
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Numbers:
IA/31578/2014

                                                IA/31588/2014

                                                IA/31594/2014

                                                IA/31602/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 24th November 2015                    | On 16th May 2016                   |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE

                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                           D N W (FIRST CLAIMANT)
                          S N M A (SECOND CLAIMANT)
                           O Y W (THIRD CLAIMANT)
                           K K W (FOURTH CLAIMANT)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Claimants

Representation:

For the Appellant Miss Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Claimants:     Miss E Greenwood of Liyon Legal Limited


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Claimants, the Appellants in the original hearing before the First-
    tier  Tribunal,  are  the  father  (First  Claimant),  mother   (Second
    Claimant) and two children (Third and  Fourth  Claimant)  of  a  single
    family unit.  The First, Second and Fourth Claimants are all citizen of
    Sri Lanka.  Post  the  making  of  the  decisions  in  respect  of  the
    Claimants the Third Claimant became a British  citizen.   As  the  case
    involves the status and rights of minor I consider  it  appropriate  to
    make an anonymity direction.

Immigration History

 2. The First and Second Claimants  entered  the  United  Kingdom  on  27th
    September 2003 as working  holidaymakers.   They  had  leave  from  9th
    September 2003 until 9th September 2005.  Since 9th September 2005 they
    have not had any valid leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

 3. Shortly after entry the Second Claimant became pregnant and she appears
    never to  have  worked.   In  respect  of  the  First  Claimant  he  by
    comparison appears to have worked full-time all the time.   Such  would
    be in breach of  the  conditions  of  a  working  holiday  visa,  which
    proscribe that visa holders worked for less than  twelve  months  in  a
    total of a two year period.

 4. On 1st April 2004 O Y W was born in the United Kingdom.  He  has  lived
    continuously in the United Kingdom since his birth and therefore for at
    least ten years, the only break being a period of holiday in Sri  Lanka
    when the child was but a few months old.  By reason of Section 1(4)  of
    the British Nationality Act 1981 O Y W having been born in  the  United
    Kingdom and  having  lived  here  continuously  for  ten  years  became
    entitled to be registered as a British citizen.   The  child  was  duly
    registered as a British citizen in October 2014.  As a British  citizen
    he is not subject to immigration  control  and  cannot  be  removed  by
    immigration decision from the United Kingdom.

 5. The Fourth Claimant was born on 23rd June 2006.  He also has never left
    the United Kingdom but clearly at this point does not have  ten  years'
    continuous lawful residence.

 6. Having come to the United Kingdom on a working holiday visa  the  First
    Claimant appears to have commenced work for an IT company.  He  appears
    to have worked throughout at the same IT company.  With the end of  his
    working holiday visa approaching in or prior  to  September  2005,  his
    employers attempted to obtain a work permit  for  the  First  Claimant.
    However that application was  refused  in  2006.   The  First  Claimant
    therefore did not have any leave to remain in the United Kingdom  after
    the expiration of his visa.  With regard  to  the  Second  Claimant  it
    appears that she herself did not make an application and her visa  came
    to an end.

 7. Despite having no visa to work the First Claimant continued to work for
    the same IT company as an IT engineer until 2014.  He claims that in or
    about 2014 he left the company to establish his own business.   However
    he did not have leave after 2006 and did not have leave to work.

 8. In or about 2010 the First Claimant made an application  for  leave  to
    remain for himself and his family.  That application was refused and no
    right of appeal was given (for the full circumstances see  paragraph  8
    of the error of law decision dated 11th September 2015).

 9. The Claimants not having been given a right of appeal it  appears  that
    judicial review proceedings were issued.  It seems  likely  that  those
    judicial review proceedings  were  compromised  on  the  basis  that  a
    decision would be taken giving the Claimants  an  in-country  right  of
    appeal.

10. Thereafter on 17th July 2014 the present decisions were taken to remove
    the Claimants from the United Kingdom back to Sri Lanka.  The Claimants
    appealed the decisions and the appeals were heard in the first instance
    by Judge Wyman on 4th March 2015.  By  decisions  promulgated  on  20th
    March 2015 Judge Wyman dismissed  the  appeals  under  the  Immigration
    Rules but allowed the appeals on Article 8 grounds.

11. The SSHD applied for leave to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  and  that
    appeal appeared before me on 11th September 2015.  By  decision  issued
    thereafter I ruled that there was  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of Judge Wyman and directed it be listed for a further hearing
    before me in the Upper Tribunal at which evidence may be given  but  in
    principle to deal with two issues:-

      a)  Given  the  effect  of  the  2006  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations
         specifically Regulation 15A and the case of  Ruiz  Zambrano  [2011]
         ECR 1-0000 Case C-34/09 given the fact that the Third Claimant  was
         now a British citizen whether or not all or any of  the  Appellants
         could be removed or whether it would constitute  a  breach  of  the
         Third Claimant's right as an EU citizen to be present and living in
         the EU.

      b) Whether or not the  decisions  were  proportionately  justified  in
         accordance with Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.

The EEA Issue

12. The legal framework under consideration is  set  out  in  the  case  of
    Zambrano [2010] EUECR 1-0000 Case C-34/09.  There is reference  therein
    to the Treaty on the Functioning of the  European  Union,  specifically
    Article 20.  There is also reference to Article 24 of  the  Charter  of
    Fundamental Rights of the European Union.

13. Article 20 of the TFEU states:-

         "1.  Citizenship of the union is hereby established.  Every  person
             holding the nationality of a member state shall be  a  citizen
             of the union.  Citizenship of the union shall be additional to
             and not replace national citizenship.

           2. Citizens of the union shall enjoy the rights and be subject to
             the duties provided for in the treaties."

    The Charter of Fundamental Rights of  the  European  Union  Article  24
    states:-

         "Article 24

           1. Children shall have the right to such protection and  care  as
             is necessary for their wellbeing. They may express their views
             freely.  Such views  shall  be  taken  into  consideration  on
             matters which concern them in accordance with  their  age  and
             maturity.

           2. In all actions relating to children whether  taken  by  public
             authorities or private institutions the child's best interests
             must be a primary consideration.

           3. Every child shall have the right  to  maintain  on  a  regular
             basis a personal relationship and direct contact with both his
             or her  parents,  unless  that  is  contrary  to  his  or  her
             interests."

14. In the case of Zambrano:-

      a) Mr Zambrano and his wife Colombian nationals arrived in Belgium  in
         1999 accompanied by their  first  child  on  visas  issued  by  the
         Belgian Embassy in Bogota.   Whilst  subsequently  they  sought  to
         claim asylum and otherwise made applications for residence  permits
         such applications  were  refused.   It  appears  that  Mr  Zambrano
         obtained employment and worked for a company for  five  years  from
         2001 even though he had no work permit.  During the time that  they
         were in Belgium two children were born to the family.  Pursuant  to
         the  Belgian  Nationality  Code  both  children  acquired   Belgian
         nationality.  As a result of the birth of the children Mr  Zambrano
         obtained a residence registration certificate.  There were  ongoing
         appeals with regard to the refusal of residence  permits  but  that
         did not stop  Mr  Zambrano  obtaining  the  residence  registration
         certificate.

      b) In or about October 2005  Mr  Zambrano's  employment  contract  was
         temporarily  suspended.   He  applied  for  temporary  unemployment
         benefits but was refused.  The application resulted in checks being
         made and it being established that he did not have  a  work  permit
         and the authorities in Belgium issued an order  for  the  immediate
         termination of Mr Zambrano's employment.

      c) Mr Zambrano applied for unemployment benefit in  Belgium.   He  was
         again refused payment of the benefit.

      d) Subsequently Mr Zambrano appears  to  have  a  renewable  residence
         permit as well as a work permit but such were not retrospective.

      e) From paragraph 98 onwards the court considered that the two Belgian
         citizen children had rights to move and reside  freely  within  the
         territory of member states but in practical terms  they  could  not
         exercise those rights independent of their parents because of their
         age.  At paragraph 99 of the judgment the following is  concluded:-



             "If Mr Ruiz  Zambrano  cannot  enjoy  a  derivative  right  of
             residence in Belgium ... he will  have  to  leave  the  member
             state of which his children hold the nationality.  Given their
             age ... his children will have to leave with him.   They  will
             be unable to exercise their right to move  and  reside  within
             the territory of the European Union.  ... They need to be able
             to remain physically  present  within  the  territory  of  the
             European Union in order  to  move  between  member  states  or
             reside in any member state."

15. As a result it was concluded that Mr Ruiz Zambrano and his wife  had  a
    derivative right of residence in order to protect the rights of the two
    Belgian children citizens  to  reside  as  union  citizens  within  the
    European Union.  Whilst the case goes on to consider whether or not the
    decision can be  justified  the  principle  was  established  that  the
    derived right of residence was an important principle  within  EU  law.
    It was found also that  interference  may  be  permissible  in  certain
    circumstances and it had also to consider whether or  not  interference
    would be proportionate.

16. In making submissions in respect  of  this  matter  both  parties  have
    relied upon the  case  of  Ayinde  and  Thinjom  (Carers  -  Reg.15A  -
    Zambrano) [2015] UKUT 560.  With respect the case has a  difference  in
    the sense that the European citizens in question were both  adults  and
    were seeking either to protect and preserve their rights as EU citizens
    by reliance upon a carer in one instance a  son  and  in  the  other  a
    spouse.  Reliance was placed upon the judgment in Zambrano in the Grand
    Chamber specifically paragraphs 41 to 45.  In dealing with  the  matter
    Upper Tribunal Judge  Jordan  emphasised  the  fact  that  there  is  a
    demarcation between the rights created and preserved by  the  TFEU  and
    those rights created and preserved by national law.  In  the  light  of
    that in the case under consideration what was sought to be expanded was
    whether or not a forced removal was  a  necessary  element  within  the
    preservation of the rights.

17. Attention was drawn to the case of Damion Harrison and AB v SSHD [2012]
    EWCA Civ 1736.  There it was clear that the principle that  the  effect
    of the decision had to force the EU citizen to  leave  was  an  element
    necessary to exist before there would be a breach of EU citizen rights.
     The conclusions of the principles to be extracted from  the  case  are
    set out from paragraphs 38 to 42.  The situation is  different  in  the
    sense that the EU citizens were adults and therefore not dependent upon
    others.

18. The distinction can be seen in the case of Abdul (section 55 -  Article
    24(3) Charter) [2016] UKUT 106.   In  the  case  of  Abdul  Mr  Justice
    McCloskey dealt specifically with Article  24  of  the  EU  Charter  of
    Fundamental Rights and was satisfied that that created  a  freestanding
    right  although  that  such  right  was  not  absolute.   In  the  case
    consideration was being given to the rights of two children aged 11 and
    13 both British citizens but both  the  daughters  of  a  41  year  old
    Nigerian who had committed a series of frauds.   In  January  2012  the
    sentence of four and a  half  years'  imprisonment  had  been  imposed.
    Whilst not ruling that the decision  to  deport  was  wrong  the  court
    emphasised that care had to be taken to  look  not  only  at  the  best
    interests of the children  but  also  consideration  given  to  Article
    24(3).  They were satisfied  that  that  was  a  discreet  right  which
    required consideration.  Clearly the right is not an absolute right and
    it may be that in considering proportionality the right does  not  hold
    against the interests of society as such.  However it is a  right  that
    has to be considered.

19. During the course of the  hearing  before  me  I  asked  that  the  two
    representatives submit written submissions.  I received  those  written
    submissions finally in January 2016.

20. In the present case Regulation 15A is relied  upon.   It  is  suggested
    first and foremost that the rights protected by Regulation 15A  do  not
    extend beyond EA nationals.   The  argument  being  that  Regulation  2
    defines an EEA national as a national of an EEA state, who is not  also
    a British  citizen.   With  respect  if  that  is  the  effect  of  the
    Regulations then the Regulations do not properly transpose  either  the
    requirements under the case of Zambrano or under Article 24 as referred
    to above.  Reliance is placed upon Regulation 2 and it is  argued  that
    that in referring to an EEA  national  has  to  exclude  references  to
    British citizens which the Third Claimant is.

21. The Claimants' representative  made  reference  to  Regulation  15(4A).
    That specifically provides:-
         "A person (P) satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if -
           (a)    P is the primary carer of a British citizen ('the relevant
         British citizen');
           (b)    the relevant British citizen is  residing  in  the  United
             Kingdom; and
           (c)    the relevant British citizen would be unable to reside  in
             the UK or in another EEA state if P were required to leave."

22. That Regulation is  clearly  relevant  to  British  citizens  and  does
    reflect the case law.

23. As an alternative it was argued that the burden was upon the  Claimants
    to prove that the result of  the  decision  would  be  that  the  Third
    Claimant would not be able to reside in  the  United  Kingdom.   It  is
    suggested that the only evidence presented to suggest  that  the  Third
    Claimant would not be able to reside in the United Kingdom was a  self-
    serving statement and the oral evidence of the First Claimant.   It  is
    suggested that the evidence given discloses that there are other family
    members within the United Kingdom who  the  child  could  reside  with.
    Reference was made to a brother and sister of the  First  Claimant  who
    resides in the United Kingdom.  The evidence from  the  First  Claimant
    was to the effect that that brother would be unwilling  to  look  after
    the Third Claimant.  It suggested that little weight should be given to
    such.

24. It is suggested because there are family members that  are  capable  of
    looking after the Third Claimant would not be compelled  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom.

25. It is clear that the provisions of Article  24(3)  of  the  EU  Charter
    creates a freestanding right  although  not  absolute  to  have  direct
    contact with a parent.   The  best  interests  of  the  Third  Claimant
    require  that  the  child  be  brought  up  in  a  stable  steady  home
    environment by his parents consistent with Article 24 and Article 8.

26. Whilst I have taken account of the fact that  there  are  other  family
    members in the United Kingdom I find  in  the  circumstances  that  the
    consequence to the Third Claimant of  removing  the  First  and  Second
    Claimants would be that the Third Claimant  would  have  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom and would thereby be deprived of his  rights  under  the
    Articles, Treaties and Regulations referred to above.  In that event  I
    find that the First and Second Claimants are entitled to remain in  the
    United Kingdom on the basis of Regulation 15(4A).  I find having regard
    to the interests of the Third Claimant that removal of  the  first  and
    second Claimants would not be a proportionate response and would breach
    the rights of the Third Claimant.

27. Whilst I accept that the Fourth Claimant is not a British citizen still
    he is a member of the family.  He clearly has a family and private life
    with the parents.  The decision  I  am  satisfied  would  significantly
    interfere with that family and private life.  There  are  no  prospects
    that he could be removed by himself given his age. There is no evidence
    that anybody would be available to look after him back in Sri Lanka.  I
    am satisfied therefore that Article 8 is engaged.  Whilst the  decision
    may ostensibly be in accordance with the law and for  the  purposes  of
    maintaining immigration control, taking account of all the facts I find
    that the decision is not proportionately justified.  This is a child of
    parents who have been found to be entitled  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The child should be entitled to remain with the parents.   To
    make any other find I find is disproportionate  interference  with  the
    rights of this family to Article 8 rights.

28. For the reasons set out I allow the appeals of  the  first  and  second
    Claimants. For the reasons set out I allow the  appeal  of  the  fourth
    Claimant. The third Claimant being a  British  citizen,  he  cannot  be
    removed from the UK and  the  decision  made  against  him  is  not  in
    accordance with the law.

Notice of Decision

29. The appeal of the first and second claimant are allowed on EEA grounds

30. The appeal of the third claimant is allowed

31. the appeal of the fourth claimant is allowed on Article 8 grounds

Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

To the  Respondent

Fee award

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award

Signed   Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure



