
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32575/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 23 June and 5 September 2014                 |On 16 September 2014       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              mr Tawee Uthaiwan
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:

For the Appellant:              Mr T Wilding (23 June) and Mr L Tarlow (5
                           September), Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent/Claimant:    Mr D Aihe, Legal Representative, Wise Step
                           Immigration Specialists


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the claimant's appeal  against  the
    decision by the Secretary of State to refuse  to  grant  him  leave  to
    remain on the grounds of long residence.  The First-tier  Tribunal  did
    not make an anonymity order, and I do not consider that such  an  order
    is required for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The claimant is a national of  Thailand,  whose  date  of  birth  is  2
    January 1971.  On  29  June  2012  Talk  Visa  Immigration  Specialists
    applied on his behalf for ILR in accordance with  "the  long  residence
    policy".  The claimant entered the UK on 15 June  1996  from  Thailand.
    He had remained in the UK ever since.  If he was  denied  discretionary
    leave, he would be at his  wits'  end.   He  did  not  have  any  ties,
    accommodation or employment in Thailand.  He had no connections  there,
    having been in the UK for the past fourteen years.  He had set  up  his
    own business here, and he had contributed to the UK economy.

 3. On 27 August 2013 the Secretary of State gave her reasons for  refusing
    the application.  He had arrived in the United Kingdom on 16 June  1996
    with valid entry clearance as a student.  He  had  entry  clearance  in
    this capacity until 31 June 1997.  On 23 September 1997 he applied  for
    asylum by post.  He was invited to attend  an  asylum  interview  on  8
    October 1997, but failed to attend the interview.  So his asylum  claim
    was refused on 14 November 1997 with no right of appeal.  He was served
    with a form APB104B (decision  to  make  a  deportation  order)  on  11
    September 1998 on the grounds  that  he  had  remained  in  the  United
    Kingdom without valid leave.  He was given a right  of  appeal  against
    the  service  of  this  notice,  which  he  failed  to  exercise.   The
    deportation order was subsequently signed against  him  on  15  October
    1998.

 4. He had applied for settlement on the basis  of  long  residence  on  13
    April 2011.  The application was treated as a  request  to  revoke  the
    deportation order.  His application was refused  on  24  November  2011
    with a right of appeal.  IS15A and  IS15B  notices  were  also  served,
    triggering an in-country right of appeal against the decision to remove
    the appellant.  The decision  and  notices  were  sent  to  his  former
    representatives, Greenland Lawyers.  However he  had  again  failed  to
    lodge an appeal against this decision.

 5. His application for settlement on the basis of long residence  made  on
    29 June 2012 had been initially refused on 10  January  2013,  with  no
    right of appeal.  On 25 January 2013 he was served with  a  form  IS15A
    (notice  to  a  person  liable  to  removal),  informing  him  of   his
    immigration status and liability  to  detention  or  removal  from  the
    United Kingdom.  Following the submission of  further  representations,
    submitted in the form of a judicial review,  the  application  had  now
    been reconsidered.

 6. As a deportation order had been made against him,  his  representations
    had been treated as an application to revoke that order.  His case  has
    therefore been considered under paragraphs 390 to 391 of HC 395.

 7. Enforcement action against him was commenced on 11 September 1998  with
    the service of form APB104B.  The time that he had spent here since  he
    was notified of the enforcement decision could not  benefit  him  under
    the criteria of paragraph 276B.  Paragraph 276B(i)(b) stated  that  any
    period of residence which was accrued  after  the  service  of  removal
    directions, or a notice of intention to deport a person from the United
    Kingdom, shall not count towards the length of residence of  a  person.
    So the appellant had been unable to demonstrate fourteen  years  lawful
    and/or unlawful residence in the  United  Kingdom  as  defined  in  the
    Rules.

 8. His application had nonetheless been considered under Article  8  ECHR.
    Paragraph A277C and Appendix FM of the Rules set out the  criteria  the
    government expects a person to fulfil in order to establish a right  to
    remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of their family (or  private)
    life.  These are that the  application  will  be  considered  under  R-
    LTRP.1.1(a), (b) and (d) and/or R-LTRP.1.1(a), (b) and (d), and EX.1 of
    Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE to DH of the Rules.  The appellant had
    failed to demonstrate that he had lived continuously in the UK  for  at
    least twenty years.  Furthermore whilst he claimed to  have  not  lived
    continuously in Thailand for seventeen years, he had resided there  for
    the majority of his life; so it was not accepted  that  he  would  have
    severed all ties to Thailand, including  social,  cultural  and  family
    ties.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 9. The claimant's appeal came before Judge Herbert OBE sitting  at  Taylor
    House on 23 December 2013.  The claimant was represented  by  Mr  Aihe,
    and the Secretary of State was represented by  Ms  McAllister,  a  Home
    Office Presenting Officer.  The claimant gave oral evidence that he had
    come to the United Kingdom on 15 June 1996 to study  English.   He  had
    lived with his mother and younger brother in a flat in London.  He  was
    being supported at the time by his cousin in Thailand.  He said he  was
    unable to go back to study in Thailand, and he wanted to stay with  his
    mother and younger brother for a while.  It was suggested to  him  that
    he should apply for asylum.  He was later told  this  was  not  a  good
    idea, and it was for that reason he did  not  turn  up  at  the  asylum
    interview.  He had lost contact with  his  solicitors,  and  was  never
    served with a notice of deportation, although he was aware that he  had
    remained here without any permission.

10. At paragraph 5 of his subsequent determination, the judge held that  it
    was not formally disputed by the Secretary of State that  the  claimant
    had been continuously resident.   Their  submission  was  that  on  the
    balance  of  probabilities  it  was  more  likely  than  not  that  the
    deportation  notice  had  been  served  on  the  solicitor  or  on  the
    appellant.  Therefore time had stopped running, and he could  not  take
    advantage of the long residence Rule.

11. At paragraph 7 the judge held that the  claimant  had  produced  fairly
    comprehensive documentation to show that he had  lived  in  the  United
    Kingdom consistently since 1996.  There was also no evidence before him
    as to how the claimant might have  left  without  any  form  of  travel
    document or passport.  It was perfectly plausible that the claimant was
    able to survive without recourse to public funds:




         Similarly I am not satisfied that the [claimant] was served with  a
         deportation notice  nor  that  his  solicitors  were  either.   The
         [claimant] genuinely did not seem to be aware of this notice having
         been served.

12. The judge went on to hold that the  claimant  thus  satisfied  all  the
    material requirements of long residence,  and  he  allowed  the  appeal
    under the Rules.

13. He also considered the appeal under Article 8.  He referred to the five-
    stage test set out by Lord Bingham in Razgar  UKHL  [2004].   He  found
    that removal of the claimant now would cause grave consequences for him
    given that he had established a significant private life in the  United
    Kingdom based around his family ties and his long residence  here.   He
    found that the removal of the claimant would be disproportionate to the
    need to maintain immigration control given the serious consequences  he
    would face "vis-�-vis the comparison of the  state  generally  and  the
    maintenance of immigration control in particular".

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

14.  On  2  April  2014  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Mark  Davies  granted
    permission to appeal to  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  following
    reasons:

         2.   The judge has made findings that the deportation order was not
             served on the [claimant] without explanation.  The  [claimant]
             was aware that he remained in the United Kingdom without leave
             and the judge appears to have given that  evidence  no  weight
             whatsoever.

         3.   The judge finds the removal of the [claimant] would have grave
             consequences but does not  explain  what  those  circumstances
             would be or the evidence that he has  taken  into  account  in
             coming to that conclusion.

         4.   The grounds of the determination do disclose an arguable error
             of law.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

15. At the  hearing  in  the  Upper  Tribunal,  Mr  Wilding  developed  the
    arguments raised in the  application  for  permission  to  appeal.   In
    reply, Mr Aihe said that Ms McAllister had told the Tribunal  that  she
    was not 100% sure that the deportation notice had been  served  on  the
    claimant.  Her case was only that it was likely to have been served  on
    him on the balance of probabilities.  There was no evidence of postage,
    and it was open to the judge to find that the deportation order had not
    been served either on the claimant or on his solicitors.   With  regard
    to the Article 8 claim, he pointed out that the claimant's  mother  and
    stepfather had attended to give oral evidence in accordance with  their
    witness statements in the claimant's bundle.  But he had not needed  to
    tender them as witnesses, as Ms McAllister said she did  not  have  any
    questions for them in cross-examination.  Although the  judge  did  not
    expressly consider Rule 276ADE,  on  the  evidence  the  claimant  came
    within Rule 276ADE as he no longer had any ties to Thailand.




Reasons for finding an Error of Law

16. The claimant had a strong motive to misrepresent the truth with  regard
    to the service of the deportation order, as  its  service  on  him  was
    fatal to his claim under paragraph 276B.  Moreover, the  claimant  knew
    at all material times that his immigration status  was  irregular,  and
    that he was known by the authorities to have an irregular  status.  For
    he had presented an asylum claim at a time when he was  an  overstayer,
    and he had failed to  show  up  for  an  asylum  interview.   In  these
    circumstances, I consider the judge did not give adequate  reasons  for
    holding that the claimant had  not  personally  been  served  with  the
    deportation order, or that it had not been brought to his attention.

17. But I consider the judge's error was more egregious in respect  of  the
    finding  that  the  deportation  order  had  not  been  served  on  the
    claimant's solicitors or on the last known address which  the  claimant
    had given to the authorities.  Since, the claimant admitted that he had
    gone to ground, no inference adverse to the Secretary  of  State  could
    reasonably be drawn from the fact that the  claimant's  solicitors  had
    not notified the claimant  of  the  receipt  of  a  deportation  order,
    assuming it was served on them, rather than on the claimant at his last
    known address.

18. The case law provided by Mr Aihe to the  First-tier  Tribunal  included
    Syed (Curtailment of leave - notice) [2013] UKUT  144  (IAC)  in  which
    Upper Tribunal  Judge  Spencer  held  that  the  Immigration  (Notices)
    Regulations 2003 did not apply to a decision under the Immigration  Act
    1971, as it was not an  immigration  decision  within  the  meaning  of
    Section 82  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.
    Accordingly, the Secretary of State had to be able to prove that notice
    of such a decision was communicated to the person concerned,  in  order
    for it to be effective.  Communication would be effective if made to  a
    person authorised to receive  it  on  that  person's  behalf,  but  the
    Secretary of State could not rely upon deemed postal service.

19. It  was  not  clear  whether  this  authority  influenced  the  judge's
    thinking, but it  undoubtedly  pointed  him  in  the  wrong  direction.
    Unlike the decision under consideration in Syed, the enforcement notice
    relied on by the Secretary of State in this  case  was  an  immigration
    decision within the meaning of Section 2 of the 2002 Act, and therefore
    it  was  governed  by  the  Immigration  (Notices)  Regulations   2003.
    Accordingly, postal service of the deportation order on the  claimant's
    nominated solicitors, or the posting of the deportation  order  to  the
    claimant's last known address, was proper service, whether or  not  the
    claimant actually received the deportation order, or was made aware  of
    it by his solicitors.

20. In  short,  the  judge's  finding  on  the  issue  of  service  of  the
    deportation order is inadequately reasoned and unsafe.

21. The judge's approach to the resolution of the alternative  claim  under
    Article 8 ECHR was also flawed.   The  judge  needed  to  consider  the
    claimant's position under Appendix FM and Rule  276ADE  of  the  Rules,
    before embarking on a freewheeling Article 8 assessment.   The  finding
    that the removal of the claimant would  constitute  a  disproportionate
    interference with his private life rights was ostensibly based entirely
    on what the claimant would be losing in terms of the private life which
    he enjoyed in the United Kingdom.  While this was undoubtedly a  highly
    relevant consideration, the central focus of Rule 276ADE(vi) is whether
    the applicant has lost all effective ties to the country of return such
    that he cannot be expected to lead an adequate private life there.

22. In conclusion, the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  contains  an
    error of law, such that it should be set aside and remade.

The Continuation Hearing on 5 September 2014

23. At  the  continuation  hearing,  I  received  oral  evidence  from  the
    claimant, his mother and stepfather.

24. Mr Aihe reported a concession by Miss McAllister at the hearing in  the
    First-tier Tribunal that the deportation order had only been served  to
    the file.  I asked Mr  Tarlow  to  check  the  file,  to  see  what  it
    contained.  He produced two documents from  the  file  which  were  not
    considered at the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.  I  arranged  for
    copies to be made of these documents.

25. On 3 September 1998 Mr Mantel wrote to  Time  Consultancy  Services  in
    respect of the appellant's immigration  status.   His  application  for
    asylum had been refused, and he had been advised  of  the  reasons  for
    that decision.  A copy of the letter advising him of  the  reasons  was
    attached.  Mr Mantel continued:

         Having regard to relevant factors, the Secretary of  State  decided
         to make a deportation order against him under  Section  51  of  the
         Immigration Act  1971.   In  accordance  with  paragraph  3(1)  the
         Immigration Appeals (Notices) Regulation 1984 formal notice of  the
         decision (together with the appropriate  appeals  forms)  had  been
         sent to Mr Uthaiwan at 8 Peterchurch House, Commercial Way,  London
         SE15 1NF, which is  his  last  place  of  abode  as  known  to  the
         Secretary of State.

26. The next document on the file was the decision to  make  a  deportation
    order (application for asylum refused) dated 11 September  1998.   This
    referred to the  fact  that  on  25  September  1997  Time  Consultancy
    Services had applied on his behalf for asylum, and the application  had
    been refused.   Accordingly,  the  Secretary  of  State  had  therefore
    decided to make an order by virtue of Section 3(5) of  the  Immigration
    Act 1971 to give directions for his removal to Thailand, the country of
    which he is a national, and which most recently had provided him with a
    travel document.

27. The next document in the file is the deportation  order  signed  on  15
    October 1998 (D1 of the Home Office bundle).

28. The final relevant document in the sequence is a file note made  on  15
    March 1999 by Mr Mantel, the writer of the letter of 3 September  1998.
    He records that the claimant is now listed as a missing  deportee.   He
    asks that the claimant's details be circulated on the  police  national
    computer.  Underneath his signature, there is  a  typed  stamp  stating
    that the subject is wanted on police national computers, and  that  the
    Metropolitan Police should be informed immediately should  the  subject
    come to notice.

29. At the bottom of the page, there is a  separate  manuscript  file  note
    made on 12 May 1999 by L. Duff.  He says that  the  claimant's  details
    have been circulated as being the subject of a deportation order.

30. In his closing submissions on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State,  Mr
    Tarlow submitted that the inference to be drawn from the file note  was
    that the deportation order had been served on the appellant at his last
    known address.  So the clock would have been stopped.  The  appellant's
    alternative claim under Article 8 was stronger.  Nonetheless, the claim
    should not succeed.  The appellant came here as a student, and had then
    deliberately gone to ground.  It was in the  public  interest  that  he
    should be removed.

31. In reply, Mr Aihe drew attention to the fact that there was no covering
    letter with the deportation order, whereas there had  been  a  covering
    letter  to  the  claimant's  former  solicitors  with  respect  to  the
    APP104(b) notice of 11  September  1998.   He  submitted  that  on  the
    balance of probabilities  there  had  been  no  attempt  to  serve  the
    deportation order on the appellant.  Accordingly,  the  clock  had  not
    been stopped, and the appellant qualified for leave to remain under the
    old Rule.  Alternatively, the appellant qualified for leave  to  remain
    under Rule 276ADE, as it would be unduly harsh to require  him  now  to
    resume a private life in Thailand.  He  had  no  friends  or  relatives
    there, and had been away a very long time.  In the further alternative,
    the appellant's removal would be disproportionate, having regard to the
    strength of his ties to the United Kingdom.

Discussion and Findings

32. Under paragraph 276B(i)(b) an applicant who  was  seeking  ILR  on  the
    grounds of continuous unlawful residence had to show  that  he  had  at
    least fourteen years' continuous residence in the United Kingdom,

         excluding any period spent in the United Kingdom following  service
         of notice of liability to removal or notice of a decision to remove
         by way of directions under paragraphs 8 to 10A, or  12  to  14,  of
         Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971 Act or  section  10  of  the
         Immigration and Asylum Act 1999, or of a  notice  of  intention  to
         deport him from the United Kingdom

33. Following the interrogation of the Home Office file, I  readily  accept
    Mr Aihe's submission that the deportation order  itself  is  likely  to
    have been served to the file, and that there was  no  attempt  made  to
    serve the order on the appellant at his last known  address.   But  the
    language of Section 276B(i)(b) makes it clear that the clock stops with
    the service of a notice of intention to deport, and not from service of
    the deportation order itself.  This is consistent with the fact that it
    is the notification of a  liability  to  deportation  or  removal  that
    triggers a right of appeal.

34. Having had the benefit of receiving oral evidence from the claimant,  I
    am prepared to accept that he did not receive  the  enforcement  notice
    dated 11 September 1998.  I am also satisfied that the claimant by this
    time had deliberately gone to ground, and had deliberately not kept  in
    touch with his solicitors or with the Home Office so that  his  current
    whereabouts were known.  On the  balance  of  probabilities,  the  Home
    Office did what they said they were going to do  in  the  letter  of  3
    September 1998, and served the enforcement notice on  the  claimant  at
    his last known address.  I am further satisfied that  this  was  proper
    service for the purposes  of  stopping  the  clock.   Accordingly,  the
    claimant has not discharged the burden of proving that he qualifies for
    leave to remain under the old Rule, which was still in force on 29 June
    2012, the date of his application for ILR.

35. On one interpretation of the Court of Appeal decision in  Edgehill  and
    Another v the Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 402, I should proceed  immediately  to  a  conventional  Article  8
    assessment, and should ignore the appellant's position  under  the  new
    Rules.  The justification for such an approach is that the  appellant's
    Article 8 claim should not be assessed by reference to a  more  onerous
    Rule than is properly applicable to his case, having regard to the fact
    that he made  his  application  for  ILR  before  the  new  Rules  were
    introduced, and the Secretary of State  expressly  represented  that  a
    case such as his would be assessed under the old Rules.

36. However, I am not invited to follow this  interpretation  of  Edgehill,
    and it would be potentially disadvantageous to the appellant to exclude
    the new Rules from consideration.  While  he  has  not  accrued  twenty
    years' unlawful residence, he potentially qualifies for leave to remain
    under Rule 276ADE(1)(vi) on the ground that he  has  been  absent  from
    Thailand for so long that he can no longer be said  to  have  effective
    ties to this country, and there would be very significant obstacles  to
    his re-integration.

37. Having given careful consideration to this claim, I am  not  ultimately
    persuaded  that  the  claim  is  made  out.    Firstly,   it   is   not
    satisfactorily established that  the  appellant  has  no  relatives  or
    family friends remaining in Thailand.  He may have lost touch which his
    father, who divorced his mother before she came to the UK  on  her  own
    sometime before 1994.  But it does not follow that the appellant  would
    not be able to find his father if he went back to  Thailand,  and  made
    enquiries.  His mother said that she had heard that  her  two  siblings
    had gone to live in Laos.  When asked to  clarify  the  source  of  her
    information, she said it was her cousin in Thailand who had  told  her.
    This would indicate that there are at least extended family members  on
    her side of the family that the appellant could make  contact  with  on
    return to Thailand.  The appellant's mother then said that  the  person
    concerned was not really a cousin, but was a neighbour in Bangkok;  and
    a long time ago she had ceased to have contact with that  person,  when
    she could not get through to that person on the telephone.

38. The evidence of her husband indicated  that  there  are  likely  to  be
    people remaining in Bangkok who are known  to  the  claimant's  mother.
    Following his marriage to the claimant's mother in  2002,  Mr  Williams
    had accompanied her on a visit  to  Thailand  on  two  occasions.   The
    second occasion was in 2004.   Whilst  he  did  not  meet  any  of  her
    relations, and by implication she did not do so either, he said she met
    someone who she went to school with.

39. In his oral evidence, the claimant confirmed that he spoke Thai as well
    as English, and that he was a skilled painter and  decorator.   He  had
    been born and brought up in Bangkok, and had been a student there.   He
    also used to work in Bangkok.  He  serviced  air  conditioners  in  big
    department stores.  The claimant came to the United  Kingdom  in  1996,
    when he was aged 25.  He had thus spent  all  his  formative  years  in
    Thailand, and he had also established an independent life  in  Thailand
    long before he came here.  For his mother had come to London some years
    before, and on his own account his father had moved out of  Bangkok  to
    somewhere in the countryside.

40. It is necessary to distinguish between his mother's  ties  to  Thailand
    and his own ties, but I consider that the claimant is likely to be able
    to carry on an adequate private life in Bangkok, and that he still  has
    some effective ties to Thailand, notwithstanding  his  lengthy  absence
    from the country.  The claimant can reasonably look to his  mother  and
    stepfather for  practical  support  and  financial  assistance  in  re-
    establishing himself in Bangkok.  Even if the claimant  does  not  have
    any relatives in Bangkok,  it  is  likely  that  his  mother  has  some
    contacts there to whom he can turn for  assistance  in  re-establishing
    himself.  It is also likely that the claimant will  be  able  to  renew
    contact with some of the people that  he  used  to  associate  with  in
    Bangkok, either in an educational or work environment. In short,  there
    would  not  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  the  claimant's   re-
    integration.

41. In conclusion, I find that the claimant does not qualify for  leave  to
    remain on private life  grounds  under  Rule  276ADE.   Turning  to  an
    Article 8 claim outside the Rules, I accept that the threshold for  the
    engagement of private life rights is relatively low, and that questions
    1 and 2 of the Razgar test should be answered in the claimant's  favour
    with regard to the establishment of private life in the United Kingdom.
     Although the claimant lives under the same  roof  as  his  mother  and
    stepfather, I do not consider that he enjoys family life with  them  or
    with his younger brother for the purposes of Article 8.   There  is  no
    evidence the relationship between the claimant and any  member  of  his
    immediate family goes beyond normal emotional ties.

42. On the issue of proportionality, it is necessary to take  into  account
    of the new statutory guidance  on  the  public  interest  contained  in
    Section 117B  of  the  2002  Act  as  amended  by  Section  19  of  the
    Immigration Act 2014.  It is in the claimant's favour that he can speak
    English, but under subsection (4) little weight should be  given  to  a
    private life that is established by a person when the person is in  the
    UK unlawfully.

43. Although the claimant is understandably very keen to remain  here  with
    his immediate family, and his immediate family are very  keen  that  he
    should stay here, his case does not disclose sufficiently compelling or
    compassionate circumstances such as to render the proposed interference
    a disproportionate one.



Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law,  and
accordingly the  decision  is  set  aside  and  the  following  decision  is
substituted: this appeal is dismissed under the Rules and  under  Article  8
ECHR.







Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
