
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA324972015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 25 April 2017                           |On 17 May 2017                   |
|Given orally at the hearing.               |                                 |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Safia Bano Shaikh
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Z Malik of Counsel instructed by AWS Solicitors



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of State appeals with leave against a decision  of  Judge
    of the First-tier Hussain, who, in a determination dated 23  June  2016
    allowed the appeal of Mrs Safia  Bano  Shaikh  against  a  decision  to
    refuse her indefinite leave to remain.  In this decision I will  refer,
    for ease of reference to Mrs Safia Bano Shaikh as the appellant, as she
    was the appellant in the First-tier and for the same  reason  refer  to
    the Secretary of State as the respondent.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born  in  1976  who  arrived  in
    Britain in October 2004,  had  various  extensions  of  stay  and  then
    applied in August 2013 to extend her leave submitting at that  stage  a
    TOEIC English language test certificate that she had taken  at  BIETTEC
    College.  She was then given an extension until 30 September 2014.   On
    29 September 2014 she made the  application  for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain, the refusal of which is the subject of this appeal.  The reason
    she was refused is because it was alleged that she  had  used  a  proxy
    test taker when taking an English language test in 2013.  As  is  well-
    known, the decision of  the  Secretary  of  State  to  refuse  followed
    results of the Panorama programme which showed  elements  of  fraud  by
    employees at ETS test centres.

3.   The appellant appealed  against  the  decision  and  produced  for  the
    hearing a very lengthy  witness  statement  in  which  she  gave  clear
    details of her qualifications, her experience of teaching and  teaching
    in English and her studies here, as  well  as  details  of  the  events
    around her taking the test. She said that she had been studying at  the
    college for some time, and that she took the test at that  college  and
    that she drove her car there on the day, and so on.  She described  the
    tests which she had taken.

4.   Before the appeal came before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  detailed
    directions were given which included  the  direction  that  documentary
    evidence on which both sides wished to rely should be served and lodged
    with the Tribunal in good time.  It appears that this was a float case,
    but nonetheless there was no reason why, because it was a  float  case,
    that it should not have  been  prepared  by  the  respondent  with  the
    appropriate documentary evidence put in, and no doubt  instructions  to
    whichever Presenting Officer might pick it up as to what the  case  was
    about and what the arguments were that should be put forward.

5.   When it came  on  for  hearing  the  Presenting  Officer  noticed  that
    relevant evidence  was  not  submitted,  in  particular  evidence  from
    Professor French.  He therefore asked  for  an  adjournment.  That  was
    refused.   The  judge,  I  consider,  was  entitled   to   refuse   the
    adjournment.  The reality is that the directions had not been  followed
    and there were no cogent reasons given  why  that  was  the  case.    I
    consider that the reasons for not adjourning were valid.  The judge was
    quite entitled to place weight on the financial costs of the  delay  to
    the appellant and it is of course the case that the courts are becoming
    increasingly strict about the timely service of documentary evidence.

6.   The judge considered the evidence and clearly had read the  appellant's
    witness statement.  He clearly, I  consider,  wrote  the  determination
    being aware of the fact that the Presenting Officer  had  conceded  the
    appeal, and I would emphasise that it  is  clear  from  the  Record  of
    Proceedings that the Presenting Officer did so and there was  no  error
    in the judge pointing that out and relying on that.  That fact probably
    is reflected in the relatively short form of the determination.

7.   The judge did place weight on the determination of the  Upper  Tribunal
    in SM and Qadir.  He correctly noted that in that  case  it  was  found
    that the evidence of the appellants was such that it was accepted  that
    they were entitled to leave to  remain:  in  effect,  that  their  test
    results had not been obtained fraudulently.

8.   The judge was aware obviously the evidence that the results from  ETS's
    investigation did not prove to the requisite standard  that  fraud  had
    been committed as alleged.  Mr Avery, of  course,  is  quite  right  in
    stating that SM was a case decided on its own facts, but clearly it was
    instructive for the judge in this case.  He was indeed entitled to rely
    on the fact that there was no report from Professor French, nor  indeed
    was the "lookup tool" provided.  While it may be said that the analysis
    of SM is sloppy, the reality is that that analysis was carried  through
    into the conclusions of the judge  in  paragraphs  13  onwards  of  the
    determination.  He was quite entitled to state in paragraph 13 that the
    Presenting  Officer  conceded  that  he  could  not  meet  either   the
    evidential or the legal burden of the case,  and  that  the  Presenting
    Officer proposed that the appeal be allowed.

9.   However, the judge did more and set out  in  paragraphs  14  onwards  a
    number of factors which he clearly took into account.   These  included
    the fact that the appellant held a first class degree from Pakistan and
    had worked as a teacher teaching  science  there  and  had  resided  in
    Britain continuously and lawfully since October 2004.   Moreover,  that
    she had taken an English test in July 2011 which she had passed and the
    validity of that test and  the  scores  on  that  test  have  not  been
    disputed, and he said that those scores are  markedly  similar  to  the
    scores said to have been achieved by the proxy test taker.

10.  While I understand Mr Avery's point, there  can  be  many  reasons  why
    people would use a proxy test taker, or that there  should  be  similar
    results in tests taken in July 2011 and  2013.   I  consider  that  the
    reasoning of the judge and the conclusion reached  that  the  appellant
    had sat the TOEIC English test  in  June  2013  was  open  to  him.   I
    therefore  find  that  there  is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination of the Immigration  Judge  and  his  determination  shall
    stand.

11.  The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.
          No anonymity direction is made.


Signed        [pic]                     Date 15 May 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
