
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/32882/2015
     IA/32914/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 18 May 2017                        |On 13 June 2017                       |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                             MS NIRMALJEET KAUR
                               MR MOHAN SINGH
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Hossein of SEB Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against the decision promulgated on 25  October  2016
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Beg which refused the appeals of  Ms  Kaur
    and Mr Singh against the respondent refusal of leave dated 11 September
    2015.

 2. The background to this matter is that the appellant first came  to  the
    UK on 30 May 2011 with entry clearance as a student.  She has had leave
    since then either in her own right or as a dependant of her husband, Mr
    Singh.  They had leave until 10 July 2014 and then on 10 July 2014 made
    a further application for leave as  a  Tier  4  (General)  Migrant  and
    dependent.

 3. The respondent refused their applications for further leave because  it
    was the respondent's view that on 25 July 2012 the appellant obtained a
    fraudulent  test  certificate  from  a  TOEIC  test  taken  at  Samford
    International College.  The respondent had been informed  by  ETS  that
    they had a recording of the appellant's  speaking  test.   Using  voice
    verification software ETS had been able to detect that a single  person
    was taking multiple tests.  When ETS checked the appellant's test  they
    confirmed that there was significant  evidence  to  conclude  that  the
    certificate was fraudulently obtained by the use of a proxy test taker.
     The test results were declared to  be  invalid  and  her  scores  were
    cancelled.  The ETS information as to the appellant's test result being
    declared invalid is at pages F1 and F2 of the respondent's bundle.

 4. The respondent therefore refused the application under paragraph 322(2)
    of the Immigration Rules as it was found that a false document had been
    submitted in  relation  to  a  previous  application.   The  respondent
    considered her  discretion  in  the  matter  and  decided  against  the
    applicant in the exercise of that discretion.

 5. The respondent also found that the appellant had not provided  a  valid
    CAS reference number in support  of  her  application  as  required  by
    Appendix A of the Immigration Rules.  This led to the application  also
    being  refused  under  paragraph  245ZX(c)  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    together with 245ZX(d).

 6. The appellant appealed on the basis that she had taken the  TOEIC  test
    herself, that she had genuine reasons why she was not able to submit  a
    CAS to the respondent with the  application  and  that  she  should  be
    granted leave under Article 8 ECHR.

 7. First-tier Tribunal Judge Beg found that the appellant  was  unable  to
    meet the evidence brought by the respondent  which  was  sufficient  to
    satisfy the evidential burden that she had obtained a  fraudulent  test
    certificate and relied upon it in a previous application.   The  appeal
    was therefore dismissed. There was no comment in the  decision  on  the
    CAS issue or Article 8 ECHR.

 8. The grounds of appeal maintain that First-tier Tribunal Judge Beg acted
    unlawfully in refusing to adjourn the hearing. The grounds also  appear
    to argue in paragraph 1 that the appellant had, in fact, provided a CAS
    with her application.  The grounds also argue that the wrong burden and
    standard of proof was applied.

 9. First-tier Tribunal Judge Beg deals with the question of an adjournment
    at [6] and [7] of the determination.  She states as follows:

         "6.  The appellants did not attend the hearing of the appeal.   The
             notice of hearing dated 9 June 2016 was properly served on the
             appellants.  In an undated letter to the Tribunal  that  (sic)
             the appellant stated she is feeling 'sick and weak' and  would
             like the appeal to be heard after a month.   She  stated  that
             both her and her husband were stressed.  She attached  a  GP's
             sick note.  I find that the GP saw the appellant on 12 October
             2016.  She complained of lower back pain and he signed her off
             work until 19 October 2016.  I find that there is no  credible
             evidence before me that the appellants are  unable  to  attend
             the hearing.  They have had ample opportunity to  prepare  for
             the hearing; the  respondent's  refusal  letter  is  dated  11
             September 2015 and the notice of hearing is dated 9 June 2016.
               The  application  to  adjourn  is  refused.   Accordingly  I
             determine this appeal under Rule 28 of the Tribunal  Procedure
             First-tier Tribunal Immigration and Asylum Chamber Rules 2014.
              I am satisfied that the appellants  received  the  notice  of
             hearing and is in the interest of justice to proceed".

10. It should be noted that  the  hearing  took  place  within  the  window
    identified by the GP, on 17 October 2016 albeit on the front  page  the
    determination wrongly refers to be it being heard  on  7  August  2016.
    Beyond the witness statements provided  with  the  grounds  of  appeal,
    there was no bundle for the appeal from  the  appellant.  Further,  not
    only did only the appellants not attend but they were unrepresented.

11. The grounds maintain that the GP letter should have obliged the  First-
    tier Tribunal to adjourn but that is disagreement not  an  error  on  a
    point of law.  First-tier Tribunal Beg considered the relevant material
    before her.  She found that it did not  indicate  to  her  satisfaction
    that the appellant was unable to attend the  hearing.  That  conclusion
    cannot be said to be perverse.  There was no error in the  decision  to
    proceed with the hearing in the absence of the appellants.

12. Nothing in the determination shows that, in substance,  the  judge  did
    not apply the  correct  burden  of  proof.   That  is  an  additionally
    unsustainable ground where at [8] the First-tier  Tribunal  judge  sets
    out specifically that she applied the civil standard of proof, that  of
    the balance of probabilities.  She also reminded herself at  [12]  that
    in an ETS case the decision will be fact sensitive.  Further,  at  [19]
    the judge refers to the case of RP (Proof of  Forgery)  Nigeria  [2006]
    UKAIT 0086 and applies it to the facts as found.  The argument that the
    judge applied the wrong burden or standard of proof is not made out.

13. The  remainder  of  the  grounds,  in  my  view,  merely  amount  to  a
    disagreement with the decision.  Nothing in the assessment by Judge Beg
    of the evidence concerning the ETS test shows  error.   The  judge  was
    manifestly entitled to find, given the material from ETS here, that the
    appeal should be refused because false documents  had  been  submitted.
    The witness statements of the appellants did little to outweigh the ETS
    material.

14. There is the further matter that, although not addressed by Judge  Beg,
    nothing here shows that the appellant submitted a CAS to the respondent
    with the application. The appeal also had to fail for this reason.

15. The grounds at paragraphs 6 to 11 seek to argue that the appellant  had
    an Article 8 claim of substance and that this had been before the First-
    tier Tribunal.  The grounds are correct in stating that Judge Beg  does
    not address Article 8 either under the Immigration Rules or outside the
    Immigration Rules in her  decision.   The  appellant  had  not  made  a
    substantive application to the respondent under Article 8, however, and
    the decision letter did not address it at all as a result.

16. The appellants did refer to Article 8 ECHR as a  ground  of  appeal  at
    section 8 of the appeal form to the First-tier Tribunal.  Those  ground
    of appeal state at paragraph 3 that there  "is  a  clear  breach  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR -  right  to  respect  for  private  life".   The
    witness statement of the appellant also indicates at paragraph  4  that
    she would argue that "the  respondent  refused  my  application  rather
    hastily  and  without  considering  the  consideration  connected  with
    Article 8 of the ECHR".  Mr Singh's  statement  is  identical  in  this
    regard.

17. The difficulty for the appellants is that, albeit there is no Article 8
    ECHR consideration by First-tier Tribunal Judge Beg, that  claim  would
    have had to be refused and the outcome to the appeal would have been no
    different. The Article 8 ECHR claim was barely  particularised  in  the
    materials before the First-tier Tribunal. The  appellants'  immigration
    history is  set  out  above.   They  have  only  ever  been  here  with
    precarious leave.  They have never had  any  expectation  of  remaining
    longer. They have undeniably strong  links  to  Pakistan  having  lived
    there for most of their lives.  There was nothing before the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge that could have allowed an appeal under the  Immigration
    Rules or outside the Immigration Rules. That is additionally  so  where
    the ETS issue and inability to meet the Immigration  Rules  is  weighed
    against the appellants.

18. It is therefore my conclusion that although  the  failure  to  consider
    Article 8 was an error, it is not a material one that  it  should  lead
    the Upper Tribunal to set aside the decision.   It  should  be  obvious
    that, had I  reached  the  alternative  decision,  and  set  aside  the
    determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Beg to be  remade,  I  would
    have refused a manifestly weak Article 8 ECHR claim.

19. For all of these reasons the decision of the First-tier Tribunal should
    stand.

Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error on a
    point of law and shall stand.



Signed   [pic]                               Date 12 June 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

