
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32190/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 26 July 2017                          |On 09 August 2017                   |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                               mr sultan ahmed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim, Counsel instructed by Simon Noble
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against the decision promulgated on 3  November  2016
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Rowlands.

 2. This case turns on an ETS certificate obtained by the  appellant  on  3
    October 2012 which was relied on in a previous application  for  leave.
    The respondent maintains that the certificate was obtained by use of  a
    proxy, that deception was  therefore  used  and  that  the  appellant's
    application for further leave  was  properly  refused  under  paragraph
    322(2) of the Immigration Rules.  The appellant maintains that he  took
    the test himself and did not use a proxy.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal Judge found against the appellant, finding that
    the ETS certificate had been obtained by deception and that the  appeal
    should be dismissed under the Immigration Rules  on  that  basis.   The
    appeal was also refused under Article 8 but there was no  challenge  to
    that aspect of the decision.

 4. The judge's reasons for finding against the appellant are  at  [14]  to
    [15].  They read as follows:

         "14. I have considered all of the evidence in this  case  including
             that to which I  do  not  specifically  refer  and  reach  the
             following conclusion.  Having considered the case  of  SM  and
             Kadir (sic) I am satisfied  that  the  starting  point  is  to
             conclude that the Respondent has at least  at  the  evidential
             threshold discharged the  burden  raising  the  issue  of  the
             probability that the test has been taken by a proxy.   I  have
             gone on to consider the expert report of Professor  Finch  and
             all of the evidence provided  by  the  Appellant  and  of  the
             circumstances in which he took the test and his reasoning  for
             travelling to London to do so.

         15.  I have also taken into account the particular evidence of  the
             witness Lesley Singh which is specifically  given  to  address
             the actual statement by ETS upon this  Appellants  (sic)  test
             result.  Although the Appellant  has  given  evidence  of  the
             circumstances of his test and it is clear that he may not have
             needed to have taken it I am satisfied on the basis of  Lesley
             Singh that the Appellants (sic) test was  properly  identified
             by ETS as being invalid and cancelled and that  the  Appellant
             had not taken the English language test himself  but  that  it
             had been done by a proxy and consequently that the certificate
             provided was false and  the  Appellants  (sic)  leave  rightly
             refused to be varied."

 5. The appellant objects to those findings because, firstly, they  do  not
    show that the correct three step approach where there is an  allegation
    of deception was followed.  The written grounds refer to  the  case  of
    Shen (Paper appeals; proving dishonesty) [2014] UKUT 00236 (IAC) and at
    the hearing reference was made to the same legal matrix being shown  to
    be the correct approach in the case of  SM and  Qadir  v  SSHD  (ETS  -
    Evidence - Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT  00229  (IAC).   The  appellant
    maintained that in these cases  the  respondent  bears  the  evidential
    burden sufficient to raise the issue of deception, the  appellant  must
    then produce  an  innocent  explanation  for  which  there  was  a  low
    standard, and having done so the burden shifted back to  the  Secretary
    of State  to  establish  on  the  balance  of  probabilities  that  the
    appellant's explanation was not sufficient and to be rejected.

 6. The appellant  argues  here  that  the  three  stage  process  was  not
    followed, albeit it was conceded at the  hearing  that  the  evidential
    burden would have been met had  the  test  been  set  out  and  clearly
    followed.

 7. The appellant's second ground is that the judge  failed  to  take  into
    account the appellant's cogent evidence as to an  innocent  explanation
    which included a great amount of detail of his academic success, why he
    would not need to take an ETS  test  by  proxy  and  his  provision  in
    earlier immigration matters of a valid IELTS certificate.

 8. It is my view that, albeit compact,  the  findings  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge at [14] to [15] of the decision are sufficient.  A judge
    is not required to set out  a  formal  legal  matrix  in  order  for  a
    decision to be lawful.  The correct legal matrix must  be  followed  in
    practice.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Rowlands does  this  in  [14]  and
    [15].  In [14] he refers in terms to the respondent  having  discharged
    the evidential burden and, as above, the  appellant  does  not  dispute
    that the material relied upon  which  comprised  generic  evidence  and
    specific evidence on this appellant was sufficient to do so.

 9. Having indicated that he had considered all of the evidence, the First-
    tier Tribunal judge goes on to indicate that he took into  account  the
    appellant's reliance on the expert report of Professor  "Finch"  (which
    should read "French").  The end of [14] refers again  to  "all  of  the
    evidence provided by the appellant"  being  taken  into  account  which
    included the circumstances in which he took the test and his  reasoning
    for travelling to London to do so.

10. In [15] the judge refers to the appellant's argument that it was "clear
    that he may not have needed to have taken  it",  so  the  fact  of  the
    appellant putting forward an explanation to rebut the respondent's case
    was a matter clearly in the mind of the judge when he made his decision
    on whether deception had been used. On a fair reading the  findings  at
    [14] and [15] make it clear that against the respondent's evidence, the
    First-tier Tribunal took into account the applicant's  explanation  but
    did not find it sufficient in the face of the respondent's case against
    him.

11. As above, albeit the findings are  relatively  brief,  the  judge  does
    enough here to provide the appellant with rational reasons as to why it
    was found that the respondent had shown that there had been reliance on
    a false document.  The judge followed the correct legal matrix and took
    into account the appellant's case as to his  innocent  explanation  but
    found it wanting.  In those circumstances no error of law arises.

Notice of Decision

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error on a
    point of law and shall stand.


Signed        [pic]                          Date 8 August 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
