

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/32856/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 23rd July 2014                            |On 06th Aug 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                     ZK
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:           Ms Lloyd, Counsel instructed by MNS Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mrs Kenny, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Tanzania. She has permission  to  appeal
    against the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Abebrese)  to
    dismiss her appeal against the Respondent's decision to refuse to  vary
    her leave to remain in the United Kingdom on human rights  grounds  and
    to  remove  her  pursuant  to  s47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum   and
    Nationality Act 2006.








    Background and Matters in Issue


 2. The Appellant came to the UK in 2006 as  a  Tier  4  (General)  Student
    Migrant. She was here with that leave when she was diagnosed  as  being
    HIV+.   It was this diagnosis, and its consequences for her, which  led
    the Appellant to make an application for leave 'outside of  the  rules'
    in April 2013.  She asked that the Respondent grant  her  discretionary
    leave  on  the  basis  that  her  removal  to  Tanzania  would   be   a
    disproportionate interference with her Article 8 rights and/or a breach
    of Article 3 ECHR.


 3. The Respondent refused the application in a letter dated the 10th  July
    2013.  The Appellant did not qualify for  leave  to  remain  under  the
    Rules. The facts of her case did not disclose a risk of  an  Article  3
    breach because there would be treatment for her condition in  Tanzania.
    The Respondent agreed that as a matter of law such a case could succeed
    in the alternative under Article 8, but found that the facts  presented
    by the Appellant were not "so exceptional" as to  warrant  a  grant  of
    leave on that basis.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal found that there would be  some  treatment  for
    the Appellant's condition in Tanzania and dismissed  the  appeal  under
    Article 3.    Noting that the Appellant had "for the most  part"  lived
    lawfully in the UK the Tribunal then proceeded to  address  Article  8,
    considering the  Rules  in  tandem  with  Razgar[1].    Judge  Abebrese
    accepted that  the  Appellant  has  a  private  life  in  the  UK,  and
    apparently that her removal would be  an  interference  with  it.   The
    proportionality balancing exercise is recorded as follows:

         "20. I do not find on the basis of the evidence and  the  law  that
         there would be severe  and  grave  consequences  of  the  appellant
         returning to Tanzania for the following reasons. The appellant does
         have cultural links  in  that  country  where  she  has  spent  the
         majority of her life and she has ties in that  country  which  will
         enable  her  to  adapt  bearing  in  mind  that  she  has  spent  a
         substantial part of her life there.


         21. I do find that the decision is in accordance with  the  law  in
         that the appellant cannot satisfy the provisions of Appendix FM and
         in particular paragraph 276ADE as stated above. It is also the case
         that the appellant stay expired (sic) and hence her need to make an
         application/appeal to the Tribunal. The decision of the respondents
         is in the view  of  the  Tribunal  one  which  is  necessary  in  a
         democratic society in pursuance of a legitimate aim  which  is  the
         control of immigration. On the evidence the appellant has  been  in
         the United Kingdom lawfully but she is no longer  able  to  satisfy
         the provisions of the Rules.


         22. I do find that the decision is proportionate as  the  appellant
         cannot rely on Article 3 and case law in relation  to  her  medical
         condition as laid down in  my  determination.  I  also  do  make  a
         finding that she does have cultural  links  in  Tanzania  and  even
         though she claims that her family have ostracised  her  because  of
         her medical condition the Tribunal takes the  view  that  she  will
         nevertheless be able to adapt to a country where she has spent  the
         majority of her adult and early years".


 5. The grounds of appeal are that the First-tier Tribunal erred in failing
    to conduct an adequate assessment of Article 8. It is further said that
    the Tribunal made a material error of fact in the  characterisation  of
    the Appellant's residence in  this  country  as  "for  the  most  part"
    lawful, whereas in fact she has always been here with leave.


 6. The Respondent had not  submitted  a  Rule  24.   Mr  Tarlow  initially
    indicated that he would submit that the reasoning in the  determination
    was sound, but  having  heard  from  Ms  Lloyd  declined  to  make  any
    submissions.




    My Findings on Error of Law


 7. At a hearing  on  the  12th  May  2014  I  made  a  decision  that  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal did contain errors  such  that
    it should be set aside in its entirety. I  did  so  for  the  following
    reasons:


   i) Conflating the test under Article 3 with the  test  under  Article  8.
      Whilst there is no challenge to the approach taken to  Article  3,  in
      addressing  proportionality  the  Tribunal  has  failed  to  take  all
      material considerations into account and has appeared to conclude that
      the failure under Article 3 and the Rules is determinative of  Article
      8. This is an error in approach. The Tribunal was obliged to  look  at
      the Appellant's circumstances in the round, both here and in Tanzania.
      This included the extent of her friendships and  support  networks  in
      the UK, and the respective lack thereof in Tanzania. These  cumulative
      factors were capable, when taken  with  the  Appellant's  illness,  of
      rendering the decision disproportionate: MM (Zimbabwe) v Secretary  of
      State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 279.  The  determination
      does not demonstrate that all of these factors  were  weighed  in  the
      balance.


  ii) Error of fact in respect of lawful residence/failing to give  adequate
      weight to that fact. The Appellant has always had leave  to  enter  or
      remain in the UK and this was a  relevant  factor:  see  for  instance
      JA(Ivory Coast) and ES (Tanzania) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 1353.  It  is
      not  clear  from  the  determination  that  the  First-tier   Tribunal
      apprehended that the Appellant has always had  lawful  residence,  nor
      that this was a factor in her favour.


 iii) Failing to make findings on material facts. The Appellant's consistent
      - and unchallenged - evidence had been that her family in Tanzania had
      ostracised her when she informed them of her HIV+ status, and that she
      would not therefore receive any emotional  or  physical  support  from
      them on return. The reference to this matter at paragraph  22  of  the
      determination does not amount to a finding. This was a relevant factor
      under both Article 8 and Article 3: see for instance AE (Ivory  Coast)
      v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 1509.



 8. The Appellant was not at the hearing on  the  12th  May.  The  Tribunal
    received a letter  from  her  solicitors  informing  me  that  she  had
    recently had a hysterectomy and  that  she  was  suffering  from  post-
    operative complications which meant that  she  was  unable  to  attend.
    The record of proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal consisted of a
    note saying  "decision  reserved",  which  is  unfortunate  since  oral
    evidence was given.  I agreed that in these circumstances it  would  be
    appropriate to adjourn the matter to  enable  further  evidence  to  be
    called.


 9. The hearing was re-convened on the 23rd July 2014  when  I  heard  oral
    evidence from the Appellant and further submissions from both  parties.
    I reserved my decision, which I now give.



    The Re-Made Decision

10.  Ms Lloyd did not rely on Article 3 ECHR. It  was  submitted  that  the
    Appellant qualifies for leave to remain under paragraph 276ADE  of  the
    Rules. If for any reason I found that she does  not,  I  was  asked  to
    apply Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 and  consider  Article  8  outside  of  the
    Rules.


11. I found the  Appellant  to  be  a  compelling,  and  entirely  credible
    witness. I make my findings on the basis of her evidence,  as  well  as
    the other, documentary evidence that is before me. I have taken all  of
    the evidence  into  account  including  that  which  is  not  expressly
    mentioned here.




    Paragraph 276ADE


12. Paragraph 276ADE of the Rules relates to private life in  the  UK.  The
    provision that is relied upon is highlighted:

         276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to
         remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the
         date of application, the applicant:

         (i) does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in Section S-
         LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. in Appendix FM; and

         (ii) has made a valid application for leave to remain on the
         grounds of private life in the UK; and

         (iii) has lived continuously in the UK for at least 20 years
         (discounting any period of imprisonment); or

         (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the
         UK for at least 7 years (discounting any period of imprisonment)
         and it would not be reasonable to expect the applicant to leave the
         UK; or

         (v) is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years and has spent at
         least half of his life living continuously in the UK (discounting
         any period of imprisonment); or

         (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or above, has
         lived continuously in the UK for less than 20 years (discounting
         any period of imprisonment) but has no ties (including social,
         cultural or family) with the country to which he would have to go
         if required to leave the UK

13. No issue arises as to the Appellant's 'suitability' to be granted leave
    to remain in the UK. She has made a valid application. It  is  accepted
    that she is over 18 and has lived continuously in the UK for less  than
    20 years.  The question is whether she has "no ties (including  social,
    cultural or family)" to Tanzania.  The burden  of  proof  lies  on  the
    Appellant and the standard of proof is a balance of probabilities.


14. In Ogundimu (Article 8 - new rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT 00060 (IAC) the
    Tribunal considered the  meaning  of  "ties"  in  the  context  of  the
    identically worded paragraph 399A:


         123.    The  natural  and  ordinary  meaning  of  the  word  'ties'
         imports, we think, a concept involving something more  than  merely
         remote and abstract links to the country of proposed deportation or
         removal. It involves there being a continued connection to life  in
         that country; something that ties a claimant to his or her  country
         of origin. If this were not the case then it would  appear  that  a
         person's nationality of the country of proposed  deportation  could
         of itself lead to a failure to meet the requirements of  the  rule.
         This would render the application of the rule,  given  the  context
         within which it operates, entirely meaningless.


         124.    We recognise that the text under the rules is  an  exacting
         one. Consideration of whether  a  person  has  'no  ties'  to  such
         country must involve a  rounded  assessment  of  all  the  relevant
         circumstances and is not to be limited  to  'social,  cultural  and
         family' circumstances. Nevertheless,  we  are  satisfied  that  the
         appellant has no ties  with  Nigeria.  He  is  a  stranger  to  the
         country, the people, and the way of life. His father may have  ties
         but they are not ties of the  appellant  or  any  ties  that  could
         result in support to the appellant  in  the  event  of  his  return
         there.  Unsurprisingly,  given  the  length  of   the   appellant's
         residence here, all of  his  ties  are  with  the  United  Kingdom.
         Consequently the appellant has so little connection with Nigeria so
         as to mean that the consequences for him  in  establishing  private
         life there at the age of 28, after 22 years residence in the United
         Kingdom, would be 'unjustifiably harsh'.


         125.    Whilst each case turns  on  its  own  facts,  circumstances
         relevant to the assessment of whether a  person  has  ties  to  the
         country to which they would have to go if  they  were  required  to
         leave the United Kingdom must include, but are not limited to:  the
         length of time a person has spent in the country to which he  would
         have to go if he were required to leave the United Kingdom, the age
         that the person left that country, the exposure that person has had
         to the cultural norms of that country, whether that  person  speaks
         the language of the country, the extent of the  family and  friends
         that person has in the country to which he  is  being  deported  or
         removed and the quality of the relationships that person  has  with
         those friends and family members.

15. In respect of the  Appellant's  ties  to  Tanzania  she  is  clearly  a
    national of that country, she speaks the language and has  lived  there
    for most of her life. I am however satisfied  that  on  the  particular
    facts of this case an intervening factor - her diagnosis with HIV - has
    affected her life with such violent force that her ties to the  country
    of her birth have effectively been severed.  Those particular facts are
    as follows.


16. The Appellant is from a relatively prosperous family in Dar es  Salaam.
    They are practising Muslims and after  her  father  died  in  1996  the
    Appellant's 'guardianship' appears to have  passed  to  her  two  elder
    brothers.  The  Appellant  described  her  family  as   religious   and
    conservative. She wears the headscarf and was for instance expected  to
    remain living at home whilst she remained unmarried. Her brothers  were
    however very supportive. One in particular was very close  to  her  and
    successfully argued against her being married to an "old man" from  the
    village whom some members of her family wanted her to marry. They  both
    actively supported her in her choice to work as a teacher whilst living
    at home and in her quest for further  education.   When  she  suggested
    that she come to the UK in order to study they offered to pay  for  it:
    the plan was that she would study in the UK and then return to Tanzania
    to work in the family business.  Her brothers paid for everything.

17. Whilst the Appellant was  pursuing  her  studies  in  the  UK  she  was
    diagnosed as  having  a  large  fibroid  that  required  an  operation.
    Although she had leave to remain at the time and would  therefore  have
    been able to have this operation on the NHS the  Appellant  elected  to
    return to Tanzania to have it done there. She would  then  be  able  to
    recuperate at home. Her brother  paid  for  her  flight,  and  for  the
    operation.   She was given a blood test before the operation, which  is
    routine. It came back OK, the operation proceeded and  was  successful.
    After she recovered the Appellant returned to her studies in the UK.

18. In January 2010 she became unwell.  She had a pain in  her  chest  that
    would not go away and her  GP  referred  her  for  investigation  after
    repeated courses of anti-biotics did not work.  She  was  diagnosed  as
    having tuberculosis. At the time she was living in Essex and travelling
    in to London each day on the tube in order to attend college. Obviously
    her doctors were concerned about this and took further blood  tests  to
    determine the strain of TB that she might have.  On  the  12th  January
    2010 the results of those tests revealed that the  Appellant  was  HIV+
    and she was started on anti-retroviral therapy.

19. The Appellant was in a state of shock. She has never  used  intravenous
    drugs, and has only ever had one sexual relationship, with  a  man  she
    had met in the UK. She has contacted him since her diagnosis  and  told
    him to get tested. He told her that he was negative. She does not  know
    if that is true or not. The only other possible source of infection was
    from a blood transfusion she received whilst having  her  operation  in
    Tanzania.

20. At the time she found out about her diagnosis the Appellant was  living
    with another woman from Tanzania to whom she was very  close.  She  was
    such a good friend that the Appellant regarded her "as a sister".   The
    Appellant confided in this woman, who supported her.   The  Appellant's
    friend was returning to Tanzania in December 2010. The  Appellant  told
    her that under no  circumstances  should  she  tell  anyone  about  her
    diagnosis. She knew that her brothers would  be  shocked  and  possibly
    angry. She knew that she would have to tell them eventually but  wanted
    to do it on her own terms, and face to face. She did not want  them  to
    find out whilst she was in the UK. Unfortunately the Appellant's friend
    did not listen to her. Possibly thinking that it was in the Appellant's
    best interest she went to see her brothers whilst she  was  in  Dar  es
    Salaam and told them.

21. The Appellant's brothers were furious. In the Appellant's oral evidence
    she cried profusely as she recalled the conversation she had  with  her
    second brother shortly after her friend's visit. He was yelling at her,
    asking whether this was what he had paid all this money for her  to  go
    to the UK for -  "was it for her to find this disease, for her to  find
    HIV?" . He hung up on the Appellant. Later on she  tried  to  call  her
    mother who was in the village. Her mother was obviously very upset.  In
    the weeks that followed there were a number of  agonising  phone  calls
    for the Appellant. It was made clear to her in no uncertain terms  that
    she had brought shame on the family and that  she  was  not  to  return
    home. When she left home she was a virgin and had been expected to stay
    that way. Her brothers wanted to marry her to someone they  knew  after
    she completed her studies. That  was  now  out  of  the  question.  The
    Appellant's mother told her that her sons had  instructed  her  not  to
    have anything to do with her but she would stand by her because she was
    her daughter.    The Appellant's brothers cut off her funding. When the
    time came to pay her next instalment of college fees she did  not  have
    the money and she had to stop studying.

22. In 2012 the Appellant's  mother  had  a  stroke.  After  one  week  the
    Appellant received a call from a distant cousin to tell  her  that  her
    mother had died.  The Appellant, as was required by custom, called  her
    elder brother to say that she was sorry for her  mother's  loss.     He
    was distraught. He told her that it was her fault. He said  that  their
    mother had been placed under an intolerable strain by  the  shame  that
    she had brought upon the family and that the stroke had been caused  by
    her worrying all the time about the situation. He  told  the  Appellant
    that she had caused her mother's stroke and then  her  mother's  death.
    He told her that she should never expect to be able to come  back  into
    the family.

23. The Appellant's contact with Tanzania  is  now  limited  to  occasional
    telephone calls with her  mother's  cousin's  daughter,  a  lady  named
    Afrida. She is married and lives with her family. Although  Afrida  has
    not abided by the injunction not  to  have  anything  to  do  with  the
    Appellant, she would not be able to help her if the Appellant  were  to
    return to Tanzania. The Appellant's brothers would not permit  it,  and
    as a result it is unlikely her husband would have the Appellant in  the
    house.   Afrida has tried to intervene on  the  Appellant's  behalf  by
    telling her brothers that lots of people live with this condition  now.
    They told her that if she wants to  help  the  Appellant  she  will  no
    longer be part of their family.

24. This is not then, simply an adult with no family. This is a woman  from
    a traditional and religious family for whom life in Tanzania has always
    meant living in her father's house, under his control  and  then  under
    her brothers', abiding by social mores and doing what  is  expected  of
    her. Although,  perhaps  unusually,  she  was  permitted  a  degree  of
    latitude in that she was educated and allowed to work,  and  even  when
    she was younger reject a marriage partner of her  father's  preference,
    the bottom line for this Appellant is that she  was  expected  to  come
    back to Tanzania, get married and work  in  the  family  business.  Her
    religious, cultural and social life was all within the  sphere  of  her
    family. Her diagnosis has  destroyed  all  of  that.  It  has  entirely
    severed her relationship with her brothers, who have ensured that other
    family  members  participate  in  the  complete  ostracisation  of  the
    Appellant. Her only contact is her distant cousin who has been told not
    to have anything else to do with her  and  has  little  option  but  to
    comply. The  Appellant's  emotional,  physical  and  financial  support
    network has gone.  Not only has it gone, but it has turned against her.
    It was apparent from the Appellant's emotional evidence how  devastated
    she is by the loss of her family and their decision to violently reject
    her. It appeared to me that she was almost more distressed  about  that
    than she is about her diagnosis,  which  she  appears  to  accept  with
    fortitude and a mature understanding of how  reasonable  her  prognosis
    could be, with the appropriate medication.


25. I accept then that the Appellant has lost all family ties to  Tanzania.
    It would be a very rare case indeed where an adult who has  lived  most
    of her life in her country of origin could be said  to  have  lost  her
    "social and cultural" ties there,  but  I  am  satisfied  that  on  the
    particular facts before me, this is such a case. That  is  because  for
    this  unmarried  Muslim  woman  her  cultural  and  social   life   was
    inextricably bound up with her  natal  family.    If  she  were  to  be
    returned to Tanzania today she would have a passport, and  the  ability
    to speak Swahili. However she would have no meaningful  opportunity  to
    enjoy a family or private life.   She would have to live on her own and
    rely on her own ability to find housing and the work to pay for it - in
    this regard she expresses real fears about  being  tested  for  HIV  by
    prospective employers, a practice on the increase across  East  Africa.
    Whilst I am satisfied that she would be  able  to  find  work  of  some
    description she would be dependent upon her own ability to stay well in
    order to keep herself in employment.  It would be an extremely  lonely,
    and I accept, distressing existence.    I find that such ties that  the
    Appellant could be said to currently have to Tanzania  are  remote  and
    abstract. The life she once enjoyed there is now completely at an  end.
    Accordingly I allow the appeal with reference to  paragraph  276ADE  of
    the Rules.


26. It perhaps follows from what I have said that I consider there to be  a
    compelling case under Article 8. Given my findings on the Rules  I  can
    be brief in setting out  this  alternative  reason  for  allowing  this
    appeal. I have considered Article 8 on the  basis  that  the  Appellant
    cannot succeed under the Rules and  following  the  guidance  given  in
    Razgar.

27. I accept that the Appellant has a substantial private life in  the  UK.
    She has lived, studied and worked in the UK for eight years. She has  a
    number of good friendships and receives support here that is unfettered
    by cultural taboo or social prejudice[2]. That private life  could  not
    be transported with her, and as I have found above, I am satisfied that
    the Appellant would face very significant obstacles in  re-establishing
    her private and family life should she be returned to  Tanzania.  I  am
    satisfied that the decision would be an interference with  her  private
    life such Article 8 is engaged.

28. The Respondent has the power in law to take the decision and  there  is
    no dispute that the decision to refuse leave to persons who  no  longer
    qualify for it is a measure  rationally  connected  to  the  legitimate
    Article 8(2) aim of protecting the economy. The question is whether the
    decision is in all the circumstances proportionate.

29. My starting point is that where an applicant does not succeed under the
    Rules, it is likely to only be in a very small number of cases that  he
    or she would succeed under Article 8. That is because the Rules now  to
    a very large extent reflect the UK's obligations  under  the  ECHR.   A
    very great weight is to be attached to the public interest in  removing
    people who have no lawful basis to remain here.

30. As the Respondent accepts, a 'health' case that does not reach the very
    high threshold required by Article 3  may  nevertheless  succeed  under
    Article 8, although the number that do are  likely  to  be  "very  rare
    indeed": GS and EO (Article 3 -  health  cases)  [2012]  UKUT  397,  KH
    (Afghanistan) v SSHD[2009] EWCA Civ 1354.  The jurisprudence identifies
    a number of factors that might be relevant to the question  of  whether
    the decision to remove is  proportionate.  The  first  is  whether  the
    applicant has had lawful leave to remain in the UK, or has come here as
    a "health tourist".   This  cannot  be  said  to  the  case  here.  The
    Appellant has always had valid leave and in fact  voluntarily  returned
    to Tanzania in order to have an  operation  there  in  2008.    The  UK
    assumed responsibility for her treatment at a time that she had  lawful
    leave and her private life was already established.  It  can  therefore
    be said that the Appellant did not come here to use resources to  which
    she was not entitled[3].

31. I can also consider whether, as a  matter  of  financial  practicality,
    medical treatment would  be  received  in  the  state  of  return.  The
    Appellant accepts that anti-retrovirals are available in Tanzania;  the
    Respondent accepts that they are not free. The Appellant's  ability  to
    access such treatment would therefore be dependent on her  own  ability
    to gain employment and earn enough money to pay for her medication;  if
    she falls ill and is  unable  to  work  her  supply  of  drugs  may  be
    interrupted.    If her ARVs are disrupted she runs a  substantial  risk
    of her condition worsening and her becoming very ill.  I have  attached
    some weight to this factor. I have however balanced against it the fact
    that the Appellant's ARVs are currently paid for by  the  public  purse
    and that this is a significant countervailing factor.

32. An important consideration is whether  the  Appellant  has  social  and
    familial support in the country of return and to what extent she  would
    be able to enjoy a family and private  life  there.  As  I  have  found
    above, the prospects of the Appellant, in her particular circumstances,
    enjoying anything like a 'normal' private or family  life  in  Tanzania
    would  be  bleak.   I  find  that  she  would  face   humiliation   and
    ostracisation by her family and those former friends and  acquaintances
    known by her family and under the influence of her brothers.  I  accept
    her compelling evidence that she has no-one to whom she could  turn  in
    Tanzania  today.  I  find  that  this  strikes  at  the  heart  of  the
    Appellant's ability to live as a  'social  animal'  and  have  attached
    significant weight to it.

33. I find that these factors, the dislocation of the  Appellant  from  her
    current network of close friends and clinicians,  the stress  upon  her
    of living with the uncertainty of being able to pay for her  medication
    in the future, the complete ostracisation from  the  society  that  she
    previously knew in Tanzania, and  the  understandable  pain  that  this
    causes her, cumulatively amounts to  compelling humanitarian  case  for
    leave to be granted.

34. I have further attached  some  weight  to  the  contribution  that  the
    Appellant herself is making to the UK, not just in the payment of taxes
    but in the important (and consistently under-valued) work she does as a
    carer. She has worked since she arrived in the UK. When she first  came
    it was only a few hours for extra cash -  she  did  not  need  to  work
    significant hours because her brothers were supporting her. After  they
    cut off her funding she has worked all the hours that she is  permitted
    to do.  She is a support worker for people with physical  and  learning
    disabilities.  There are three particular  people  that  she  has  been
    looking after for a long time -  something  over  three  years.   These
    patients are categorised as having "challenging behaviour" and  so  are
    deemed to need a consistent carer who has received specialist training.
    She has taken a break from this at the moment because she has  recently
    had to have a hysterectomy and so cannot lift her patients but when she
    is off "light duties" (that is  currently  helping  to  look  after  22
    elderly people) she will  go  back  to  her  usual  caring  work.  This
    involves cleaning her patients,  feeding them and managing their needs.
    As well as these three regular clients  who  are  particularly  reliant
    upon her,  the Appellant has other patients with learning  disabilities
    whom she takes shopping and spends time with.


35. Having considered all of these factors in the round I am satisfied that
    the  Respondent  cannot  show  this  decision  to   be   proportionate,
    notwithstanding the very great weight that I must attach to the  public
    interest in removing people who do not  qualify  for  leave  to  remain
    under the Rules. I therefore allow the appeal with reference to Article
    8 in the alternative.





      Decisions

36. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of law  and  it
    is set aside.

37. I remake the decision as follows:

    "The appeal is allowed under  the  Immigration  Rules.  The  appeal  is
    allowed on human rights grounds".

38. The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity  pursuant  to  rule
    45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.
    Because  of  the  Appellant's  health  issues  I  continue  that  order
    (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008).





                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                              26th July 2014
                                                     -----------------------
[1] R v SSHD (ex p Razgar) [2004] UKHL 27

[2] The Appellant's bundle contains several letters of support from friends
and co-workers in the UK.
[3] As a student and then a worker, the Appellant was entitled to NHS
treatment free of charge: see Regulation 4(1)(iii) and (zi) of the NHS
(Charges to overseas visitors) Regulations 1989 (1989/306)

