
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32715/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 22nd October 2014                            |On 30th October 2014       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              md arafat hossain
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr T Binaziz, Counsel instructed by JS Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Respondent is a national of Bangladesh whose application to  refuse
    to grant the Appellant leave to remain under the Tier 1  (Entrepreneur)
    points-based system was refused by the Secretary of State.

 2. His subsequent appeal to Judge Devittie was allowed in respect  of  the
    Immigration Rules to the limited extent that the matter was remitted to
    the Respondent for a fresh decision.

 3. Grounds of application were lodged and permission to appeal granted.

 4. Mr Whitwell appeared on behalf of the Secretary of  State  and  pointed
    out that documents referred to in the refusal letter  which  were  said
    not to have been lodged were, in fact, before the Secretary of State.

 5. In all the  circumstances  he  requested  permission  to  withdraw  the
    appeal.  Mr Binaziz was content to accept the position  given  that  he
    could achieve no better outcome than that.

 6. In the circumstances I permitted the Secretary of  State's  application
    to be withdrawn.  The effect of this is that the  decision  stands  and
    the Secretary of State will reconsider the  papers  and  make  a  fresh
    decision.

Decision

 7. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

 8. I do not set aside the decision.






Signed                              Date: 30th October 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald

