
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/32694/2014
                                                               IA/32695/2014
                                                               IA/32696/2014
                                                               IA/32697/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5th January 2016                  |On 22nd January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRENCH


                                   Between

                    jignasha amish shah (first appellant)
                  amish kumar jayantilal (second appellant)
                            d s (third appellant)
                           h s (fourth appellant)
                     (partial ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr S Jaisri instructed by Deccan Prime Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The adult Appellants are a couple and  the  other  two  Appellants  are
    their daughters.  The older daughter, DS, was  born  on  29th  November
    1998 and she arrived in the United Kingdom  with  her  mother  in  June
    2004.  They came as visitors.  The younger daughter, HS,  was  born  in
    this country on 21st March 2005.  The second adult Appellant appears to
    have come to this country in July 2003.   He  claimed  asylum  in  2008
    which was refused in the same year.  At  the  relevant  time  all  four
    Appellants were citizens of India.

 2. The Appellants applied on a human rights basis for leave to  remain  on
    17th August 2011 and that application was  refused  on  27th  September
    2011.  It appears that a further application was made on 10th September
    2012.  That too was refused but following an application  for  judicial
    review, which was concluded by agreement that the application would  be
    reconsidered, it was refused again on 6th August 2014.   Decisions  for
    removal were made giving a right of appeal, which was exercised by each
    of the Appellants.

 3. The appeals were heard together before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
    Ghani and were all dismissed in a  decision  promulgated  on  3rd  June
    2015.  At the hearing of the appeals it was  accepted  that  the  adult
    Appellants could not succeed  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  they
    relied upon Article 8 ECHR.  The appeals of the two daughters were  put
    on the basis of paragraph 276ADE of the  Immigration  Rules  and  again
    also under Article 8 ECHR.  Judge Ghani considered  that  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect the two daughters to return to  India  with  their
    parents and  the  appeals  were  dismissed  both  with  regard  to  the
    Immigration Rules and Article 8 ECHR.

 4. The Appellants applied for permission  to  appeal,  claiming  that  the
    decision was inadequately reasoned and not in accordance with the  law.
    Parts of that application appeared to pay little relation to the  cases
    as there were references to poor health and to grandchildren,  elements
    which had not been  raised  in  the  original  appeals.   It  was  also
    asserted that the appeals should not have been considered in accordance
    with the Immigration Rules in the light of the  date  of  the  original
    application.  There  were  however  references  to  the  assessment  of
    whether it was reasonable to expect the two daughters to go to India in
    the light of case law. Permission was refused.

 5. On renewal in a revised form  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  permission  was
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds  on  28th  September  2015.   The
    grant reads as follows:

         "1.  Insofar as the grounds make reference to the first and  second
             Appellants' appeals under the Immigration Rules  it  is  plain
             from the concession recorded  at  paragraph  22  that  it  was
             conceded on their behalf that neither Appellant could meet the
             requirements of the Immigration Rules and that  the  case  was
             advanced upon the basis of Article 8 outside of the Rules  and
             that the issue related to the claims of  the  Appellants'  two
             daughters and the reasonableness of return  in  the  light  of
             their length of residence.

         2.   It is arguable that the judge failed to consider each  child's
             best interests when considering the reasonableness of  return.
             Whilst the position of the parents is the context in which the
             decision is made, it is arguable that making an assessment  of
             the reasonableness of return the judge failed to  have  regard
             to the Appellants' length of  residence  and  their  level  of
             integration in the UK and in particular the ages on which they
             arrived (or were born) and their ages at the date of  hearing.
             Whilst the length of residence is  not  a  'trump  card'  (see
             paragraph 70 of Behary, R  (on  the  application  of)  v  SSHD
             [2013] EWHC 3575 (Admin)) the length of residence and the ages
             of the children during that  period  are  significant  factors
             established in a number of authorities (see E-A (Article  8  -
             best interests of the child) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 315 at  [39],
             Behary at [69], EV (Philippines) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874 at
             [36]  and  Azimi-Moayed  and   Others   (Decisions   affecting
             children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197 (IAC)) and  it  is
             arguable that the judge failed to make  an  assessment  taking
             those factors into account".

 6. Following that grant of permission  the  Respondent  filed  a  response
    under Upper Tribunal Rule 24 opposing the appeals and  contending  that
    the judge had properly considered the issues.  The point was also  made
    that there had been no earlier reference to grandchildren or to alleged
    poor health.

 7. At the commencement of the hearing before me I asked whether  it  could
    be clarified what was the date of the application to the  Secretary  of
    State as this might  have  a  potential  bearing  upon  the  impact  of
    paragraph 276ADE of the Rules, for which the relevant date is the  date
    of application.  Mr Jaisri said  that  he  understood  it  to  be  10th
    September 2012 although Miss Everett accepted that  the  relevant  date
    might be that of the application for reconsideration  of  the  refusal,
    which would have been a little later.  Both parties accepted  that  the
    issues turned upon the position of the two daughters, as was made clear
    in the grant of permission by Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds.

 8. Mr Jaisri submitted that the judge had failed to  have  regard  to  the
    relevant period of residence and the impact of that  in  his  decision.
    He had not articulated the relevant case law and there was no statement
    of the weight to be attached to Section 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship
    and Immigration Act 2009  concerning  the  welfare  of  children.   The
    assessment at paragraph 30 of  the  decision,  he  said,  included  the
    negative elements relevant to the position of the girls.  The  position
    of the younger daughter, HS, appeared to  have  been  subsumed  in  the
    assessment of the position of the older daughter, DS.  The sisters  had
    not been assessed separately.  He said the period that  the  girls  had
    been in this country was  of  very  substantial  significance.   Having
    regard to the presidential  decision  in  Azimi-Moayed,  DS  had  spent
    eleven years after the age of 4 in this country and as at the  date  of
    the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal had been taking GCSEs.   The
    younger daughter had lived for six years after the age of 4.   At  this
    point I mentioned to Mr Jaisri the judgment of the Court of  Appeal  in
    EV (Philippines) and of the Supreme Court in Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC
    74, in which it was held that the unlawful status of  the  parents  was
    the  context  in  which  the  position  of  the  children  fell  to  be
    considered.  He reminded me that Zoumbas had  been  a  judicial  review
    decision but his principal point was that the judge had not weighed the
    very many positives in the balancing exercise.

 9. In response Miss Everett submitted that there was no  error.  She  said
    that it was clear from paragraph 30 of the decision that the judge  had
    borne the  relevant  guidance  in  mind.   He  had  realised  that  the
    strongest case was  that  of  the  older  daughter  and  had  therefore
    concentrated on her.  He had gone through the positive  factors  relied
    on, such as the fact that the daughter was doing  well  at  school  and
    attended temple and had strong  relationships.   However  she  accepted
    that the judge did  not  specifically  address  the  point  as  to  the
    relevance of seven years' residence in this country but she  said  that
    he was clearly aware of it.  He had not mentioned  the  guidance.   She
    submitted that it was not always the case that a child who had lived in
    this country for seven years after the age of  4  would  succeed.   The
    judge had  felt  that  the  children's  best  interests  would  not  be
    compromised.  She accepted that the younger daughter's position had not
    been gone into in the  same  depth  but  that  was  because  the  judge
    correctly assessed the position of the older daughter as the stronger.

10. Having considered  the  decision,  the  grant  of  permission  and  the
    submissions made, I came to the view that there was a material error of
    law in the assessment of the position of the two daughters by the judge
    at first instance and I set aside his decision.  There was  no  dispute
    that the adult Appellants could not succeed  in  their  own  right  and
    could not meet the requirements of the Immigration  Rules.   The  judge
    addressed the position of DS at paragraph 30 of his decision.  He noted
    the age at which she had come to this country and that  she  was  doing
    extremely well at school.  He referred to some case  law  including  ZH
    (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC  4  but  noted  that  neither  child  was
    British.  He also referred to Zoumbas.  He had not however referred  to
    the case of  Azimi-Moayed  in  which  the  significance  of  length  of
    residence is addressed in detail.  That  appeal  was  heard  after  the
    revisions to the Immigration Rules came into force in July  2012.   The
    relevant criteria are set out at paragraph 13 of Azimi-Moayed where  it
    is stated as follows:

         "(i) As a starting point it is in the best interests of children to
             be with both their parents  and  if  both  parents  are  being
             removed from  the  United  Kingdom  then  the  starting  point
             suggests that so should dependent children who  form  part  of
             their household unless there are reasons to the contrary.

         (ii) It is generally in the interests  of  children  to  have  both
             stability and continuity of social and  educational  provision
             and the benefit of growing up in the  cultural  norms  of  the
             society to which they belong.

         (iii)    Lengthy residence in a country other  than  the  state  of
             origin  can  lead  to  development  of  social  cultural   and
             educational ties that it would be inappropriate to disrupt, in
             the absence  of  compelling  reason  to  the  contrary.   What
             amounts to lengthy residence is not clear  cut  but  past  and
             present policies have identified seven  years  as  a  relevant
             period.

         (iv) Apart from the terms of  published  policies  and  Rules,  the
             Tribunal notes that seven years from age 4  is  likely  to  be
             more significant to a child than  the  first  seven  years  of
             life.  Very young children are focused on their parents rather
             than their peers and are adaptable.

         (v)  Short periods of residence, particularly ones without leave or
             the reasonable expectation of leave to enter or remain,  while
             claims are promptly considered, are unlikely to give  rise  to
             private  life  deserving  of  respect  in   the   absence   of
             exceptional factors.  In any event protection of the  economic
             wellbeing of society amply justifies removal in such cases".

11. Whilst the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did  mention  that  the  older
    daughter had claimed to have lived continuously in the UK for at  least
    seven years and that it would not be reasonable for her to  leave  this
    country, he did not  specifically  address  the  significance  of  that
    period in his consideration of her position or of that of  her  sister.
    As at the date of hearing (23rd  April  2015)  DS  had  lived  in  this
    country for almost eleven years after the age  of  four,  the  starting
    point for the significance  of  residence  mentioned  in  Azimi-Moayed.
    That period is obviously  far  in  excess  of  the  seven  years  there
    mentioned.  The judge accepted that DS had an active  social  life  and
    was well integrated.  The periods of time for the children relevant  in
    Zoumbas and EV (Philippines) are notably less  than  seven  years.   In
    Zoumbas the child had returned to the United Kingdom in March 2006  and
    the decision under appeal (this was a  judicial  review  decision)  was
    made in October 2011.  The period was something over five years in that
    case.  Other children were born subsequently but clearly had  lived  in
    this country for an even  shorter  period.   In  EV  (Philippines)  the
    children had arrived in 2009 and their applications  refused  in  2011.
    The appeal at first instance had been in 2012.  Again,  a  far  shorter
    period was involved.

12. Whilst the principle that the position of children has to be considered
    in the context of that of their parents is clear, the  current  appeals
    of DS and HS are most notably different having regard to the periods of
    time they have spent in this country and it was incumbent on the  judge
    to weigh those periods of time, particularly after  the  age  of  four,
    along with the other factors in considering  whether,  under  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv) or under Article 8 ECHR it was  reasonable  to  expect  a
    child to leave this country.   As  has  been  said  many  times,  these
    situations are profoundly fact-sensitive.   The  judge  having,  in  my
    view, failed to factor in the significance of the period of seven years
    after the age of four, in particular in the case of DS, in reaching his
    conclusion he erred in law.

13. Having reached that decision I stated that I was in a position  to  re-
    make the decision if the parties were ready to proceed.  I put back the
    appeals for a short period to enable them to prepare and then proceeded
    to rehear the appeals.  I clarified that the findings in respect of the
    adult Appellants to the effect that they could not  qualify  under  the
    Immigration Rules nor in their own  right  under  Article  8  ECHR  was
    unaltered.

14. When the hearing resumed I was handed a short statement  by  DS  and  a
    copy of a grant of British citizenship  and  the  British  passport  in
    respect of HS.  She had become a British citizen in October  2015.   DS
    gave brief evidence, upon which she was not  cross-examined.   She  set
    out that she had taken her  GCSE  exams  in  June  and  July  2015  and
    obtained one A*, seven As and three Bs in those examinations.  She  had
    now embarked on A level studies in  four  A  level  subjects,  physics,
    maths, economics and computer science.   Her  sister,  who  was  now  a
    British citizen, was continuing to study at the same school.

15. In submissions Miss Everett said that the most significant  change  was
    that the second child was now a British citizen but she relied upon the
    undisturbed findings and the  refusal  letter.   Under  the  Rules  the
    relevant factor was the reasonableness of removal and that  had  to  be
    seen in the context of the position of the  parents.   The  Immigration
    Rules indicated where the balance should lie.   The  family  still  had
    ties in India and she submitted that there was  no  evidence  that  the
    best interests of the children would be compromised by return.

16. In response Mr Jaisri referred again to the guidance  in  Azimi-Moayed.
    The older child's position had been the most significant but the second
    child had now been in this country for some ten years and was a British
    citizen.  The younger  child  was  not  independent.   The  family  had
    established roots.  The children were attending the same college in the
    same area where they had always lived.  The children  had  no  personal
    connection with the culture of India  and  he  submitted  it  would  be
    unreasonable to expect them to return.

17. The background to these appeals is the entry of  the  parents  to  this
    country  and  then  their  unlawful  overstaying.   That  is  a  highly
    significant factor as is made clear in cases such  as  Zoumbas  and  EV
    (Philippines) but also in  the  Immigration  Rules  themselves  and  at
    Section 117 of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.
    Immigration control is important and is in the public  interest.   Each
    case however must turn on its facts and the significance  of  the  best
    interests of children is made clear in  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009.  That  is  a  primary  but  not  a  determinative
    factor.  Without the interests of the two daughters  being  considered,
    the parents should undoubtedly return to India even  though  they  have
    some private life in this country.  The judge's findings in that regard
    are undisturbed.  The crucial factor, as was pointed out in the  course
    of the hearing, was the position of the two daughters.

18. As at the date of the hearing before me the older daughter, who  it  is
    accepted is doing extremely well at school and is  well  integrated  in
    this country, had been here for some eleven and a half years since  the
    age of four.  I was in no doubt that her best interests are  to  remain
    in this country and to continue her education here.   The  position  of
    the second daughter is different from her position as  at  the  hearing
    before the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal.   She  is  now  a  British
    citizen.  That citizenship may have been granted very recently  but  it
    would be invidious to seek to establish degrees of citizenship.  She is
    a British citizen and that is the basis upon which I  must  decide  the
    appeals.  The significance of British citizenship was made clear in  ZH
    (Tanzania) and was repeated in Zoumbas and in  EV  (Philippines).   The
    younger child is entitled to live in this country and to  complete  her
    education here.  Although I did not  hear  directly  from  the  younger
    child, it was apparent that both of the daughters wished to  remain  in
    this country.  Their views are of significance.

19. The question I have to answer so far as the daughters are concerned  is
    whether it would be reasonable at this stage in their lives  to  expect
    them to go to India, in the context that they would do  so  with  their
    parents.  In the light of the lives they have lived in this country and
    the period of time they have lived here and  the  profundity  of  their
    integration,  I  find  that  it  would  not.   I  make   this   finding
    notwithstanding the poor immigration history of their parents.

20. Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act is then  relevant  in  considering  the
    position of the parents.  Whilst they have a poor immigration  history,
    their relationship with their children was not in dispute.  Sub-Section
    (6) of Section 117B reads as follows:

         "In the case of a person who is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where -

         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
             with a qualifying child, and

         (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
             United Kingdom".

    The definition of "qualifying child" appears at Section 117D and  means
    a person who is under the age of 18 and who:

         (a)  is a British citizen, or

         (b)  has lived in the United Kingdom for  a  continuous  period  of
             seven years or more.

    There are other factors in Section 117B which would be likely to  weigh
    against the parents but it is clear from the decision of  the  Tribunal
    (chaired by the President) in Treebhawon and Others  (Section  117B(6))
    [2015] UKUT 00674 (IAC) that the public  interest  in  Section  117B(6)
    prevails over the other elements.

21. I accordingly conclude that  these  appeals  should  be  allowed  under
    Article 8 ECHR.  The best interests of the children, to be assessed  as
    at the date of hearing, compel me to consider the cases under Article 8
    as well as under the Rules.  I would also allow the appeals of the  two
    daughters under paragraph 276ADE(iv) in the light of  their  period  of
    residence and experience as at the date of applications.



Notice of Decisions

I have set aside the decisions in all four appeals made  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal and have re-made the decisions.

For the reasons set out above I allow  all  four  appeals  under  Article  8
ECHR.

I also allow the appeals  of  DS  and  HS  under  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
Immigration Rules.

No application was made for an anonymity order and no such order is made.


Signed   Date 22 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have considered whether to make a fee award and have  decided  not  to  do
so.  These appeals were allowed only after detailed  submissions  and  after
further evidence had been given.


Signed   Date 22 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French

