
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/32335/2014
                                                               ia/32337/2014
                                                               IA/32341/2014
                                                               IA/32343/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard in the Upper Tribunal at       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Taylor House                         |                                     |
|On 12th October 2015                 |On 3rd December 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                     tt
                                    Sn N
                                    Sl N
                                    Sh N
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondents:   Mr Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of Pakistan, the first appellant being  the
    mother born on 21 March 1972 and the three  other  appellants  are  her
    sons and dependants, born on 13 May 2011, 22 February 2005 and 21 April
    2002 respectively.  They are now aged 4 years, 10 years  and  13  years
    old.

 2. The first appellant arrived in the UK on a  visit  visa  with  her  two
    older children on about 10 August 2008.  She stated her husband was  in
    Pakistan and she claimed asylum which was refused. Her  appeal  against
    that decision was dismissed on 24 March 2009 by Designated Judge Shaerf
    and her appeal rights were exhausted in April 2009.  Her third son  was
    born in the United Kingdom in 2011.  She claims her husband is not  the
    father.

 3. On 18 June 2014 the first appellant made an application  for  leave  to
    remain and this was refused on 21 July 2014 on the basis that there was
    "nothing remotely exceptional" in the circumstances of the family  that
    would justify a grant of leave outside the Rules.

 4. The matter  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Eldridge  on  12
    December 2014 and he allowed the appeals on human rights grounds on  30
    December 2014.

 5. At paragraph 42 of the decision he wrote:

         "42.     Almost all factors of public interest are very strong.   I
             find, however, that I cannot conclude as  the  Respondent  did
             that  there  is  'nothing   remotely   exceptional'   in   the
             circumstances of these Appellants.  The Appellants represent a
             strong set of  factors  which  taken  together  are  unusually
             difficult.   No  one  of  them  may   be   determinative   but
             aggregating the mother's health,  the  likely  impact  of  her
             health  on  the  children,  their  best  interests   and   the
             unprotected status of all of them  in  Pakistan  leads  me  to
             conclude that, on balance, the very strong public interest  is
             outweighed by the private interests of these four  Appellants.
             I do not ignore the poor immigration history of the mother.  I
             have considered carefully all the provisions of s.117B of  the
             2002 Act.  Nevertheless, I conclude that the  decisions  taken
             in respect of each was disproportionate.  The circumstances of
             the Appellants are compelling and are not  encompassed  within
             the Rules."

 6. An application for permission to appeal was made by the  respondent  on
    the basis that the judge set  out  all  the  factors  with  respect  to
    Section 117B, particularly that the appellant did  not  speak  English,
    was not financially independent and her private life was accrued  at  a
    time when she had been here unlawfully.  The judge  then  proceeded  to
    place significant weight on the appellant's private life  and  that  of
    her children to conclude  that  removal  would  be  a  disproportionate
    breach of their Article 8 rights.  It  was  submitted  that  the  judge
    failed to give adequate reasons for then failing to place little weight
    on the appellants' private life.

 7. It was submitted that the correct question when considering  Article  8
    applications  outside  the  Rules  was  whether  or  not   there   were
    exceptional circumstances which would  result  in  unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences for the  appellant  and  her  sons  in  removing  them  to
    Pakistan.

 8. At "40" the judge speculated as to the  availability  of  treatment  in
    Pakistan and this error was compounded by the acknowledgment of a  lack
    of prognosis in the UK.  In placing great weight on the mother's health
    whilst failing to acknowledge that she  is  taking  NHS  treatment,  to
    which she was not entitled, and which, effectively, was a burden on the
    taxpayer the judge erred in concluding in favour of the appellant  when
    all the factors were considered and without adequately  explaining  why
    the public interest factor was outweighed.

 9. An error of law was found on the basis that the judge erred in  failing
    to give adequate reasons, having found the public interest  factors  to
    be very strong, as to why they were outweighed by the private  life  of
    the appellants.  There was no prognosis of  the  appellant's  condition
    and the finding was based in part on speculation as to the availability
    of medical treatment in Pakistan.  Further to SS (Congo) v SSHD  [2015]
    EWCA  Civ  317,  it  was  important  to  first  identify  the  relevant
    Immigration Rule and secondly whether there  were  circumstances  which
    took the matter outside Article 8 and then thirdly balance the relevant
    factors.

10. The appellants only put their case on the basis of private life and the
    judge at paragraph 40 had made speculative findings about treatment  in
    Pakistan and failed to engage with the balancing  exercise.  The  judge
    had not identified that Judge Shaerf had previously found the appellant
    not credible as to her circumstances.  The matter was adjourned  for  a
    resumed hearing before the  Upper  Tribunal  and  for  evidence  to  be
    submitted on the matter of the paternity of the youngest child.

Conclusions

11. The appellant was aware of the date time and venue of the  hearing  and
    did not attend.  I considered whether to adjourn the matter but as  she
    submitted a statement without giving any  reason  for  her  failure  to
    attend, and specifically she did not claim  any  illness,  I  concluded
    that the matter, in accordance with  the  overriding  objective  should
    proceed.  There was no indication that the appellant  would  appear  on
    any further occasion.  She submitted that it  was  prejudicial  to  her
    interests to have the matter returned to the First tier Tribunal before
    the same judge.  In fact the  matter  was  being  heard  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal and the matter had  been  adjourned  to  allow  the  appellant
    produce further evidence which she chose not to do.

12. The starting point for this  decision  in  accordance  with  Devaseelen
    [2002] UKIAT 00702, is the decision  of  Designated  Judge  Shaerf  who
    found, in response the asylum and human rights claim of  the  appellant
    in 2009, that the appellant was neither  credible  nor  reliable  about
    core aspects of her account, namely domestic violence from her  husband
    which drove her to the United Kingdom.  The appellant  herself  claimed
    that her husband frequently travelled to the UK on business or to visit
    family.  In 2008 her husband obtained entry clearance for her  to  come
    to the UK but would not pay for her air fare.  She  then  travelled  to
    the UK in 2009 but then claimed she had an adulterous relationship with
    someone named A and she  could  not  return  to  Pakistan  because  her
    husband would kill her. Her  parents  were  deceased  and  she  had  no
    siblings but she had cousins in Lahore. In essence she would return  as
    a single mother.

13. Judge Shaerf dismissed the appellant's appeal on 24th March  2009.   He
    did not accept that

         "... the Appellant's husband would concur in and indeed be  present
         when the appellant sold her wedding jewellery in order to fund  her
         travel to the United Kingdom.  Given that the  appellant's  husband
         and A are, according to the appellant, in touch with each other and
         A knows where the appellant is living in the United Kingdom,  I  do
         not find it plausible the appellant's husband has made  no  efforts
         which have come to the attention of the appellant to find  out  how
         his two sons are or to seek their return  to  his  family  home  in
         Pakistan."

14. Judge Shaerf found on the one hand the husband would not allow  her  to
    leave home but on the other hand obtained entry clearance for her.  Her
    claim with that of her then two children was dismissed  on  asylum  and
    human rights grounds.  That decision was not successfully challenged.

15. At the error of law hearing following Judge  Eldridge's  decision,  the
    question was raised as to the legitimacy or otherwise of the last child
    of the appellant and it was confirmed that the Secretary of  State  did
    not accept the illegitimacy of the child or the findings in relation to
    that child.  At this point Mr Wells submitted that the appellant wished
    to submit evidence on this point because of the protection issue  which
    was a relevant factor in the Article 8  balancing  exercise.  The  last
    child has two siblings who were fathered by the husband and evidence as
    to the degree of his relationship to his brothers could be discerned.

16. The Error of Law decision retained the findings of  Judge  Eldridge  at
    paragraphs [27], [28], [30], [31], [34] and [36].

17. At [27] and [28] Judge Eldridge stated

         "27.     In my judgment the respondent  has  addressed  the  issues
         raised on behalf of the applicants and given comprehensible reasons
         for reaching the conclusion she did. There has been no  failure  of
         process although whether she has reached the correct  decisions  is
         another matter and forms the crux of these four appeals'.

         28.      As I understand the position the appellants do not rely on
         their family life.  As the proposal is to remove them together this
         is understandable.  The family is not divided by the decision.  The
         unit remains the same four as now with  no  father  for  the  third
         child being identified and the father of the  other  two  being  in
         Pakistan. "

18. It was specifically the contention of the respondent at  the  error  of
    law stage that the illegitimacy of the third child  was  not  accepted.
    Despite a specific request to submit DNA evidence  no  evidence  within
    the intervening period of the third child's paternity was produced.

19. I note the finding at [27] but would add to it that  I  do  not  accept
    because of the overall factors as they stood by the date of the hearing
    before me, that the father of the third child is  unidentified.   I  do
    not accept that she is a single mother and I find that her  husband  is
    the father of the last child.  This is on the basis that the  appellant
    was disbelieved as to the core of her account,  specifically  that  she
    left Pakistan because of domestic abuse and that she gave  evidence  in
    2009 that her husband made frequent trips to the UK to visit family and
    on business.   She gave no indication that he  had  made  overtures  to
    harass her in the UK and Judge Shaerf found it  unbelievable  that  the
    father would make no attempt to see his sons in the UK.  There  was  no
    evidence of any  divorce  or  attempted  divorce  on  either  side.  In
    passing, I also note that all of her children have the name of N  which
    would appear to be unrelated to her own name.

20. At [30], [31], [34] and [36] Judge Eldridge wrote

         "[30]    None of the children can successfully seek to remain under
         the Rules as a child in respect of family life.  Their mother  does
         not meet the relationship  requirements  -E.LTRC.1.6.   Again,  the
         financial requirements cannot be met either.  Section EX cannot  be
         engaged in respect of the appellant - her children have not resided
         here long enough'.

         [31]     They also cannot succeed in respect of their private lives
         under paragraph 276ADE, the appellant has been  here  for  about  6
         years and does not meet the residence requirement.  In this  regard
         she plainly retains ties to Pakistan.  This may not be in the  form
         of useful family members but she lived in the country until she was
         aged 36 -that is 6/7ths of her life.  She speaks Urdu and used that
         language at the hearing.  She must  be  taken  to  be  fully  aware
         culturally of life in Pakistan.  The three  persons  who  wrote  to
         support her may well share her own  cultural  background,  although
         all are British citizens.  None of the children qualifies under the
         Paragraph on the same as Appendix FM - the basis lack of  7  years'
         residence in this country'.

         [34]     On the other hand the decision is certainly  lawful  [that
         of the Secretary of State] (subject of course to the resolution  of
         this  ground  of  appeal).   The   appellants   cannot   meet   the
         requirements of the Rules for leave to remain and those  Rules  are
         justified in support of a legitimate aim  -  effective  immigration
         control, not least to  safeguard  the  economic  interests  of  the
         country.  The respondent has discharged the burden upon her.'

         [36]     S.117B sets out a number of factors I must  in  particular
         have regard to S. 117B(1) establishes that maintenance of effective
         immigration  control  is  in  the  interests  of  justice.    Later
         provisions state that speaking English is in the  public  interest.
         It is undoubtedly true that the two older boys do but there  is  no
         evidence to show  the  appellant  has  any  noticeable  command  of
         English.  Financial independence is in the public interest and this
         family is not independent financially.  Above all, however, I am to
         give little weight to private life established whilst any appellant
         has been here unlawfully.  All of these four appellants  have  been
         here unlawfully - the youngest for the period since birth  and  the
         others for nearly all of the last six and half  years.   These  are
         very strong factors in favour of removal."

21. Having preserved the findings of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  who
    found the appellants could not  succeed  under  the  Immigration  rules
    (Appendix FM or Paragraph 276ADE and I note for clarity  that  the  two
    older children had not been in the UK for seven years  prior  to  their
    application in 2014  as they entered the UK in 2008 ),  there  are  two
    essential  questions  which  have  not  been  considered   within   the
    Immigration Rules that of whether this is a single woman being returned
    to Pakistan with an illegitimate child and the best  interests  of  the
    children. I have made a clear finding that I do not consider  that  the
    appellant is a single woman returning alone to Pakistan or that she  is
    the mother of an illegitimate child. I am not persuaded that there  are
    any compelling reasons to consider these matters outside the  rules  on
    those bases.

22. However the health of the mother was raised as a compelling factor  and
    further to Singh v SSHD [2015]  EWCA  Civ  it  is  important  that  all
    relevant matters be considered for Article 8 purposes.  If  the  matter
    were to be considered outside the rules and in accordance with the five
    stage test in Razgar v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27 there is no doubt  that  the
    appellant and moreover her children have established  a  private  life.
    There is no finding of any family life  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    threshold for the interference is low AG (Eritrea) [2007] EWCA Civ  801
    and would be reached by their removal.  It has been  found  above  that
    the decisions are in accordance with the  law  and  necessary  for  the
    rights and freedoms of others.

23. When approaching the proportionality of the decision  I  must  consider
    the welfare of the children  in  accordance  with  Section  55  of  the
    Borders Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.   ZH  (Tanzania)  v  SSHD
    [2010] EWCA Civ 207 identifies that the best interests of the  children
    must be established first and Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74 sets out that  the
    best interests is an integral part of  the  proportionality  assessment
    and they are a primary consideration  but  not  paramount  and  can  be
    outweighed by other factors.  It is important to  ask  what  are  those
    interests prior to asking whether they are outweighed.

24. Azimi-Moayed and others (decisions affecting children; onward  appeals)
    [2013] UKUT 00197 (IAC) established the following;

         (1)      The case law of the  Upper  Tribunal  has  identified  the
         following principles to assist  in  the  determination  of  appeals
         where children are affected by the appealed decisions:

             i)  As a starting  point  it  is  in  the  best  interests  of
             children to be with both their parents and if both parents are
             being removed from the United Kingdom then the starting  point
             suggests that so should dependent children who  form  part  of
             their household unless there are reasons to the contrary.

             ii) It is generally in the interests of children to have  both
             stability and continuity of social and  educational  provision
             and the benefit of growing up in the  cultural  norms  of  the
             society to which they belong.

             iii)      Lengthy residence in a country other than the  state
             of origin can lead  to  development  of  social  cultural  and
             educational ties that it would be inappropriate to disrupt, in
             the absence of compelling reason to the contrary. What amounts
             to lengthy residence is not clear cut  but  past  and  present
             policies have identified seven years as a relevant period.

             iv) Apart from the terms of published policies and rules,  the
             Tribunal notes that seven years from age four is likely to  be
             more significant to a child that  the  first  seven  years  of
             life. Very young children are focussed on their parents rather
             than their peers and are adaptable.

             v)  Short periods  of  residence,  particularly  ones  without
             leave or the reasonable  expectation  of  leave  to  enter  or
             remain, while claims are promptly considered, are unlikely  to
             give rise to private life deserving of respect in the  absence
             of exceptional  factors.  In  any  event,  protection  of  the
             economic well-being of society amply justifies removal in such
             cases.

25. The children are now aged 13 years, 10  years  and  4  years  old.  The
    eldest entered the UK in 2008 and has been at school here for 7  years.
    He was not born in the United Kingdom and as he came here at the age of
    6 years, I find he  must  have  been  schooled  in  Pakistan  and  have
    knowledge of the language. At 13 years he will have  entered  secondary
    school but is not yet in the formal part of his education such  as  the
    public examination preparation.   I find that as his mother speaks Urdu
    and there was no indication she could speak English that it  is  likely
    that he and his siblings can also speak Urdu and there would not  be  a
    linguistic barrier on their return. The second child was also born  and
    has lived albeit as a very young child in Pakistan and came  here  when
    he was approximately three years old.  He too has now been  in  the  UK
    for approximately seven years.  He is in primary school and has not yet
    entered secondary school.  Both children can  speak  English.   I  note
    that they have been here for seven years and Azimi-Moayed stresses  the
    importance of the seven years post the age of four. It  is  clear  that
    these children, save for the youngest have been here for that length of
    time and during a developmental stage of their lives. I also take  into
    account that they are doing well at school. That  will  stand  them  in
    good stead.

26. The best interests of the children, however, at their young age are  to
    remain with their parents.  I can accept that educational stability  is
    important but there is no reason why they could not  adapt.   The  best
    interests for these children are to remain in education, which they can
    do on their return in their own country. I do not, and  nor  did  Judge
    Shaerf whose decision remains unchallenged, accept the evidence of  the
    appellant with regard her circumstances and it is in the best interests
    of these children to remain with both their parents. The father is said
    to be in Pakistan for most of the time. The social and  cultural  norms
    for the children are no doubt influenced by the mother  who  has  lived
    for most of her life in Pakistan. I do not accept that they do not have
    contact with their father. The youngest child will of course be  mostly
    dependent upon his mother.  There is no indication  that  there  is  no
    education  system  in  Pakistan  to  which  the  children  might  avail
    themselves. The children  are  Pakistan  nationals  and  they  will  be
    deprived of much contact with their father and their own culture should
    they remain in the United Kingdom. The siblings are Pakistan nationals.



27. The school reports provided indicated no health issues for the children
    or special educational needs.  Indeed the school reports, were positive
    with regards social interaction,  such  that  the  children  would  not
    appear to have  difficulties  in  re-integrating  in  new  schools  and
    adapting to society in Pakistan. It is not the case that  the  children
    would be required to learn a second  language  as  there  was  evidence
    given that Urdu was spoken  at  home.   Indeed  the  mother  needed  an
    interpreter as her English was poor.  I do not accept that she does not
    speak Urdu to the children at home.

28. I turn to the health of the mother which was another factor to be taken
    into account. GS (India) and Others v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 40 held that
    foreign nationals may be removed from the United Kingdom even where, by
    reason of a lack of adequate healthcare in the destination state, their
    lives will be drastically shortened. I have noted Akhalu (health claim:
    ECHR  Article  8)  Nigeria  [2013]  UKUT  00400  (IAC)  and  taken  the
    circumstances of the first appellant into account.

29. The appellant has had the misfortune to have had breast cancer but this
    has been treated extensively on the NHS and there was no current report
    to indicate that it is not in remission or that there are now  on-going
    significant issues with her health.  There was  no  evidence  that  the
    appellant would not be able to obtain treatment in Pakistan. Indeed the
    Secretary of State cited  the  Country  of  Origin  Information  Report
    Pakistan 2014, which confirmed that  there  was  cancer  care  offering
    modern treatment and techniques.  The standard may be reduced  compared
    with that in the United Kingdom but medical care for breast  cancer  is
    available.  The last letter on file dated 30th April 2014 regarding her
    breast cancer care dated from over one year ago and refers to a 'Breast
    Care Follow Up' from St Barts Hospital.  There was no  indication  that
    this complaint had resurfaced and no up to date report.

30. The appellant also claimed that  she  had  mental  health  issues.  The
    evidence  of  28th  May  2014  indicated  that  she  had  been  offered
    appointments for counselling which she did not attend and I  note  that
    she is able to ensure that all 3  of  her  children  attend  school  or
    nursery school. There was no up to date specialist evidence to indicate
    that the appellant suffered with significant mental health issues.  The
    latest evidence was that of the GP in December 2014 who  asserted  that
    she had severe depression but I note that she was only  taking  a  very
    low dose of antidepressants and it did  not  appear  from  the  current
    evidence that she was receiving specialist care albeit she was said  to
    have been referred to Newham Psychological Services.   No  up  to  date
    report was presented. The Country of Origin Information Report confirms
    that there  is  also  treatment  available  for  mental  health  issues
    although this may need  to  be  self  funded.  This  however  does  not
    indicate that it is not available.   I  do  not  find  the  appellant's
    mental or physical health of such significance that  it  would  prevent
    her removal or care for her children. To date she has been able to care
    for them and get them to school.  The attendance rate of  the  children
    at school was very high.  I do not accept this would  be  possible  for
    such young children if the mother's  mental  health  was  significantly
    affected.

31. The appellants are all Pakistan nationals and have all been in  the  UK
    unlawfully.  As indicated above the first appellant has availed herself
    of extensive treatment on the NHS and  the  children  have  been  state
    educated.  The mother has known since at  least  the  determination  of
    Judge Shaerf in 2009 that she has no  right  to  remain  and  that  her
    children have no right  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.   Zoumbas
    confirms that the children  should  not  be  blamed  for  the  parent's
    conduct but there are  no  significant  obstacles  to  the  appellants'
    return.

32. I re-emphasise one further point.  In her evidence before Judge  Shaerf
    she claimed her husband visited the UK on a regular basis.  If, as  she
    stated, she had left her husband and  he  was  abusive,  and  that  her
    husband had ready access to the United Kingdom, Judge  Shaerf  did  not
    accept that he would not  have  made  strenuous  efforts  to  find  and
    contact his children. I agree.  Indeed it was the husband who was  said
    to have assisted in making the arrangements for her travel.  In all the
    circumstances I find that it is more than likely she remains in contact
    with the husband.  In other words I do not  accept  that  she  will  be
    returning alone as a single mother with an illegitimate child.

33. EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ  874  demonstrates  that  any  further
    Article 8 analysis would not assist the appellants.  As  stated  by  LJ
    Lewison at [60]

         "In our case none of the family is a British citizen. None has  the
         right to remain in this country. If  the  mother  is  removed,  the
         father has no independent right  to  remain.  If  the  parents  are
         removed, then it is entirely reasonable to expect the  children  to
         go with them. As the immigration judge found  it  is  obviously  in
         their best interests to remain with their parents. Although it  is,
         of course a question of fact for the tribunal, I  cannot  see  that
         the desirability of being educated at public expense in the UK  can
         outweigh the benefit  to  the  children  of  remaining  with  their
         parents. Just as we cannot provide medical treatment for the world,
         so we cannot educate the world."

34. Although mentioned above in the findings of Judge Eldridge I have taken
    into account Section 117B of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act
    2002 when assessing the weight to be accorded to  the  public  interest
    and the  proportionality  of  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  as
    follows:

         'Section 117B Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable
         in all cases

             (1) The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in
                  the public interest.

             (2) It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
                  interests  of  the  economic  well-being  of  the   United
                  Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain  in  the
                  United Kingdom are able to speak English, because  persons
                  who can speak English -

                  (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                  (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

             (3) It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
                  interests  of  the  economic  well-being  of  the   United
                  Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain  in  the
                  United Kingdom are financially independent,  because  such
                  persons -

                  (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

                  (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

             (4) Little weight should be given to -

                  (a)  a private life, or

                  (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

                  that is established by a person at a time when the  person
                  is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

             (5)  Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a   private   life
                  established by a  person  at  a  time  when  the  person's
                  immigration status is precarious.

             (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,
                  the public interest does not require the person's  removal
                  where -

                  (a)  the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                      relationship with a qualifying child, and

                  (b)  it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                      leave the United Kingdom.'

35. The appellant had interpreters, at court and thus I find  she  has  not
    shown that she can speak English to a standard to integrate.  There was
    no indication that she had been paying any tax.  It was the  case  that
    all the children were at maintained school or  nursery  school  and  it
    would appear that the family are accessing care from  the  NHS.   Thus,
    although the two older children can no doubt speak English, I  conclude
    that the family are a burden  on  the  tax  payer.  At  all  times  the
    appellant has remained in the United Kingdom unlawfully and I  do  give
    little weight to the private life of the  appellants  bearing  in  mind
    they have all been here unlawfully.  I take these factors into account.



36. Section 117B(6) specifically states

         (6)      In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,
         the public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
             the United Kingdom.

37. I have explored the reasonability of whether  the  children  should  be
    expected to return to Pakistan and found that it is reasonable for  all
    of them, including the eldest to do so for  the  reasons  outlined  and
    despite the length of time they have spent in the United Kingdom.

38. The question I must ask in relation to Article 8 is most succinctly set
    out in Huang v SSHD [2007] UKHL 11

         "In an article 8 case where this question is reached, the  ultimate
         question for the appellate immigration  authority  is  whether  the
         refusal of leave to enter or remain,  in  circumstances  where  the
         life of the family cannot reasonably  be  expected  to  be  enjoyed
         elsewhere, taking full account of all  considerations  weighing  in
         favour of the refusal, prejudices the family life of the  applicant
         in a manner sufficiently serious to  amount  to  a  breach  of  the
         fundamental right protected by article 8. If  the  answer  to  this
         question is affirmative, the refusal is unlawful and the  authority
         must so decide. It is not necessary that the appellate  immigration
         authority, directing itself  along  the  lines  indicated  in  this
         opinion, need ask in addition whether the  case  meets  a  test  of
         exceptionality."

39. I do not accept that there would be  significant  difficulties  in  the
    appellant's return. The appellant cannot have had  any  expectation  of
    being able  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.   She  was  given  an
    unfavourable decision in 2009 by DJ Shaerf and yet she failed to return
    to Pakistan and proceeded to have another child  here.   I  can  accept
    that the children are not to blame for the actions of  the  parent  but
    the mother has had ample time to prepare the children for their return.
    Having been found not credible as long ago as 2009, and, until the most
    recent decision, which was promptly challenged by the Home Office,  she
    cannot have had an expectation  of  remaining  here.  She  has  a  poor
    immigration history and this I take into account. That is  not  in  the
    control of the children.  This decision specifically  focussed  on  the
    interests of the children and an assessment of  the  reasonableness  of
    their return and, in the circumstances, I find that the decision of the
    Secretary of State was a lawful and proportionate decision.

Notice of Decision

The appeals are dismissed under the Immigration Rules and  on  Human  Rights
grounds.


Signed      Date 24th November 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed the appeal there are no fee orders.


Signed      Date 24th November 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
