
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32431/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th April 2015                             |On 30th April 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                        mrs Laura Peradilla Gatulayao
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms. S. Saifolahi of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr. S. Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


The Appellant

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of the  Philippines  born  on  15th  January
    1957.  She appealed against a decision of  the  Respondent  dated  31st
    July 2014 to refuse to vary her leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom
    and to remove her under Section  47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act  2006.   The  Appellant  argued  that  refusal  of  the
    application breached this country's obligations under Article 8 of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights (Right to Respect for  Private  and
    Family Life) as she had established a family and private life  in  this
    country.

2.   The Appellant entered the United Kingdom on  17th  January  2009  as  a
    visitor with leave until 27th May 2009.  On 16th April 2009 she made an
    application outside the Rules for leave  to  remain  to  care  for  her
    sister-in-law and niece who were  suffering  with  a  neurodegenerative
    condition.  Her application was granted and she was given  leave  until
    18th August 2009.  She made a  further  application  in  time  on  12th
    August 2009 and was granted twelve months as a carer valid  until  28th
    September 2010.  On that day she made  an  application  for  indefinite
    leave to remain as a dependent relative of her brother (the husband  of
    her  sister-in-law)  which  was  refused  as  she  did  not  meet   the
    requirements of paragraph 317 of the Immigration Rules.

3.   An appeal against that decision of  the  Respondent  was  dismissed  on
    11th March 2011 under the Immigration Rules but allowed under Article 8
    as being not in accordance with the  law.   The  Respondent  thereafter
    granted the Appellant discretionary leave to  remain  for  three  years
    until 30th May 2014 when the  Appellant  applied  again  for  leave  to
    remain on the grounds that she was needed as a carer for  her  brother.
    Her brother's wife and daughter had in the  meantime  sadly  died  from
    their neurodegenerative condition,  his  wife  in  July  2013  and  his
    daughter on 16 January 2014.

4.   The Respondent refused the application since following  the  deaths  of
    the sister-in-law and niece the basis of  the  Appellant's  three  year
    discretionary leave no longer subsisted.  She could not  qualify  under
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules as she had not lived  in  the
    United Kingdom for twenty years and she still had family  ties  to  the
    Philippines.  The Respondent considered that there was no  evidence  to
    suggest  that  the  Appellant  was  prevented  from  returning  to  the
    Philippines or that her brother who was also a Philippine national with
    indefinite leave to remain in this country  could  not  return  to  the
    Philippines with her.  Her  brother  had  symptoms  of  depression  and
    anxiety but could receive the necessary treatment whether  or  not  the
    Appellant was in the United Kingdom,  and  there  was  no  evidence  to
    suggest he specifically required  her  presence  in  order  to  receive
    treatment and help for his conditions.  Alternatively he  could  return
    to the Philippines if he wished to remain with her.

The Proceedings at First Instance

5.   The Appellant's appeal came before a panel of  two  Judges  sitting  at
    Birmingham  on  13th  November  2014.    The   panel   considered   the
    determination of March 2011 (which had allowed the  Appellant's  appeal
    on Article 8 grounds)  but  found  no  evidence  to  suggest  that  the
    Appellant's brother was unable to care for  himself.   There  might  be
    some depression but there was nothing to  suggest  he  could  not  look
    after himself and his home.  The panel had a number  of  short  medical
    reports  before  them  which  they  considered,   together   with   the
    Appellant's evidence in her witness  statement  that  her  brother  was
    unable to cope properly, had had a long time off work and relied on the
    Appellant for emotional and practical support and therefore they shared
    a family life.  The panel  were  not  satisfied  that  the  Appellant's
    brother had had a long time off work because he said that he went  back
    to work in the first week in February which would only have  been  some
    two to three weeks after his daughter died.  They  were  not  satisfied
    that the brother was currently suffering from  any  serious  depression
    because it did not appear that the brother had been  taking  any  anti-
    depressants for a significant period of time.  He himself had  said  he
    was feeling better now and was willing to  undertake  counselling.   It
    was to his late wife's aunt that he turned  when  he  had  any  medical
    appointments or counselling rather than the Appellant.

6.   The Appellant had not shown that  she  was  a  carer  for  her  brother
    during the illnesses of his wife and  child  and  the  panel  were  not
    satisfied that she had shown she is a carer now.   She  did  not  enjoy
    Article 8 family life with her brother.  She provided him with domestic
    support and friendship, but that  no  longer  continued  following  the
    interval of time since the death of the brother's  wife  and  daughter.
    The circumstances at the time of  the  2011  appeal  were  considerably
    different to now.  The Appellant could not meet the Immigration  Rules,
    and whilst they were extremely compelling and compassionate reasons  to
    allow the appeal in 2011 in the light of the severe ill-health  of  two
    close family members, that was no longer the position.  There  were  no
    longer any compelling circumstances not sufficiently  recognised  under
    the Immigration Rules.

7.   In 2011 First Tier Tribunal Judge Davis had indicated that there  would
    be an active review at the end of a three year period of  discretionary
    leave when the Appellant  would  need  to  satisfy  the  Respondent  by
    provision of appropriate evidence that further discretionary leave  was
    warranted.  The discretionary leave that the  Appellant  was  given  in
    2011 was on the basis that close relatives needed her care.   That  was
    no longer the position and the Appellant was therefore aware  following
    the determination of Judge Davis in 2011 that  her  immigration  status
    was precarious and she would need to prove at the end of the period  of
    discretionary leave she was still  entitled  to  it.   Given  that  her
    private life had been precarious since arrival it was not such as might
    be expected to lead to a grant of  indefinite  leave  to  remain.   The
    Appellant still had close family members in the Philippines to whom she
    could return.  The appeal  was  dismissed  under  both  the  Rules  and
    Article 8.

The Onward Appeal

8.   The Appellant appealed against  that  decision  in  onward  grounds  of
    appeal that first set out a chronology before arguing  that  permission
    to appeal was sought on the basis that the panel had  placed  too  much
    emphasis on the fact that the Appellant's sister-in-law and niece  were
    now deceased and had not taken  sufficient  account  of  the  situation
    regarding the Appellant's brother and his need to  have  the  Appellant
    with him.  Discretionary leave was not to be extended where  there  has
    either been serious misconduct (not relevant in this case) or the basis
    of the grant of  discretionary  leave  has  ceased  to  be  (which  the
    Respondent argued was  the  case  here).   The  Appellant  had  led  an
    exemplary life in the United Kingdom and although  the  primary  reason
    for the grant of discretionary leave was  the  need  to  care  for  the
    Appellant's sister-in-law  and  niece,  it  was  also  to  benefit  the
    Appellant's brother as he was in need of support.  By  caring  for  her
    brother  and  his  family  the  Appellant  saved  the  United   Kingdom
    considerable sums of money which otherwise would  have  been  spent  on
    social services care.

9.   The Judge had not dealt with the evidence given by Mrs Joy  Morag,  the
    aunt of both the Appellant and of her brother, save in one  respect  to
    acknowledge  that  the  aunt  accompanied  the   brother   to   medical
    appointments.  The aunt's other evidence was to  the  effect  that  the
    Appellant had been an invaluable help to her brother since she came  to
    the United Kingdom and he would not have been able to cope without her.
     He still relied on the Appellant to provide him with  the  support  he
    needed.  He became very distressed after the death of his wife and  had
    to take time off work.  The Appellant took care of  his  home  and  the
    effect upon the brother would be disastrous if  the  Appellant  had  to
    leave the United Kingdom.

10.  The willingness of the brother to see a counsellor did  not  mean  that
    he was not in need of the Appellant's emotional and  physical  support.
    Mrs Morag lived too far away to provide the  Appellant's  brother  with
    the full emotional and physical support that he needed  and  which  the
    Appellant provided.  The panel had placed too much  reliance  on  their
    interpretation of the word "carer" without looking at the actual  needs
    of the brother for the Appellant to provide emotional support  as  well
    as physical tasks.  The panel had misapplied the case of Gulshan  which
    did not impose a threshold test for Article 8  outside  of  the  Rules.
    The fact that the Appellant  had  family  members  outside  the  United
    Kingdom did not prevent her from  forming  a  family  life  within  the
    United Kingdom.  Living for five years with her brother and his  family
    constituted family life.

11.  The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Hodgkinson on 27th January 2015.  In granting
    permission to appeal he wrote:

     "Much of the content of the grounds appears to amount to no  more  than
         a disagreement with the findings of the panel and makes  assertions
         out with the context of the decision as a whole.  However there  is
         arguable merit in the contention that the panel  failed  adequately
         or at all to take into account the evidence of Mrs Joy Morag  whose
         evidence is arguably relevant to findings of fact arrived at within
         the decision.  It is noted that, although not referred  to  in  the
         grounds, the panel did not consider the viability or  otherwise  of
         the Appellant's brother  relocating  to  live  in  the  Philippines
         although this was raised by the Respondent in the  refusal  letter.
         For the reason indicated it is considered that there is an arguable
         error of law in the panel's determination.  Although the  remaining
         grounds are of less immediately identifiable  arguable  merit,  the
         decision in Ferrer (limited appeal grounds; Alvi) [2012] UKUT 00304
         (IAC) is followed and permission granted on all grounds pleaded."

12.  The Respondent replied to this grant  of  permission  on  3rd  February
    2015 opposing the Appellant's appeal.  The Respondent wrote:

     "The panel in a comprehensive determination considered  all  the  facts
         and arrived at conclusions open to them by giving adequate reasons.
          Ms Morag's [evidence] could  not  have  materially  added  to  the
         evidence given and considered as facts were clear.  Paragraph 25 of
         the determination makes it clear that the panel were not  satisfied
         that there were any longer any compelling reasons not  sufficiently
         recognised under the Rules".

The Hearing Before Me

13.  In consequence the matter  came  before  me  to  decide  in  the  first
    instance whether there was a material  error  of  law,  such  that  the
    determination  fell  to  be  aside.   If  there  was   not   then   the
    determination would stand.  Counsel for the Appellant argued  that  the
    panel had limited the scope of their assessment of  Article  8  on  the
    grounds that the Appellant's brother did  not  need  a  carer  and  the
    circumstances for the original grant of  discretionary  leave  were  no
    longer in place.  The panel had found  there  was  no  requirement  for
    significant support and care for the Appellant's brother because  there
    was a marked improvement in his condition.  In doing so the  panel  had
    overlooked the evidence of Mrs Morag that the brother was reliant  upon
    the Appellant and in turn he supported her.  The panel had ignored  key
    evidence  when  finding  there  were  no  compelling  or  compassionate
    circumstances.  Their findings on the level of assistance required  was
    not supported by the medical evidence or the evidence of the witnesses.
     Although the panel assumed that things had improved with  the  passage
    of time the Appellant still gave invaluable assistance to  her  brother
    who was suffering from depression.

14.   In  response  the  Presenting  Officer  argued  that  the  panel   had
    considered the matter outside  the  Rules  and  there  was  nothing  to
    disturb the panel's findings.  It was  accepted  that  the  Appellant's
    brother suffered from depression, but as paragraph 9  made  clear,  the
    Appellant's brother was now working, he was not on anti-depressants and
    he was seeing counsellor.  The previous appeal was  allowed  to  enable
    the Appellant to help her brother  care  for  the  brother's  wife  and
    daughter, but  those  circumstances  no  longer  existed.   There  were
    adequate reasons to say that there  was  no  family  life  between  the
    Appellant and her brother.  The  panel  had  not  made  any  irrational
    findings.   The  grounds  of  onward  appeal  were  no  more   than   a
    disagreement with the result.

15.  In conclusion Counsel argued that the panel was wrong at  paragraph  19
    of their  determination  to  say  they  were  not  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant had shown she enjoyed Article 8 family life with her brother.
     That was contrary to the  evidence  given  by  the  Appellant's  aunt.
    Consideration of that evidence would have made a material difference to
    the outcome.  Without consideration of that evidence it was at  present
    unclear on what basis they had come to their  conclusion  at  paragraph
    19.  There was  evidence  that  the  Appellant's  brother  had  anxiety
    attacks.



Findings

16.  The Appellant was granted three years discretionary leave in  order  to
    help her brother look after her brother's  wife  and  daughter.   Sadly
    they died which meant that at the end  of  the  three  year  period  of
    discretionary leave the original reason for the grant of  discretionary
    leave no longer applied.  In allowing the Appellant's  appeal  in  2011
    which led to the grant of the  three  year  discretionary  leave  Judge
    Davis had made it clear that there would be an active review at the end
    of the three year period when the Appellant would need to  satisfy  the
    Respondent that further discretionary leave was still warranted.

17.  What  the  Appellant  was  arguing  at  first  instance  was  that  the
    Appellant's presence was still needed but this time  to  care  for  her
    brother.  The argument was necessarily premised on the assumption  that
    the Appellant's care for her brother was at the same level  of  intense
    support as she had shown towards her sister-in-law and niece. The panel
    having carefully considered the evidence before them  found  that  that
    was not the case.  The situation had moved on.  The brother's emotional
    upset had  improved,  he  was  back  at  work,  he  was  not  on  anti-
    depressants.  The panel found as  a  fact  that  whilst  the  Appellant
    provided her brother with significant support immediately following the
    death of his wife and  daughter  that  significant  support  no  longer
    continued following the effluxion  of  time  and  the  brother's  clear
    improvement in mood.  Importantly the panel found that the support  the
    Appellant provided was not over and above the support that any  sibling
    might expect following such tragic events from a close family member.

18.   The  Appellant's  argument  in  this  case  and  the  basis  on  which
    permission to appeal was granted was that the panel  appeared  to  have
    overlooked the evidence of the Appellant's aunt, Mrs Joy  Morag,  which
    was to the effect that the Appellant's brother still relied heavily  on
    the support provided by the Appellant.  However, the passages from  Mrs
    Morag's evidence cited in the grounds  do  not  upon  careful  analysis
    undermine the general findings of the panel.  Mrs Morag said  that  the
    Appellant had been an invaluable help to her  brother  ever  since  the
    Appellant came to the United Kingdom.  At paragraph 19 the panel agreed
    that the Appellant had provided her brother with significant support in
    the past but the Appellant's brother was no longer in need of a  carer.
    In the final analysis the impact of  the  Appellant's  removal  to  the
    Philippines on her brother was a matter for the panel to  assess.   The
    brother was able to work and the point made by the panel at paragraph 9
    was that there was no evidence to suggest that he was  unable  to  care
    for himself.  The extracts from  Mrs  Morag's  evidence  cited  in  the
    grounds of appeal did not contradict that and it cannot  be  said  that
    the panel overlooked material evidence which would otherwise have  made
    a material difference to their conclusions.

19.  It is not of course necessary for a Tribunal to set out each and  every
    piece of evidence that they have received.  In this case the panel  did
    set out the relevant evidence in some detail and thoroughly analysed it
    and gave cogent reasons for their conclusions.  The panel were aware of
    the aunt's evidence which they summarised  at  paragraph  15  of  their
    determination saying:

     "We noted that although the  Appellant  referred  to  herself  as  [her
         brother's] carer and as being the person who supported him it is to
         his late wife's  aunt  whom  he  turns  when  he  has  any  medical
         appointments or counselling and she gave evidence that  she  always
         accompanies him to any such appointments and keeps an  eye  on  him
         and reminds him when to go and so on".

20.  There is a misprint in the  following  paragraph  16  where  the  panel
    state that they were not satisfied that the Appellant was in need of  a
    carer, that should of course read the Appellant's brother.   The  panel
    continued that it may well be that the Appellant provides moral support
    and companionship and acts  as  his  housekeeper,  but  those  are  not
    matters covered by the carer policy and there was insufficient  medical
    evidence to justify the claimed assistance.  The evidence they had  was
    of some care available in  the  form  of  moral  support  with  medical
    appointments attended by the aunt.

21.  In those circumstances it was clear that the  panel  had  in  mind  the
    relevant evidence in this case.  They directed themselves correctly  on
    the test to be applied.  The case of MM cited in the grounds of  onward
    appeal states that in carrying out the proportionality assessment under
    Article 8 outside the Immigration  Rules  the  Tribunal  must  pay  due
    attention to both the  United  Kingdom  and  Strasbourg  jurisprudence.
    This the panel did.  The grounds  are  a  mere  disagreement  with  the
    result.

22.  The grant of  permission  to  appeal  noted  that  the  panel  had  not
    considered the  viability  or  otherwise  of  the  Appellant's  brother
    relocating to live in the Philippines in the event that  the  Appellant
    returns there.  However given the fact that the panel  found  that  the
    Appellant could return to the Philippines and that the  effect  on  the
    brother was not such as to amount to  a  disproportionate  interference
    with his life, the case did not get that far and there was therefore no
    error in the panel's failure to consider the point.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and I  uphold  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
dismiss the Appellant's appeal.

Appeal dismissed.

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 28th day of April 2015


.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed this 28th day of April 2015


.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft

