
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/32082/2015
                                                               IA/32086/2015
                                                               IA/32088/2015
                                                               IA/32089/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On: 11th January 2017                |On: 13th January 2017                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     OOE
                                     AME
                                     JAE
                                     EGE
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Singh, Greater Manchester Immigration Aid Unit


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The respondents were at the date of decision all nationals of  Nigeria.
    They are respectively a mother, father and two minor children, born  in
    2006 and 2010. On the 14th July 2016  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Lloyd) allowed their linked human rights appeals.    The  Secretary  of
    State now has permission to appeal against that  decision,  granted  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Dineen on the 3rd November 2016.




    Anonymity Order

 2. There is no reason why the identity of the adult respondents should  be
    protected. Their case does however turn on the presence in  the  United
    Kingdom of their two young children. I have had regard to  Rule  14  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and the Presidential
    Guidance Note No 1 of 2013:  Anonymity  Orders.  I  am  concerned  that
    identification of the adult respondents could lead to identification of
    their minor children and I therefore consider it appropriate to make an
    order in the following terms:

         "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
         Respondents are granted anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify them or any member  of  their
         family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
         Appellant  and  the  Respondents.   Failure  to  comply  with  this
         direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"




    Matters in Issue

 3. The  case  before  Judge  Lloyd  was  that  the  third  appellant  (now
    respondent) was a 'qualifying child', that is to say a  child  who  had
    spent a continuous period of at least seven years living in the  United
    Kingdom.  It was submitted that the quality of  his  private  life  was
    such that it would not be 'reasonable' to expect him to now  leave  the
    United Kingdom and that as such  his  appeal  should  be  allowed  with
    reference  to  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv),  his  parents   appeals   with
    reference to s117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002, and his younger sister's appeal under Article 8 'outside  of  the
    rules'.  These submissions were all accepted by  Judge  Lloyd  and  all
    four appeals were allowed.

 4. The Secretary of State for the Home Department does  not  dispute  that
    the  third  respondent  did  have  an  arguable  case  under  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi), or that the  consequences  of  that  for  the  remaining
    family members were as found by Judge Lloyd. The complaint is  that  in
    his assessment of whether it was 'reasonable' for the  child  to  leave
    the United Kingdom the Judge  has  confined  his  analysis  to  matters
    relating to the child, such as his level of integration.  The Secretary
    of State simply places reliance on the decision of the Court of  Appeal
    in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705 to the effect  that  in  assessing
    what is 'reasonable' the court must weigh  in  countervailing  factors,
    such as the matters set out at sub-sections (1)-(5) of s117B.

 5. It is a moot point whether this ground is made out.  The  determination
    certainly addresses the public interest factors (see paragraph 36)  and
    although it is arguable that the Judge did not expressly weigh these in
    to the assessment of reasonableness (as opposed to proportionality)  it
    was apparent at the hearing before me that it now matters not. That  is
    because the child in  question  has  since  naturalised  as  a  British
    citizen.  He therefore does not need to worry about  the  Secretary  of
    State's appeal, and for the reasons which follow, nor do his parents.

 6. The court in MA agreed [at 14-20] with the analysis of the President of
    this Tribunal in Treebhawon and Ors (section 117B(6)) [2015]  UKUT  674
    (IAC) that sub-section (6)  is  a  stand-alone  provision.  Unlike  the
    matters at subs-sections (1)-(5)  the  reasonableness  of  expecting  a
    qualifying child to leave the United Kingdom is  a  matter  capable  of
    determining the outcome of the proportionality balancing exercise.   In
    the lead judgement Elias LJ accepted - albeit reluctantly  -  that  the
    question of what was 'reasonable' is not confined to the best interests
    of the child.  The  decision-maker  must  look  to  the  countervailing
    factors, as well as other matters such as the Secretary of State's  own
    policy guidance. In the case of British children, that policy guidance,
    set out in the Immigration Directorates' Instructions, Family Migration
    Appendix FM Section 1.0 at 11.2.3 reads:

         "Where a decision to refuse the application would require a  parent
         or primary carer to return to a country outside the  EU,  the  case
         must always be assessed on the basis that it would be  unreasonable
         to expect a British citizen child to leave the EU with that  parent
         or primary carer".

 7. That is in accordance with the concession made in Sanade v Secretary of
    State for the Home Department [2012] UKUT 48 (IAC).    Mr  McVeety  did
    not seek to persuade me that the guidance was  not  relevant.  Applying
    that guidance I find that it would not  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
    third respondent to leave the United Kingdom. There  being  no  dispute
    that his parents both enjoy a genuine parental relationship  with  him,
    or that the child would have to leave  the  country  if  they  did,  it
    follows that in any remaking this appeal would have to be allowed.  Any
    error in the First-tier Tribunal decision is not therefore material.




    Decision

 8. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain an  error
    of law such that it must be set aside.

 9. There is an order for anonymity.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                           11th January 2017
