
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32987/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10th June 2015                             |On 26th June 2015             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR



                                   Between

                                 aqib munir
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Bramble, Counsel, instructed by S & S
Immigration
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Jones made
    following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 14th January 2015.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 20th January 1988.   His
    immigration history is a little uncertain.  He initially entered the UK
    in July 2004 as a visitor with a five year visitor visa valid  to  16th
    April 2009.  He was subsequently issued with a further visit visa valid
    from September 2010 to September 2020 which permitted multiple  entries
    to the UK for a maximum of six months at a time.  He says that he  last
    entered the UK in January 2011.

 3. On 25th June 2013 he was served with notice as an overstayer  and  when
    interviewed said that had a British wife who was seven months  pregnant
    with his child.  He  and  his  partner  had  entered  into  an  Islamic
    marriage on 10th November 2010.  The child was sadly still born on  2nd
    October 2013.

 4. Following the refusal of his first application based on his marriage to
    a  British  citizen,  on  16th  April  2014  he  submitted  a   further
    application for leave to remain on the basis of his private and  family
    life in the UK, and it was this decision which was the subject  of  the
    appeal before the Immigration Judge.

 5. The judge noted that the appellant's  wife  was  visibly  pregnant.  He
    dismissed the appeal on the surprising basis that the appellant had  no
    family life in the UK. Although he accepted that he had a private life,
    he assessed that to be modest to moderate, just  sufficient  to  engage
    Article 8.  He said that  he  could  not  conceive  that  it  would  be
    disproportionate  to  require  the  appellant  to  depart  the  UK,   a
    conclusion he would have reached regardless of Sections 117B  and  117C
    of the 2002 Act but he was fortified in the  view  that  he  originally
    took by reference to the statutory factors that he was  bound  to  take
    into account.

 6. The appellant appealed and, on 10th March 2015, permission was  granted
    by Judge Hollingworth.

 7. Although the respondent served a reply dated 23rd March 2015  defending
    the determination Mrs Pettersen at the hearing accepted that  it  could
    not stand.

 8. There are a number of errors of law.

 9. First, it was not open to the judge on  the  basis  of  the  undisputed
    facts to find that the appellant had no family life in the UK.  He  had
    entered into an Islamic marriage almost three years before the date  of
    the hearing.  The couple had had a baby who died at birth and were  now
    expecting their second  child.   Although  Islamic  marriages  are  not
    recognised as valid under UK law that does not mean that  there  is  no
    family life between this couple.

10. It is right to say that the appellant, as at the date of decision,  did
    not satisfy the conditions set out in GEN1.2 of Appendix FM because  as
    at the date of application they had not been living  together  for  two
    years. By the date of the hearing, however, they  had  been  doing  so,
    which is a relevant  consideration  in  deciding  whether  family  life
    exists in this case.

11. Second, I assume that if this couple had a living child the judge would
    not have disputed that there was family life.  It is difficult  to  see
    why the fact that their baby died changes that assessment.

12. Third, there was evidence before the judge, not referred to at  all  in
    this  determination,  that  the  appellants  wife  was  being   closely
    monitored through her pregnancy because of the  death  of  their  first
    child which was a reason put forward for her not being able  to  go  to
    Pakistan,  relevant  to  the  consideration  of  whether   there   were
    insurmountable obstacles to the couple relocating there.

13. Fourth, the judge said in terms that he made up his mind  on  the  case
    and only afterwards considered the statutory factors which he was bound
    to take into account  and  which  fortuitously  supported  his  initial
    conclusion.  That is the wrong way round.

14. The decision is set aside.

Findings and Conclusions

15. Both sides agreed that this matter  could  be  dealt  with  by  way  of
    submissions.

16. Since the date of the hearing the couple have a British child  born  on
    13th April 2015.

17. Mrs Pettersen submitted that the reason originally put forward for  the
    sponsor's  inability  to  go  to  Pakistan  no  longer  applied  since,
    thankfully, the child has been safely born.  It was  proportionate  for
    the appellant to make an application for entry  clearance  or  for  his
    family to accompany him to Pakistan.  Although his wife was British she
    had visited Pakistan in 2005 and the relationship  between  the  couple
    had developed whilst the appellant was in the UK unlawfully.  The child
    was of an extremely young age and it would be reasonable to expect  her
    to accompany her parents to Pakistan.

18. Mr Bramble relied on his skeleton argument and submitted that the  best
    interests of the child were a primary consideration in this case.  As a
    British citizen she was entitled to the benefits of her citizenship and
    to retain contact with the wider family members on her  maternal  side.
    He also submitted that  it  would  not  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
    appellant's wife, who was British since birth and  who  did  not  speak
    Urdu, to lose her rights and entitlements and relocate to Pakistan.  He
    accepted that the appellant had been in the UK unlawfully but,  so  far
    as the statutory factors which I was bound to take  into  account  were
    concerned, he spoke English and had not claimed benefits.

Conclusions

19. There is no reason to go  behind  Judge  Jones's  assessment  that  the
    appellant has been  unclear about the amount of time he  has  spent  in
    the UK and that much of the time was lawful.  So much is clear from his
    witness statement when he simply says that he has been in  the  UK  for
    several years.  That is consistent with the claim that he last  entered
    the UK in January 2011, although he spent time here before between 2004
    and 2009, but in any event it is acknowledged that  he  overstayed  his
    six month visa which would have expired in July 2011.

20. Under Section 117B Article 8 public interest considerations  applicable
    in all cases, under Part 5A of the Immigration Act 2014 it states:

          i) The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
             public interest.

         ii) It is  in  the  public  interest  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic wellbeing of the UK that persons who
             seek to enter or remain in the UK are able to  speak  English,
             because people who can speak English -

               a) Are less of a burden on tax payers and,

               b) are better able to integrate into society.

        iii) It is  in  the  public  interest  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic wellbeing of the UK that person  who
             seek to enter or remain in the UK are financially independent,
             because such persons -

             (a)  are not a burden on tax payers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         iv) Little weight should be given to -

               a) a private life, or

               b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,  that  is
                  established by a person at a time when the  person  is  in
                  the UK unlawfully.

          v)  Little weight should be given to a private  life  established
             by a person at a time when the person's immigration status  is
             precarious.

         vi) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where -

          a) The person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
             with a qualified child, and

          b) It would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
             UK."

21. 117B considerations were recently considered by the Upper  Tribunal  in
    AM (Section 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 where the Upper Tribunal held
    that an Appellant can obtain no positive right to a grant of  leave  to
    remain from either Sections 117B(2) or (3), whatever the degree of  his
    fluency in English to the strength of his financial resources.  So  far
    as Section 117B(6)  is  concerned,  the  question  must  be  posed  and
    answered in the proper context of whether it was reasonable  to  expect
    the child to  follow  its  parents  to  their  country  of  origin  (EV
    (Philippines)).

22. In this case, therefore, although it is said  that  the  appellant  can
    speak English and has not been a burden on the  state,  he  derives  no
    credit for that in relation to Section 117B.

23. It is equally clear that the appellant has spent a  substantial  amount
    of time in the UK unlawfully and accordingly little  weight  should  be
    given to a relationship formed with a qualifying partner. The  crux  of
    this case therefore is the position of the appellant's British child.

24. In EV (Philippines) and Others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 875 the Court  of
    Appeal  considered  Section  55  of  the   Borders,   Citizenship   and
    Immigration Act 2009 and adopted the formulation of  Lady  Hale  in  ZH
    (Tanzania) v SSHD [2010] UKSC 4.

25. At paragraph 30 she said:
         "30. Although nationality is not a "trump card" it is of particular
             importance in assessing the best interests of any  child.  The
             UNCRC recognises the right of every child to be registered and
             acquire  a  nationality  (Article  7)  and  to  preserve   her
             identity, including her nationality (Article 8). In  Wan,  the
             Federal Court of Australia, pointed out at para 30 that,  when
             considering the possibility of the children accompanying their
             father to China, the tribunal had not considered  any  of  the
             following  matters,  which  the  Court  clearly  regarded   as
             important:
             (a)  the fact that the children,  as  citizens  of  Australia,
                  would be deprived of the country of their  own  and  their
                  mother's citizenship, and of its protection  and  support,
                  socially, culturally and medically, and in many other ways
                  evoked by, but not  confined  to,  the  broad  concept  of
                  lifestyle'
             (b)  the resultant social and linguistic disruption of their
                  childhood as well as the loss of their homeland;
             (c)  the loss of educational opportunities available to the
                  children in Australia; and
             (d)  their resultant isolation from the normal contacts of
                  children with their mother and their mother's family."

26. In EV(Philippines), at paragraph 35 Christopher Clarke LJ said:

         "A decision as to what is in the best interests  of  children  will
         depend on a number of factors such as (a) their age, (b) the length
         of time they have been  here,  (c)  how  long  they  have  been  in
         education, (d) what stage their education has reached (e)  to  what
         extent they have become distanced from the country to which  it  is
         proposed that they return (f) how renewable their  connection  with
         it may be, (g) to what extent they will have linguistic medical  or
         other difficulties in adapting to that country, and (h) the  extent
         to which the course proposed will interfere with their family  life
         or other rights (if they have any) as British citizens."

27. Lewison LJ said at paragraph 51:

         "To attempt to answer this question is it necessary to revisit  the
         well-known case of ZH (Tanzania)  v  SSHD  [2011]  UKSC  4.  It  is
         necessary to put  that  decision  into  its  factual  context.  The
         Appellant was the mother who is a national of  Tanzania.   She  had
         two children who were aged 12 and 9 respectively. They were British
         citizens.  Importantly so was their father.  Accordingly there  was
         no question of removing the father.  Nor did the Secretary of State
         have any  power  to  remove  the  children.   The  only  power  the
         Secretary of State had was that of removing the mother  alone.   If
         therefore the children were  to  stay  in  the  UK  they  would  be
         separated from their mother.  On the other hand  if  they  followed
         her to Tanzania they would be  separated  from  their  father,  and
         deprived of the opportunity to grow up in the country of which they
         were citizens.  That was the  context  in  which  the  issues  were
         discussed."

28. And at paragraph 58:

         "In my judgement therefore the assessment of the best interests  of
         the children must be made on the basis that the facts are  as  they
         are in the real world.  If one parent has no right to  remain,  but
         the other parent does, that is the  background  against  which  the
         assessment is conducted.  If neither parent has the right to remain
         then that is  the  background  against   which  the  assessment  is
         conducted.  Thus the ultimate question will be: is it reasonable to
         expect the child to follow the parent with no right  to  remain  to
         the country of origin?"

29. In EV (Philippines) none of the family was a British citizen  and  none
    had the right to remain in the UK and the court concluded that  it  was
    entirely reasonable to expect the children to go with their parents.

30. In this case the child is extremely young, and  although  she  will  be
    beginning to develop relationships with her maternal family in the  UK,
    those relationships are  inevitably  nascent.   She  has  developed  no
    private life of her own at all.  Her  father  has  a  poor  immigration
    history in that he has clearly overstayed  his  visa  and  shown  scant
    regard for the requirements of immigration control.

31. On the other hand as in ZH (Tanzania), if she followed  her  father  to
    Pakistan she would be deprived of the right to grow up in  the  country
    of which she is a citizen.  The Secretary of  State  has  no  power  to
    remove her mother, as a British citizen, and  she  would  therefore  be
    potentially separated from her.  Her mother not  only  has  citizenship
    rights of her own in the UK, but this is the only country she has  ever
    known, her family are here, and importantly, she has lost a child  here
    and would lose the solace which she presently gains from  visiting  the
    child's grave.

32. In these circumstances the appellant meets the requirement of paragraph
    EX1(a) in that he has a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  a
    qualifying child and it would not be reasonable to expect her to  leave
    the UK.

Notice of Decision

33. The original judge's decision is set aside.  It is remade  as  follows.
    The appellant's appeal is allowed.



No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor



