
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32153/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 30th October 2014                          |On 31st October 2014         |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                               MAHENDRA TAMANG
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr S Ahmed instructed under the Direct Access Scheme
(advocacy only).
For the Respondent: Mr Mangion - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. Following a hearing at North Shields  on  9th  September  2014  the
        determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which  dismissed  the
        Appellant's appeal was set aside, for the reasons set  out  in  the
        error of law finding and directions document dated  12th  September
        2014.  The matter returns to  the  Upper  Tribunal  today  for  the
        purposes of a substantive hearing  to  allow  the  decision  to  be
        remade. The scope of the hearing is  limited  to  the  question  of
        whether family life recognised by Article  8  (1)  exists  and  the
        proportionality of the decision.


     2. The Appellant was born on 29th December 1986 and is a  national  of
        Nepal. His father is a veteran of the Brigade of  Gurkhas  who  was
        discharged in September 1995 after more than 12  years  of  service
        with an exemplary record. It is  his  evidence  that  had  he  been
        permitted to do so he would have applied for leave to enable him to
        settle in the United Kingdom upon discharge. His evidence  is  that
        during the time of his service he entered  the  United  Kingdom  on
        four separate occasions, one  of  which  was  for  the  purpose  of
        receiving medical treatment by way of spinal decompression  surgery
        for prolapsed intervertebral discs, an injury sustained as a result
        of his military service.


     3. As the appellant's father was unable to apply for  settlement  upon
        discharge he travelled to Hong Kong where  he  obtained  employment
        which he was able to use to  support  his  family  unit  which  was
        composed of his wife, his son the appellant, and  a  daughter,  who
        remained in Nepal. His evidence was that his wife would  visit  him
        and stay on occasions in Hong Kong although  thereafter  return  to
        Nepal to continue to care for their children.


     4.  In  2009,  following  a  well-publicised  campaign  fronted  by  a
        celebrity in the entertainment industry, the  law  was  changed  to
        remedy what is now accepted was  an  historic  injustice  to  allow
        members of the Gurkha Regiment who retired prior to 1997  to  apply
        for settlement in  recognition  of  their  service  to  the  United
        Kingdom. The appellant's father made such  an  application  and  in
        January 2010 was granted entry clearance.  He  entered  the  United
        Kingdom in July 2010 with his wife (the  appellant's  mother),  and
        shortly thereafter the Appellant joined them from within the UK and
        has lived with them in the family household since. The  appellant's
        father's evidence is that he would have  made  the  application  in
        1995, if permitted, at which point the Appellant would have been  a
        dependent child under the age of  18  and  therefore  eligible  for
        entry along with his parents.


     5. The evidence shows that the Appellant remained in the  family  home
        in Nepal until entering the United Kingdom on 24th  September  2009
        with leave as a Tier 4 (General) Student valid until  3rd  November
        2010.


     6. The evidence considered by the Upper  Tribunal,  both  written  and
        oral, clearly demonstrates that the Appellant remained  within  the
        family unit in Nepal until he came to the United Kingdom. The  cost
        of his studies both in terms of course  fees  and  maintenance  was
        provided by his parents, indicating continued dependence upon them.
        He undertook casual work within a local fast food outlet  permitted
        by the terms of his student visa but has not worked  since  joining
        his father's household and therefore  remains  dependent  upon  his
        father who is employed and earning sufficient income to support the
        family unit in the United Kingdom.


     7. The Appellant's sister later applied for entry  clearance,  as  she
        remained in Nepal, which was refused and which has been subject  of
        an appeal before the First-tier Tribunal heard in October 2014. The
        determination of that Tribunal is still awaited.


     8. Whether family life recognised by Article 8 exists is a question of
        fact. One of the reasons it was found the judge of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal had erred in law was as a result of a failure to apply the
        correct legal  test,  including  a  failure  to  consider  relevant
        European jurisprudence including AA v United  Kingdom  (Application
        no. 8000/08) in which the European Court of Human Rights held  that
        Strasbourg jurisprudence tended to suggest that  the  applicant,  a
        young adult who resided with his mother and had not yet  founded  a
        family life of his own, could be regarded as having " family  life"
        for the purposes of Article 8(1). The Court, however, found that it
        was not necessary to decide  whether  this  was  the  case  for  as
        Article  8  protected  the   right   to   establish   and   develop
        relationships with other human beings and could embrace aspects  of
        an individual's social identity, it had to  be  accepted  that  the
        totality of social ties between settled migrants and the  community
        in which they were living constitute  a  part  of  the  concept  of
        private life within the meaning of Article 8 and that  in  practice
        the factors to be examined when assessing  proportionality  of  the
        deportation measures were the same regardless of whether family  or
        private life was engaged.


     9. I accept the Appellant is now an adult but it has not been shown on
        the evidence that he has established an  independent  household  of
        his own away from  that  of  his  parents.  Whilst  that  household
        initially existed in Nepal, once his father and mother came to  the
        United Kingdom and re-established their lives within  this  country
        that became the family home at which  the  Appellant  was  reunited
        with them. I accept Mr Mangion's  submission  that  it  appears  no
        enquiries were undertaken to establish whether  the  Appellant  was
        able to seek employment as a result of the fact his  student  leave
        will have continued by virtue of section 3C of the Immigration Act,
        and that there is merit in support of a finding that the  situation
        that does exist, with the Appellant in  the  family  household  and
        dependent upon his parents, has only arisen  as  a  result  of  his
        belief he was unable to work, and is  therefore  a  situation  that
        only exists as a result of his lack of  status  permitting  him  to
        remain and to obtain proper employment in the United Kingdom.  That
        may be  the  case,  but  as  the  facts  clearly  indicate  ongoing
        dependence upon his family, the lack of an independent household, a
        chronology showing that his studies in the  United  Kingdom  flowed
        from his development within his family and a desire in him and  his
        family for him to  study  in  this  country  as  a  result  of  the
        reputation the educational services have  here,  it  has  not  been
        established that his arriving in the United Kingdom and  activities
        since are those of an individual who has established an independent
        life away from the family. The fact they are situation specific  as
        a result of the status is relevant, however, to the proportionality
        of the decision.


    10. I accept that the Appellant has established private life recognised
        by Article 8(1) in United Kingdom too. Although  any  private  life
        established as a student will be tenuous as result of the temporary
        nature of such status, since completing his  studies  and  rejoined
        his father's household the Appellant has developed a  private  life
        within that household and with friends within the community in  the
        United Kingdom.


    11. I therefore accept that  family  and  private  life  recognised  by
        Article 8(1) has been shown to exist with his mother and father and
        between them and him in the United Kingdom.  The Upper Tribunal  is
        only referring to Article 8 (1) ECHR  in  this  context  as  it  is
        accepted  that  the  Appellant  is  unable  to  succeed  under  the
        Immigration Rules which  is  a  relevant  factor  when  considering
        proportionality.


    12. In relation to the proportionality argument, as no issues arose  in
        relation to any other of the Razgar questions, if this was  a  case
        of an individual who attended as a student but  decided  thereafter
        that he wished to remain because his parents had themselves entered
        with  status  granted  independently  to  them,  the  case  of  the
        Secretary of State would be  considerably  strengthened.  This  is,
        however, not such a case.


    13. As stated above, the Appellant's father is a former member  of  the
        Gurkha Brigade. His evidence, which I accept, is that had  it  been
        possible he would have  applied  for  leave  to  enter  the  United
        Kingdom in 1995 and brought the members of his family with him. The
        only thing that prevented such a course of action was  because  the
        law did  not  facilitate  such  an  application  and  had  such  an
        application been it would have been refused  for  this  reason.  As
        soon as he was able to make such an  application  he  did  and  was
        granted entry and is now settled in this country. The difficulty is
        that by the time that application was approved  his  children  were
        adults. An important case when considering  issues  such  as  those
        which have arisen in this appeal is that of R(on the application of
        Sharmilla Gurung and others) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 8. In this case
        the Court held that the historic injustice suffered by Gurkhas  was
        only one factor to be weighed  against  immigration  control  under
        Article 8. It was not necessarily determinative. The fact that  the
        right to settle enjoyed  by  Gurkhas  was  less  secure  than  that
        enjoyed by the BOCs was a relevant factor but although  the  weight
        to be given to the historic injustice to Gurkhas was not as  strong
        as that given to BOCs, the UT had not been correct  to  state  that
        the weight to be given was  generally  substantially  less  in  the
        Gurkha cases.  If a Gurkha could show that, but  for  the  historic
        injustice, he would have settled in the  UK  at  a  time  when  his
        dependent (now) adult child would have been able to  accompany  him
        as a dependent minor child, that was a strong  reason  for  holding
        that it was disproportionate to permit the adult child to join  his
        family now.


    14. Also, in Ghising and others (Ghurkhas/BOCs: historic wrong; weight)
        [2013] UKUT 00567 (IAC) it was held that:


     (i)  In finding that the weight to be accorded to the historic wrong in
          Ghurkha ex-servicemen cases was not to be regarded  as  less  than
   that to be accorded the  historic  wrong  suffered  by  British  Overseas
   citizens, the Court of Appeal in Gurung and others [2013] EWCA        Civ
   8 did not hold that, in  either  Gurkha  or  BOC  cases,  the  effect  of
   the historic wrong is to reverse or otherwise alter the burden  of  proof
   that applies in Article 8 proportionality assessments;


     (ii)     When an Appellant has shown that there is family/private  life
   and        the decision made by the Respondent amounts to an interference
          with it, the burden lies  with  the  Respondent  to  show  that  a
   decision       to remove is proportionate (although Appellants  will,  in
   practice,      bear the responsibility of  adducing  evidence  that  lies
   within their        remit and about which the Respondent may be unaware);


     (iii) What concerned the Court in Gurung and others was not the  burden
     of proof  but,  rather,  the  issue  of  weight  in  a  proportionality
   assessment. The Court held that, as in the case  of  BOCs,  the  historic
   wrong   suffered   by    Gurkha    ex-servicemen    should    be    given
   substantial weight;


     (iv) Accordingly, where it is found that Article 8 is engaged and,  but
   for        the historic wrong, the Appellant would have been  settled  in
   the UK         long ago, this will ordinarily determine  the  outcome  of
   the Article 8       proportionality assessment in an Appellant's  favour,
   where the           matters relied on by the SSHD/ ECO consist solely  of
   the public          interest in maintaining a firm immigration policy;


     (v) It can therefore be seen that Appellants in Gurkha (and BOC)  cases
     will not necessarily succeed, even though (a) their family life engages
          Article 8(1); and (b) the evidence shows they would have  come  to
   the        United Kingdom with their father, but for the  injustice  that
     prevented the latter from settling here earlier.  If the Respondent can
          point to matters over and above the public interest in maintaining
   a          firm immigration policy, which argue in favour of  removal  or
   the        refusal of  leave  to  enter,  these  matters  must  be  given
   appropriate         weight in the balance  in  the  Respondent's  favour.
   Thus, a bad             immigration history and/or criminal behaviour may
   still be            sufficient to outweigh the powerful  factors  bearing
   on the                  Appellant's side of the balance.


    15. By reference to that guidance I make the following findings:


     i.   That Article 8 is engaged both in relation to private  and  family
   life.


     ii.  That but for the historic wrong/injustice the Appellant would have
              been settled in the United Kingdom  long  ago  as  his  father
   would          have made a settlement application upon cessation  of  his
   military            service at which point he would be entitled to  bring
   his minor               children with him, which would have included  the
   Appellant.


     iii. That the legitimate aim relied upon by the Secretary of State, set
   out            in the refusal notice, is based upon the  public  interest
   in maintaining               a firm immigration policy and  an  assertion
   that the facts of the case            do not satisfied  the  requirements
   for settlement in Chapter 15,                 Section 2A - Person seeking
   settlement:   HM   Forces,   of   the                         Immigration
   Directorate Instructions of December 2013.


     iv.  That the fact family life engages Article 8 (1) and  the  historic
   injustice           argument is established, such that  it  is  prevented
   the Appellant from           settling here earlier, is not determinative.


     v.   That having assessed both competing arguments and all the material
              provided, that the Respondent has failed to prove the decision
   is             proportionate to the public interest in maintaining a firm
                       immigration  policy.   In  this  respect  Mr  Mangion
   confirmed in                 response to a  specific  question  from  the
   Bench that there were no              countervailing factors that he  was
   relying upon in seeking to argue              otherwise.


     vi.  That having weighed the  competing  arguments,  the  factor  which
     tipped the scales in the Appellant's favour sufficient to outweigh  the
          case advanced by the Secretary of State  is  the  historic  wrong,
   which          when combined with the strengthened  of  the  family  life
   that exists,            leads to a finding that the  Secretary  of  State
   has not discharged the           burden of proof upon her to the required
   standard to show that  the              decision  is  proportionate.  The
   appeal shall therefore be allowed.

Decision

    16. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set aside
        the decision of the original Judge. I remake the decision as
        follows. This appeal is allowed.


   Anonymity.


    17. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005. I make no such order pursuant to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
        Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 30th October 2014
