
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA321782015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice       |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 27 June 2017                            |On 14 July 2017                  |



                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

                               Mr UDDIN SALEEM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss D. Qureshi instructed by Legend Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms K. Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of India who was born on  16  January  1980.
    He appeals against the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge R. G.
    Walters promulgated on 18 November 2016 following a  hearing  that  had
    taken place on 26 October.  In that appeal the  appellant  was  neither
    present nor represented.  This was an ETS appeal.

 2. The basis of the decision made by  the  respondent  was  that  a  false
    document had been submitted in relation to the appellant's application.
     The false document was a TOEIC certificate  from  Educational  Testing
    Service, known as ETS.  ETS had informed the Secretary  of  State  that
    the test apparently taken by the appellant at  the  London  College  of
    Social Studies on 11 December 2012 was invalid.  It was on the basis of
    reliance upon what ETS had said, and in particular on its  use  of  the
    word 'invalid', that the respondent contended that a false document had
    been submitted in connection with the appellant's application,  thereby
    justifying her refusing the application under paragraph 322(1A) of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 3. In the course of the hearing it was apparent that there was before  the
    judge what is now universally referred to as 'the generic evidence'  in
    cases such as these.  The generic evidence  dealt  with  the  issue  of
    invalidity.  It took the form  of  the  well-known  witness  statements
    which had been provided in many similar cases by Peter  Millington  and
    Rebecca Collings.

 4. The appellant appealed against the decision in circumstances to which I
    shall later refer.  The position has now been settled by  the  judgment
    of Beatson LJ in the Court of Appeal in Qadir v Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 1167, 25 October 2016.  The  appeal
    was brought by the Secretary of State against the determination of  the
    Upper Tribunal in SM and Qadir (ETS  -  evidence  -  burden  of  proof)
    [2016] UKUT  229.   That  was  a  decision  of  the  President  of  the
    Immigration and Appeal Chamber  and  of  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Saini.  The challenges advanced by the Secretary of State were made  on
    a number of grounds but the great  majority  related  to  the  evidence
    relied upon by the  Secretary  of  State  to  prove  that  the  English
    language  qualifications  recorded  in  TOEIC  certificates  had   been
    obtained by deception and fraud in the use of proxy test  takers.   The
    Secretary of State had relied on the generic evidence as  explained  by
    Ms Collings and Mr Millington.  The same material had been the  subject
    of a decision by the Court of Appeal in Secretary of State for the Home
    Department v Shehzad and Chowdhury [2016]  EWCA  Civ  615.   That  case
    determined that the generic evidence relied upon by  the  Secretary  of
    State was sufficient to discharge  the  initial  evidential  burden  of
    proof placed upon her of proving deception in an ETS appeal.

 5. The Court of Appeal then went on to deal with whether there was also  a
    legal burden that had to be discharged.  The Upper Tribunal in  Qadir's
    case determined in favour of Mr Majumder and Mr Qadir.  It  found  that
    the initial evidential burden had been established  in  favour  of  the
    Secretary of State and it did so by what was  described  as  'a  narrow
    margin'.  However, it then went on to consider  the  evidential  burden
    placed then upon the appellants, Mr Majumder and Mr Qadir,  of  raising
    an innocent  explanation.   The  Upper  Tribunal  had  found  that  the
    evidence included an expert report by Dr Harrison.  In addition the two
    claimants provided explanations which the  Upper  Tribunal  found  were
    both plausible and truthful.  In paragraph 19 of the  decision  in  the
    Court of Appeal, the Court records  the  findings  made  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal that there was no suggestion that the claimants' evidence  was
    false or that they used falsified or forged  documents  in  support  of
    their claim.  Mr Majumder had given oral evidence  in  English  at  the
    First-tier Tribunal and the  Upper  Tribunal  had  the  opportunity  of
    assessing his demeanour and the oral evidence  that  he  had  provided.
    There was no indication of invention, exaggeration of evasiveness,  and
    that he consistently presented himself as a witness of truth.   It  was
    therefore said in  Mr  Majumder's  case  that  he  had  discharged  the
    evidential burden such that the Secretary of State failed to  discharge
    the legal burden.  Similar considerations applied as far as Mr  Qadir's
    evidence was  concerned.   There  were  no  significant  flaws  in  the
    documentary evidence produced by either appellant, see paragraph 21  of
    the decision in the Court of Appeal.  Consequently it was open  to  the
    Upper Tribunal to determine that the Secretary of State had  failed  to
    discharge the legal burden placed upon her.

 6. The situation in the current appeal is very  different.   The  original
    grounds of appeal are in the  court  bundle.   They  contend  that  the
    impugned decision was unjustified, arbitrary, wrongful and flawed, that
    it was unsupported by evidence and that the respondent had  'completely
    ignored the disclosed facts'.  The  grounds  go  on  to  say  that  the
    requirements for a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant on the points-based
    system had been met by the  appellant  and  accordingly  he  should  be
    entitled to leave to remain on that  basis.   They  fail  to  make  any
    reference to the issue of deception. They fail to address what was said
    in the reasons for refusing the application, namely that deception  had
    been used.  There is no express statement that the  appellant  had  sat
    the relevant test.

 7. The case was heard by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  at  which  the
    appellant was neither present nor represented.  He  therefore  did  not
    give any evidence that he had not used deception nor did he  produce  a
    witness statement in which he made that crucial allegation.  Instead it
    was advanced on the basis of  the  grounds  of  appeal,  which  I  have
    already identified are wholly inadequate to counter the suggestion that
    no deception was  employed.   It  was  therefore  inevitable  that  the
    generic evidence was sufficient to establish both the evidential burden
    and, absent any explanation, the legal burden.

 8. In the grounds for permission advanced in the Upper Tribunal, there is,
    once again, a failure to make any express reference to the evidence  of
    the claimant himself.  It is merely a recital of the established  case-
    law and a claim that the generic evidence  relied  on  by  ETS  was  no
    longer sufficient in such cases.  That is a  misunderstanding  of  what
    both the Upper Tribunal said in SM and Qadir  and  what  the  Court  of
    Appeal said in  the  case  of  Qadir  v  Secretary  of  State.   It  is
    significant that the grounds of  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal do not contain any express averment that the appellant sat the
    test.  They do not offer anything by way of evidence that might operate
    as an innocent explanation.

 9. In my judgment the grounds of appeal both to the Tribunal  and  to  the
    Upper Tribunal are wholly inadequate by reason of  this  failure.   The
    judge was bound, as indeed I am bound, by the decisions  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal and of the Court of Appeal to the effect that these cases  are
    evidence-based, that there is an initial evidential burden placed  upon
    the Secretary of State which is discharged by the generic evidence  but
    which can be displaced by evidence from the claimants themselves  which
    amounts to an innocent explanation.  That was a process which  both  Mr
    Majumder and Mr Qadir succeeded upon in the Upper Tribunal  but  it  is
    entirely lacking in the circumstances of this case.

10. Accordingly I find that the First-tier Tribunal Judge made no error  of
    law in refusing this claim.

DECISION

     The First-tier Tribunal made no  error  on  a  point  of  law  and  the
decision dismissing    the appellant's appeal shall stand.





                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL



