


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32363/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Decision Promulgated         |
|On : 1 May 2014                               |On : 8 May 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                   THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE ANDREWS DBE
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between


                          francesca duncan williams
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr F Shibli, instructed by Raja & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The appellant is a citizen of Ghana, born on 23  January  1960.  Her  appeal
came before us following a hearing on 10 March 2014 at which errors  of  law
were found in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing  her  appeal,
on Article 8 grounds, against the respondent's decision to remove  her  from
the United Kingdom.

The further background to the appeal is as set  out  in  the  error  of  law
decision which is reproduced as follows:

    "1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department
    against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing  Ms  Williams'
    appeal against a  decision  to  remove  her  from  the  United  Kingdom
    following the refusal of her application for indefinite leave to remain
    outside the immigration rules. For the purposes  of  this  decision,  I
    shall refer to the Secretary of State as the respondent and Ms Williams
    as the appellant, reflecting their positions as they were in the appeal
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

    2. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana, born on 23  January  1960.  She
    entered the United Kingdom on 7 November 2008 with leave to enter as  a
    visitor valid until 7 May 2009. On  29  April  2009  she  submitted  an
    application for leave to remain as a Minister  of  Religion  which  was
    refused on 9 June 2009. She made two further applications for leave  to
    remain as a Tier 2 Minister of Religion, on 30 July 2009 and 30 October
    2009, both of which were refused, on 2 September 2009  and  2  December
    2009 respectively. On 27 September 2012 she  submitted  an  application
    for leave to remain under Article 8 of the ECHR but that was refused on
    6 June 2013. On 7 August 2012 an application was  made  for  indefinite
    leave to remain outside the immigration rules but that was refused on 5
    July 2013. A decision was then made on  12  July  2013  to  remove  the
    appellant from the United Kingdom.


    3. The respondent refused the appellant's application  under  paragraph
    322(1) of HC 395. It was considered  that  there  was  no  evidence  to
    suggest that her removal would be in breach of Articles 2 and 3 of  the
    ECHR. With regard to Article 8, the respondent noted that there was  no
    evidence to support the appellant's claim to be in a relationship  with
    a British national and in any event considered that she had  failed  to
    demonstrate that there were insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life
    continuing outside the United Kingdom. There was no evidence to support
    her claim as to  her  child  being  resident  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    Accordingly the respondent concluded that the appellant could not  meet
    the requirements of Appendix FM of the rules and furthermore considered
    that she was unable to meet the private life requirements of  paragraph
    276ADE.


    4. The appeal's appeal against that decision was heard  in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal on 2 January 2014, by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Pacey,
    who heard oral evidence from the appellant and two other witnesses.  It
    was conceded that the appellant could not meet the requirements of  the
    immigration rules and the appeal proceeded on the basis  of  Article  8
    only. The judge accepted that the appellant had established  a  private
    life in the United Kingdom and, on the basis of  the  evidence  of  her
    valuable ministry work and her strong private life, concluded  that  it
    would be disproportionate to require her to leave the  United  Kingdom.
    She allowed the appeal on human rights grounds.


    5. The respondent sought permission to  appeal  that  decision  to  the
    Upper Tribunal on the grounds that the judge had failed to  follow  the
    approach in Nagre, R (on the application of) v Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department [2013] EWHC 720 and Gulshan (Article 8 - new  Rules
    - correct approach) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 640; that she  had  failed  to
    identify  any  exceptional  circumstances  which  would  result  in  an
    unjustifiably harsh outcome to the appellant; that she  had  failed  to
    take into account the public interest  against  applicants  relying  on
    Article 8 to get around the  immigration  rules;  that  the  judge  had
    failed to consider that  there  were  other  preachers  in  the  United
    Kingdom who could take over the appellant's duties; and that the  judge
    had  overestimated  the  weight  to  be  attached  to  the  appellant's
    religious activities.


     6. Permission to appeal was granted on 31 January 2014.


     7. The appeal came before me on 10 March 2014 and I  heard  submissions
   on the error of law.


    8. Mr Saunders relied upon the grounds of appeal and submitted that the
    judge had ignored the principles in Gulshan and had materially erred in
    her decision such that it should be set aside and re-made by dismissing
    the appeal.


    9. Mr Shibli raised a preliminary matter, namely that the Secretary  of
    State's appeal was one day out of time and that the appeal  should  not
    have been admitted into the Upper Tribunal given  the  absence  of  any
    explanation for the delay. Mr Shibli accepted that a rule  24  response
    to the grounds of appeal had never been filed and  that  the  appellant
    had not previously raised any issue as to the timeliness of the appeal.
    I considered that,  although  the  Secretary  of  State  had  given  no
    explanation for the delay in submitting the application for  permission
    to appeal, I was not now prepared to set aside the decision  to  extend
    time and to grant permission, given the nature of  the  delay  and  the
    absence of any prior objection by the appellant  to  the  extension  of
    time.


    10. With regard to the substance of the grounds,  Mr  Shibli  submitted
    that the judge was not  required  to  consider  the  immigration  rules
    because it had been conceded that the  rules  could  not  be  met.  The
    judge's findings at paragraphs 34 and 36  showed  that  she  considered
    there to be unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  if  the  appellant  was
    removed. She took a  balanced  view  and  was  entitled  to  reach  the
    conclusion that she did.


    11. In my view the judge made material errors of law  in  her  decision
    such that the decision has to be set aside and re-made.


    12. Having accepted the concession that the  appellant  was  unable  to
    meet the requirements of the family and private life provisions of  the
    immigration rules the judge then moved  on  to  conduct  an  Article  8
    proportionality assessment without any consideration  of  the  approach
    set out in the cases of Nagre, MF (Nigeria) v Secretary  of  State  for
    the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 and Gulshan  [2013]  UKUT  640
    and without any apparent appreciation of the emphasis in  recent  case-
    law of the significant weight to be given to  the  public  interest  in
    cases where the requirements of the rules could not be met. The correct
    approach has most recently been  set  out  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    Shahzad (Art 8: legitimate aim) Pakistan [2014] UKUT  85  at  paragraph
    31:

         "Where an  area  of  the  rules  does  not  have  such  an  express
         mechanism, the approach in R (Nagre) v Secretary of State  for  the
         Home Department [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin)  ([29]-[31]  in  particular
         and Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013]  UKUT
         640 (IAC) should be followed: i.e. after applying the  requirements
         of the rules, only if  there  may  be  arguably  good  grounds  for
         granting leave to remain outside them is it necessary for Article 8
         purposes  to  go  on  to  consider  whether  there  are  compelling
         circumstances not sufficiently recognised under them."


    13. Whilst Shahzad was decided after the appeal was heard, it  endorsed
    the principles in earlier cases which were available at  the  time  and
    which the judge failed to consider or apply. No consideration was given
    to the existence of arguably good grounds for granting leave so  as  to
    justify going on to consider Article 8 in a wider context  and  neither
    was any consideration given to whether compelling circumstances existed
    that were not sufficiently recognised under  the  rules.  Although  the
    judge set out factors in the appellant's favour at  paragraph  34,  she
    gave no,  or  no  adequate  reasons,  for  concluding  that  they  were
    compelling.


    14. In all of these circumstances I find that the judge's decision  has
    to be set aside for reason of error of law and re-made.


    15. In view of Mr Shibli's submission that  the  judge's  determination
    failed to give a sufficiently detailed account of the evidence and  the
    various factors that persuaded her to find in  the  appellant's  favour
    and that it was necessary for further evidence to be  adduced  and  for
    findings to be made in that respect, I was prepared to accept that  the
    decision ought not simply to be re-made on the evidence  before  me.  I
    agreed that the appeal would be adjourned  and  listed  for  a  resumed
    hearing  at  which  further  evidence  could  be  adduced.  However   I
    considered that it was appropriate for that to take place in the  Upper
    Tribunal. Indeed Mr Shibli did not suggest otherwise.


    16. Accordingly the appeal will be listed for a resumed hearing"

Appeal hearing and submissions

The appeal came before us for a resumed hearing on  1  May  2014.  We  heard
oral evidence from the appellant and three further witnesses, Pastor  Appoh,
Bishop Paul Hackman and Babatunde Tony Alli.

The evidence of the witnesses, in  particular  that  of  the  appellant,  is
lengthy and we see no purpose in setting  it  out  in  detail.  However,  in
summary, the appellant  confirmed  that  she  was  currently  undertaking  a
doctorate in theology at Ramah Bible College. Her  studies  at  the  college
commenced in 2008 and were due to end in 2015. She gave a  detailed  account
of her ministerial  work,  including  preaching,  teaching  bible,  training
pastors, youth and leadership work, counselling, work  with  the  "put  down
your weapons" programme and the  homeless  stress-free  programme  and  soup
kitchen which she recently set up herself. When asked why she had  not  made
an application within the rules  with  a  sponsor  she  said  that  she  had
started an application with the Christian Action  Faith  Ministries  as  her
sponsor but it did not go through and her solicitor  never  showed  her  the
refusal letter. In response to our enquiry, she said that she did  not  have
any evidence from the Christian Action  Faith  Ministries  to  confirm  that
they had acted as her sponsor. They were used  as  a  sponsor  in  only  the
first application and she did not know why  there  was  no  sponsor  in  the
other applications. She did not know  how  the  solicitors  went  about  the
applications.

When asked why she could not be replaced  here  if  she  had  to  return  to
Ghana, the appellant said that she  was  needed  because  of  her  years  of
experience and the trust that she had built up, in particular in  the  knife
and gun crime project. People called her Mama Francisca and related  to  her
as a mother and her absence would therefore cause a big gap.  When  referred
to the details given by her former solicitors in the application  they  made
on her behalf on 2 August 2012, the  appellant  said  that  it  was  wrongly
claimed that she would be executed if she went back to  Ghana  as  that  was
not the case and she did not approve the  letter.  Furthermore,  whilst  she
remained in a relationship with a British citizen, Ibrahim Bangura,  he  was
not currently in the United Kingdom and her son was no longer in the  United
Kingdom. Mr Shibli confirmed that  the  appeal  was  not  being  pursued  on
family life grounds. The appellant said that she had four children,  two  of
whom lived in the US and two in Ghana. She spoke to them from time to  time.
She had no other close family in Ghana. The church that she  had  originally
started with her ex-husband in Ghana had branched throughout the  world  but
she no longer had any connection to that church in Ghana since her divorce.

The witnesses all confirmed the evidence given in their  statements  and  Mr
Appoh and Bishop Hackman gave further oral evidence  about  the  appellant's
work in Ghana and the United Kingdom. Mr Appoh talked  in  particular  about
the gun and knife crime programme, a new initiative inaugurated in  February
2014 following several years of preparatory work. Bishop  Hackman  explained
that he was in charge of Trans Atlantic Pacific  Alliance  of  Churches,  of
which the  Christian  Action  Faith  Ministries  was  a  part.  He  was  not
responsible for sponsoring the appellant previously and, when asked  why  he
had not assisted her to meet the requirements of the  immigration  rules  by
sponsoring her, his response was that she was already  in  the  country.  He
said that his organisation was prepared to sponsor her but it was  only  now
that he understood that she had been in the United Kingdom without leave.

We then heard submissions.

Ms Isherwood submitted that the appellant  had  failed  to  show  compelling
reasons why she should be permitted to remain in the United Kingdom  without
meeting the requirements of the immigration rules.  There  was  no  adequate
explanation as to why, if so many people wanted her to stay in the  country,
none had been prepared to sponsor her.  It  was  not  credible  that  Bishop
Hackman had been unaware of her immigration status  and  only  now  realised
that he could sponsor her. The appellant's work could continue  without  her
being in the United Kingdom, as she  had  trained  others  to  take  on  her
various roles.

Mr Shibli asked us to accept that the appellant's  immigration  history  had
been  due  to  problems  with  and  inadequate  advice  from  her   previous
solicitors. As  a  result  of  that  she  had  lacked  the  knowledge  about
sponsorship. Requiring her to return  to  Ghana  and  seek  entry  clearance
would mean separation from her invaluable work.  She  had  thirty  years  of
experience and people trusted her.  Her  absence  would  leave  many  people
without support.

Consideration and findings

The appellant pursues her case on  the  basis  of  her  private  life  under
Article 8 of the ECHR. It is accepted that she cannot meet the  requirements
of the immigration rules, with respect both to  Tier  2  under  the  points-
based system and to the family and private life rules under Appendix FM  and
paragraph 276ADE. She claims that her  circumstances  are  compelling,  such
that she should be permitted to remain in the  United  Kingdom  outside  the
rules on wider Article 8 principles.

It is common ground that the relevant principles are  to  be  found  in  the
case of Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach)  Pakistan  [2013]
UKUT 640, as endorsed in Shahzad (Art 8:  legitimate  aim)  Pakistan  [2014]
UKUT 85 and as set out at paragraph 12 of the error of law decision.  As  we
indicated to Mr Shibli, we have difficulty in seeing,  in  line  with  these
principles, how the appellant even gets as  far  as  addressing  "compelling
circumstances", since she has first to demonstrate that there  are  arguably
good grounds for granting leave outside the rules.

There are, in the appellant's case, clear  and  distinct  immigration  rules
under which she could have sought, and could still seek, leave to enter  and
remain in the United Kingdom. It is her evidence that she has been  studying
at the Ramah Bible College since 2008 and that her studies have been  funded
by her ex-husband, yet no explanation has been  given  as  to  why  she  has
never sought to  apply  under  the  student  provisions  of  the  rules  and
currently as a Tier 4  (General)  Student  Migrant  under  the  points-based
system.

More significant, however, is her failure to provide any explanation  as  to
why she has not been able to produce a Certificate  of  Sponsorship  from  a
recognised sponsor in order to meet the requirements of the rules as a  Tier
2 Minister of Religion Migrant.  It  is  clear,  from  the  various  refusal
decisions with which we have been provided, that the appellant made  several
applications for leave to remain as a Tier 2 Migrant, dating  back  to  June
2009. Her first application was rejected  as  invalid  on  9  June  2009;  a
second was refused on 1 September 2009, a third on 2  December  2009  and  a
fourth on 29 March 2010. Whilst the applications failed partly on the  basis
of an absence of prior relevant leave, the common  denominator  in  all  the
applications was a failure to  produce  a  Certificate  of  Sponsorship.  No
further application was made until the application of 2 August 2012  leading
to the decision under appeal. That application, however,  was  made  outside
the rules.

The appellant seeks to blame previous incompetent solicitors for  a  failure
to make a proper application under the rules and claims  that  she  was,  at
one stage, advised by her solicitor  that  she  had  actually  been  granted
leave. Whilst we are prepared to accept that she may have  been  unfortunate
in  her  choice  of  previous  solicitors  and  has,  in  the   past,   been
inadequately advised, we cannot accept that that provides  a  reasonable  or
credible explanation for what is now a prolonged stay in the United  Kingdom
without any form of permission or leave  to  be  here.  She  is  clearly  an
intelligent woman with many professional resources  available  to  her.  She
would have known from the various refusal decisions that  a  Certificate  of
Sponsorship was required. Indeed, by her own evidence she was aware, at  the
time of her initial application, that a sponsorship  was  required,  as  she
claimed before us that the Christian Action Faith Ministries  acted  as  her
sponsor, although she stated that  the  application,  once  started,  "never
went through". There is, however, no evidence before us that  a  Certificate
of Sponsorship was ever obtained and submitted from such a sponsor  or  that
the Ministries did indeed sponsor her and neither is there  any  explanation
why, if the Ministries had been willing  to  sponsor  her  previously,  they
were not willing to continue to sponsor her.

Neither is  there  any  explanation  why  the  appellant  has  not  obtained
sponsorship from any other source in the years that she has been working  as
a minister in the United Kingdom. The claim presented  is  that  she  is  an
invaluable asset to the community and that her services in various  churches
and programmes have made her indispensible. It is claimed  that  her  skills
acquired over the past thirty years, dating back to the time when she  first
started visiting the  United  Kingdom  in  1978,  and  the  level  of  trust
established over that period, are irreplaceable.  It  is  claimed  that  her
absence would cause immense difficulties, even for the short period of  time
in which she could return to Ghana to make an entry  clearance  application.
We find it inconceivable, in such circumstances, for there to be an  absence
of willing candidates for sponsorship and can find no explanation for  such.


Like Ms Isherwood, we  have  considerable  difficulty  in  accepting  Bishop
Hackman's claim that he was unaware of the appellant's  unlawful  status  in
the United Kingdom and that had his ministry been  aware  of  the  need  for
sponsorship he would have  been  willing  to  offer  it.  According  to  his
evidence he has known her since  1992,  he  ordained  her  as  a  pastor  in
November 2004 and he has met with her regularly  since  she  re-entered  the
United Kingdom and started serving as  a  Christian  minister  of  Christian
Action Faith Ministries in  November  2008.  There  is  simply  no  adequate
explanation as to why his organisation, or any of the many other  ministries
or organisations with which she has worked, would not have been  willing  to
offer her sponsorship in order to make an application under the  immigration
rules.

In all of these circumstances we find  that  the  appellant  has  failed  to
provide any, or any adequate explanation for  her  failure  to  produce  the
required evidence to meet the requirements of  the  immigration  rules.  The
basis for her current application outside the immigration rules is one  that
it is properly provided for under the rules. It has always been open to  her
to make an entry clearance  application  under  the  rules  and  that  still
remains open to her. We do not accept that her situation is  such  that  she
cannot reasonably be expected to leave the  United  Kingdom  for  the  short
period in which such an application can now be made. It is  plain  from  her
own evidence and that of the witnesses supporting her that  there  are  many
other people, whom she has herself trained, who are able  and  qualified  to
carry on her work during her absence and there is no reason to believe  that
her absence would leave a void that could not be filled  by  those  lawfully
resident in the United Kingdom. Accordingly we conclude that  there  are  no
arguable grounds justifying a grant of leave outside the rules.

We find, in any event, and for the reasons already given, that there are  no
compelling circumstances in the appellant's case which are not  sufficiently
recognised under the rules. Since  her  most  recent  entry  to  the  United
Kingdom the appellant has been living here for five and a half years,  which
is significantly less than the period of residence  allowed  for  under  the
rules. Although she entered lawfully she has not had  any  leave  to  remain
since the expiry of her visit visa. She has made  various  applications  for
leave to remain, but as we have  stated  above,  has  failed  adequately  to
explain the absence of  required  supporting  evidence  of  sponsorship.  We
accept that she has nevertheless  established  a  substantial  private  life
here  during  that  time  and  has  undertaken  valuable  services  to   the
communities, ministries and organisations with which  she  works,  not  only
during her current period of  residence  but  also  during  the  periods  of
previous visits over a number of years.

However, as we have already said, the appellant has  herself  trained  other
people who are able to carry on her work in her absence. There is no  reason
why she could not return to her work and her studies  here  after  obtaining
the required entry clearance,  but  in  any  event  she  would  be  able  to
continue to contribute to her various projects from  Ghana  and  by  way  of
future visits to the United Kingdom. She would also be able to  provide  the
same valuable services to the ministries in  Ghana  with  whom  she  retains
close ties. Other than her work  and  her  studies  there  are  no  ties  of
significance in the United Kingdom. There has  been  mention  of  a  British
partner in the United Kingdom but there is scant evidence  of  that  and  in
any event she does not rely on the relationship in her Article 8 claim.  Her
son is no longer in the United Kingdom and he and another  of  her  children
remain in Ghana. The claim in the application made on  her  behalf,  leading
to the decision under appeal, as to a risk of persecution in  Ghana  is  one
that the appellant does not herself endorse. Accordingly there is no  reason
why she cannot return to that country.

For all of these reasons we find that the appellant cannot  succeed  in  her
Article 8 claim and that her appeal falls to be dismissed.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved an  error  on
a point of law. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set  aside.
We re-make the decision by dismissing the appeal on all grounds.











                               Signed                                  Date


                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
