
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32488/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 5 July 2017                           |On 12 July 2017                     |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

                                 Monsur Alam
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Iqbal, instructed by Burney Legal Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal brought by the  appellant  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Walters  promulgated  on  19  April  2017,
    dismissing the appellant's appeal against a decision of  the  Secretary
    of State of 23 June 2015 refusing  to  grant  the  appellant  leave  to
    remain (pursuant to the making of a human rights claim).

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh, born  15  October  1979.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 22 November 2004 with entry  clearance
    as a student valid until 31 October 2005.  He has remained  here  since
    that time.

 3. On 30 January 2015, the  appellant  applied  for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain on the basis of ten years' continuous lawful  residence  in  the
    United Kingdom.  That application was refused  in  the  decision  under
    challenge, it being concluded therein that the appellant did  not  meet
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules as a consequence  of  falling
    foul of paragraph 322(1C)(iii) of those Rules.

 4. Underpinning such conclusion was  the  uncontroversial  fact  that  the
    applicant had been convicted of harassment/breach of restraining  order
    and had received a suspended sentence of imprisonment of twelve  weeks.
    In her decision letter (page 4 of 8) the Secretary of State  identifies
    the relevant date of conviction as being 3 June 2013, although  I  note
    from a letter drawn up on 11 November 2014 by  the  National  Probation
    Service it is said that the appellant pleaded guilty to the offence  on
    the 4 January 2013.  The outcome of the instant appeal is not dependent
    on which of these two dates is the correct  date  for  the  appellant's
    conviction, so I need not make a finding in this regard.

First-tier Tribunal's decision

 5. The First-tier  Tribunal  concluded  as  follows  in  relation  to  the
    relevance of the conviction:

         "11. Mr Iqbal submitted that the appellant's conviction  on  3.6.13
             was spent on 3.6.15.  The  respondent  made  her  decision  on
             23.6.15.  He submits, therefore, that at the date of  decision
             the appellant's conviction had been spent.

         12.   Unfortunately,  Mr  Iqbal  did  not  produce   the   relevant
             legislation to demonstrate that the conviction of  3.6.13  was
             spent on 23.6.15.  Even assuming that it was spent, he  failed
             to produce any authority that spent convictions are not caught
             by paragraph 322(1C)(iii).

         13.  Mr Iqbal continued his  submissions  by  saying  that  Section
             85(4) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
             empowers the Tribunal to take into consideration  evidence  of
             any matter which is relevant to the substance of the  decision
             even if it arrives after the date  of  decision.   He  submits
             that the Tribunal was invited to consider the fact that at the
             date of decision (23.6.15) the appellant's conviction had been
             spent and was no longer falling foul of  322(1C)(iii)  of  the
             Immigration Rules.

         14.  I did not accept that submission for  the  reasons  previously
             mentioned.

         15.  Mr Iqbal goes on to submit that the relevant Immigration Rules
             refer to conviction within 24 months  preceding  the  date  of
             application.  He therefore submits  that  there  is  a  direct
             conflict between the primary legislation  i.e.  Section  85(4)
             and the Immigration Rules.

         16.  I could not see such a conflict."

Error of Law

 6. It is difficult to ascertain whether the First-tier Tribunal was misled
    by the submissions made to it as to what the relevant issue was in  the
    appeal, or whether it misunderstood the submissions such  that  it  did
    not direct itself to the relevant issue. Either way it  is  clear  that
    the relevant issue was not considered by the  First-tier  Tribunal,  as
    both parties before me accept.

 7. The relevant issue is best identified  by  setting  out  the  pertinent
    provisions of Paragraph 322(1C) of the Immigration Rules:


         "322 ... Grounds on which leave to remain and variation of leave to
             enter or remain in the United Kingdom are to be refused;

             ...

         (1C) where the person is  seeking  indefinite  leave  to  enter  or
             remain:
             ...
         (iii)    they have been convicted of an offence for which they have
             been sentenced to imprisonment for less than 12 months, unless
             a period of 7 years has passed since the end of the  sentence;
             or
         (iv) they have, within the 24 months prior to the date on which the
             application is decided,  been  convicted  of  or  admitted  an
             offence for which they have received a non-custodial  sentence
             or other out of court  disposal  that  is  recorded  on  their
             criminal record. ..."

 8. There is no dispute  that  a  suspended  sentence  of  imprisonment  is
    treated as a non-custodial  sentence  for  the  purposes  of  paragraph
    322(1C) of the  Rules.  That  being  so,  as  accepted  by  Mr  Clarke,
    paragraph 322(1C)(iii) of the Rules has no relevance to this appeal.  I
    observe at this juncture that whilst the Secretary of State  refers  to
    paragraph 322(1C)(iii) in her refusal letter, its terms are incorrectly
    set out therein.

 9. Moving on, the issue the First-tier Tribunal was required to decide  is
    whether within the period of 24 months prior to the date on  which  the
    appellant's application was decided (i.e. within 24 months prior to  23
    June 2015) the appellant had been convicted of, or admitted, an offence
    for which he received a non-custodial sentence.  This is not  an  issue
    that the First-tier engaged with, let alone decided.  Accordingly,  its
    decision must be set aside.

Re-making of decision

10. I have identified above the  date  of  the  SSHD's  decision,  and  the
    possible  dates  of  the  appellant's  conviction.  It  is  clear  that
    whichever of the  dates  is  taken  as  the  date  of  conviction,  the
    appellant  does  not  fall  foul  of  the  requirements  of   paragraph
    322(1C)(iv) of the Rules. Mr Clarke accepted that this was so.

11. Mr Clarke also accepted that the  appellant  had  demonstrated  to  the
    required standard that he had lived lawfully in the United Kingdom  for
    a continuous period of ten years

12. As a consequence, the appellant prima facie falls within  the  confines
    of  paragraph  276B  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   Mr  Clarke  further
    indicated that the Secretary of State took  no  other  issue  with  the
    requirements of that Rule.  In these circumstances, I conclude that the
    appellant has spent ten  continuous  years  lawfully  resident  in  the
    United Kingdom, and that he meets all  other  of  the  requirements  in
    paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules.

13. This though is not determinative of the appeal because the appellant is
    only permitted to rely herein upon the ground  that  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision would lead to a breach  of  Section  6  of  the  Human
    Rights Act 1998.  In this regard the appellant particularly relies upon
    Article 8 ECHR.

14. It is clear that the appellant has a private life in the United Kingdom
    and that interference with that private life would be of such  severity
    so as to engage Article 8.  The Secretary of State's view as  to  where
    the public interest lies in granting a person to enter or remain in the
    United Kingdom is set  out  in  the  Immigration  Rules.   Those  Rules
    provide for inclusionary and exclusionary provisions.  Given  that  the
    appellant meets the requirements of paragraph 276B  of  the  Rules  and
    does not fall foul of the exclusionary requirements  within  the  Rules
    (in this case, paragraph 322(1C) is  the  only  such  provision  relied
    upon), a consideration of the Rules dictates that the  public  interest
    lies in the appellant being allowed to remain in the United Kingdom.

15. There being no other  relevant  features  of  this  case  drawn  to  my
    attention by Mr Clarke and given what I  have  said  about  the  public
    interest, I conclude that it is not proportionate to  refuse  to  grant
    the appellant leave to remain. His appeal must accordingly be  allowed.
    The Secretary of State's decision to refuse to grant  leave  to  remain
    breaches section 6 of the Human Rights.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law capable  of
affecting the outcome of the appeal and it is set aside.

Upon remaking the decision, I allow the appellant's appeal.

Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Written: 5 July 2017


