
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers:  IA/32380/2014
                                                               IA/32499/2014
                                                               IA/32392/2014
                                                               IA/32386/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 22 December 2015                  |On 6 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                           MR BIDEMI TAOFEEK AJAO
                               MRS BOLAJI AJAO
                              MISS FAVIOUR AJAO
                   MASTER BENJAMIN OLUWAFERANMI AYAMOLOWO
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms D, Revill, Counsel instructed by SLA Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal by the appellants against  the  decision  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal dated 25 March 2015  dismissing  their  appeals
         against the respondent's decision to refuse their  application  for
         leave to remain.

      2. Pursuant to Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
         Rules 2008 (SI 2008/269) I do not  make  an  anonymity  order.   No
         order was made by the First-tier Tribunal and although two  of  the
         appellants are minors there is little specific  detail  other  than
         their names and I am not  satisfied  that  an  anonymity  order  is
         required.

    Background

      3. The appellants are all citizens of Nigeria.  The first  and  second
         appellants are husband and wife.   The  third  appellant  is  their
         minor daughter born on 15 October 1999 and the fourth appellant  is
         their foster child, born on 9 January 2009.  They applied by letter
         dated 30 March 2014 for leave to remain in the UK on the basis that
         it was claimed that return to  Nigeria  would  breach  their  human
         rights.

      4. The first appellant Mr Ajao first entered the United Kingdom on  10
         February 1996 and claimed to have remained since that date although
         this was not accepted  by  the  respondent  or  by  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge.  It was accepted by the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         that the first appellant has been in the UK from 2006 onwards.  The
         second and third appellants have been  residing  in  the  UK  since
         2008.  There was no definitive  evidence  as  to  when  the  fourth
         appellant entered the UK.  The first and second appellant indicated
         that they did not know how long he had been in the UK prior to  the
         fourth appellant being left with the first and second appellants by
         his mother in August 2013.

      5. The respondent refused the  appellants'  application  in  decisions
         dated 28 July 2014 to remove the first three appellants as  illegal
         entrants/persons subject to administrative removal under section 10
         of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 and the  decision  dated  18
         July 2014 that the fourth appellant was a person in respect of whom
         removal directions may be given in accordance with  Schedule  2  to
         the Immigration Act 1971.   In  the  reasons  for  refusal  letters
         (dated 28 July 2014 in respect of the first three appellants and 21
         July 2014 in respect of the fourth appellant)  the  respondent  did
         not accept that the  appellants  met  the  requirements  of  either
         Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
         respondent  also  considered  that  there   were   no   exceptional
         circumstances which would warrant a grant of leave to remain in the
         UK.

      6. The appeals against those decisions came before First-tier Tribunal
         Judge V Mays on 27 February 2015.  In the 25  March  2015  decision
         the judge found that the third appellant did not meet the  criteria
         of paragraph  276  ADE(1)(iv)  and  that  none  of  the  appellants
         succeeded under Article 8 outside of the Immigration Rules.

      7. Permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  sought  on  two
         grounds: firstly in relation to the third appellant it was asserted
         that the First-tier Tribunal Judge fell into error in omitting  the
         medical evidence produced to the Tribunal  in  assessing  the  best
         interests of the child and in assessing whether it  was  reasonable
         or  otherwise  for  the  third  appellant  to  leave  the  UK   (in
         considering paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv)); and secondly  it  was  argued
         that in relation to the fourth appellant there  was  an  inadequate
         assessment  of  his  best  interests  in  particular   a   distinct
         assessment given the background story of his arrival in the UK  and
         abandonment by his parents.

      8.  The  appeal  came  before  me.   I  heard  arguments   from   both
         representatives and reserved my decision.  For the reasons set  out
         below I do not find there to be merit in either ground.

    Ground 1

      9. Ms Revill relied on her grounds and skeleton argument and  asserted
         that the third appellant relied on a number of  factors  that  were
         relevant to her best interests and cumulatively it  was  contended,
         rendered her removal unreasonable.  These included the fact of  her
         ongoing medical treatment; it was not disputed that  documents  had
         been produced in relation to a hole in the third appellant's  heart
         and that she was subject to ongoing treatment and monitoring within
         the UK.

     10. Ms Revill argued that the judge  erred  in  not  referring  to  the
         evidence of the medical condition in the decision and in  referring
         to the respondent's Country of Origin report but not having  regard
         to the section  on  the  availability  of  medical  facilities  and
         educational  differences.   Whilst  Ms  Revill  was  realistic   in
         indicating that the medical condition 'may not be decisive  on  its
         own' it was her view that cumulatively with all the  other  factors
         this  would  have  rendered  removal   of   the   third   appellant
         unreasonable under paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv)

     11. I note that the First-tier Tribunal Judge set out at paragraph  [6]
         of her decision all the evidence before her which included a bundle
         and an additional bundle on behalf of the appellants.  In  addition
         to  setting  out  the  material  considered,  the  judge,  at  [47]
         indicated that she had considered all the evidence  in  the  round.
         The fact that the judge did not list each and every item considered
         does not, in the context of the judge's detailed  consideration  of
         the third appellant's best interests (at [34]  to  [48]),  indicate
         any error.  The issue of the third appellant's  medical  condition,
         whilst clearly before the judge, was not mentioned in  any  of  the
         witness statements or skeleton arguments indicating that it  was  a
         more minor consideration than for example her education, which  may
         account for the lack of any explicit reference to it by  the  judge
         in her reasons.  Whilst the fact that it may  have  been  a  lesser
         issue of course does not mean that it did not merit  consideration,
         I am satisfied that the judge considered all the factors  (and  she
         directed herself in relation  to  the  approach  to  be  taken  and
         applied EV (Philippines) and others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874.)

     12. In the alternative, if I am wrong in the above, any  error  by  the
         judge is not material as taken at its highest, it is not  realistic
         to suggest that this evidence, even if it  had  not  been  properly
         taken into account by the judge, was capable of materially changing
         the best interests' assessment in relation to the third  appellant.
         The medical evidence that was before the judge indicated  that  the
         third appellant, as at her last review by the paediatric cardiology
         consultant in May 2013, was well with no  cardiac  symptoms.   This
         indicated a follow up in 'about two  years'  time'.   Although,  as
         cited by Ms Revill  in  her  skeleton  argument,  the  respondent's
         Country of Origin  information  may  discuss  general  issues  with
         availability and accessibility of medical treatment, there  was  no
         evidence before the judge that might have suggested that there  was
         a lack of availability of any treatment that  the  third  appellant
         might require in Nigeria.  The  judge  found  that  the  first  and
         second appellant would be able to financially support  and  provide
         for the minor appellants and found that  there  were  a  number  of
         extended family members in Nigeria who she found may well  be  able
         to assist the appellants.  She also found that the adult appellants
         together with her extended  would  be  able  to  assist  the  third
         appellant in integrating into Nigeria and that  she  spoke  English
         and therefore would have no  linguistic  difficulties.   The  judge
         also considered that the appellant's educational attainments in the
         UK and her proven adaptability here would assist her in being  able
         to integrate into school and social networks  in  Nigeria,  without
         significant difficulty.   The  judge  considered  that  educational
         provision may not be of the same standard as the UK but that  there
         was provision available.

     13. In the context of all these findings therefore it is clear that  an
         ongoing heart condition  which  the  evidence  indicates  currently
         requires monitoring by cardiac specialists every  two  years  would
         not change the outcome of the appeal.

     14. In relation to paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) what neither the  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge nor the parties before me  addressed  was  that  the
         third appellant did not meet the requirements as she did  not  have
         seven years residence at the date of application (as set out in the
         respondent's reasons for refusal, the third and  fourth  appellants
         arrived in the UK on 18 February 2008 and the application was  made
         on 30 March 2014).   Whilst the judge noted that the respondent  in
         submissions 'accepted that the third appellant has resided  in  the
         United Kingdom for seven years' there is  no  indication  that  any
         concession was made that the third appellant had been  resident  in
         the UK for seven years at the date of  application.   It  is  clear
         that she was not.

     15.  In  any  event,  any  error  by  the  judge  in  relation  to  her
         consideration of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) is  not  material  as  the
         judge considered Article 8 outside of  the  immigration  rules  and
         relied on her earlier best interests  findings.   For  the  reasons
         given above I am not satisfied that any error (if indeed there  was
         one) was  capable  of  affecting  the  outcome  of  the  Article  8
         assessment, or the appeal generally.

     16. I am satisfied that the judge reached a conclusion open to  her  on
         the evidence before her and gave detailed, adequate reasons for her
         findings.  I do not find any merit in this ground.

    Ground 2

     17. It was Ms Revill's submission that the judge failed, in considering
         Article 8 outside of the Immigration Rules, to make any findings as
         to the best interests of the fourth appellant or to have regard  to
         the material evidence before her.  It was her submission that there
         was no finding as to what would be in the fourth  appellant's  best
         interests or even as to whether he  enjoys  family  life  with  the
         other appellants.

     18. That is not correct; the judge made a finding at [64]  that  'I  am
         satisfied that it will be in the best interests and  well-being  of
         the children to remain with their parents and return  to  Nigeria'.
         Although the fourth appellant is not the biological  child  of  the
         family it is clear from the judge's findings that she accepted  the
         evidence before her that the  fourth  appellant  was  part  of  the
         family and that he enjoyed family life with his foster parents  and
         foster sister.   The judge recorded the submissions  on  behalf  of
         the appellant including at [30] that the fourth appellant 'is  part
         of the family unit and his relationship with the third appellant is
         a weighty matter'.  In the judge's conclusions at  [37]  in  making
         findings in relation to the third appellant the judge found that:

             '... if she returned to Nigeria she will be returning as  part
             of the family unit comprising of her parents  and  her  foster
             brother'.

         The judge also found that it would  be  reasonable  for  the  third
         appellant to leave the United Kingdom with her parents 'as part  of
         a family group'.

     19. The judge further found at [54] that:

             'I accept that the consequences of removal of  the  appellants
             to their country of origin would potentially engage Article  8
             of the ECHR.  The Respondent's decision  would  not  interfere
             with the Appellant's family life as  they  would  be  free  to
             continue to enjoy family life in their country of origin.  The
             Respondent's decision would interfere with Appellant's private
             life in the United Kingdom'.

         Whilst the judge may well have erred in her use of apostrophes, any
         error was typographical and not material, as it is clear  from  her
         findings as a whole that the judge is satisfied  that  all  of  the
         appellants enjoy family life together.

     20. In relation to the judge's consideration of the fourth  appellant's
         best interests, as noted above  the  judge  reached  the  following
         concluding findings at [64] that it was in the:

             '... best interests and well-being of the children  to  remain
             with their parents and return to Nigeria'; and at [69]: that:

             '... it would be reasonable for both  children  to  leave  the
             United Kingdom as part of a family unit'.

     21. The judge's consideration of the fourth appellant's best  interests
         is set out in part at [55].   The  judge's  consideration  included
         material from Southwark Council  Children's  Services  including  a
         report dated 27 February 2014 and a  private  fostering  assessment
         record dated 5 November 2013 which the judge specifically refers to
         in her findings.

     22.  The  report  of  27  February  2014  assesses  that   the   family
         'demonstrated a commitment to care for Benjamin' and that the first
         and second appellants  'have  both  shown  in  depth  knowledge  of
         various parenting issues such as  provisions  of  parenting  issues
         ...'.  It was the professional opinion of  the  social  worker  who
         wrote  the  27  February  2014  report  that  the  'commitment  and
         dedication' of the first and second appellants  'is  beneficial  to
         him' and that 'the secure attachment provided by the  Ajao's  would
         have lifelong consequences' for the fourth appellant particular  in
         the context of his mother abandoning him in the UK.    The  private
         fostering assessment record in November 2013 also accepted that the
         first and second appellants were 'willing to look  after  Benjamin'
         and  that  a  conversation  with  the  fourth  appellant's   father
         confirmed that he was happy for the fourth appellant to  remain  in
         the care of the Ajao family.  Social services were also of the view
         (1.1.30 of  the November 2013 private fostering assessment) that:

             '... although insecure attachment  in  early  childhood  (i.e.
             mother having abandoned him & his father of-loading  onto  the
             Ajaos his responsibility to care for  his  son)  can  set  the
             stage for Benjamin to be adversely affected by potential  risk
             factors.  However these concerns can  be  compensated  by  his
             positive attachment to Mr and Mrs Ajao'.

     23. It is clear therefore from the detailed  Social  Services'  reports
         that it is considered that Benjamin's interests  lie  in  remaining
         part of the Ajao family.  The judge's findings, of the family  unit
         and that it was in their best interests to all return  to  Nigeria,
         reflects those reports and the evidence  generally  that  the  four
         appellants are a family.

     24. The judge's overall findings including the conclusions at [64]  and
         [69] as to the fourth appellant's best interests being in returning
         with the family to Nigeria and that it would be reasonable for  him
         to do so, demonstrate that she has considered the findings  of  the
         social work reports, including as summarised above.

     25. The decision-maker is required  to  be  properly  informed  of  the
         position of  the  child  affected  and  a  scrupulous  analysis  is
         required in identifying the child's best interests; JO  and  others
         (section 55 duty) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 00517, applied.

     26. The respondent considered all the factors in relation to the fourth
         appellant in the separate reasons for refusal letter dated 21  July
         2014 considering the position of the fourth appellant (although  it
         was specifically stated that  his  position  was  being  considered
         alongside that of the Ajao family).  It is also  evident  that  the
         judge has conducted the required analysis of the fourth appellant's
         individual circumstances and reached the conclusion at [64] that it
         was in the fourth appellant's best interests to return  to  Nigeria
         with his foster  family.   The  judge,  in  addition  to  directing
         herself in relation to the guidance in applied EV (Philippines) and
         others v SSHD  (above)  also  indicated  (at  [64])  that  she  had
         considered the guidance provided in Zoumbas v SSHD [2013]  UKSC  74
         in relation to the best interest of a child and the proportionality
         assessment.

     27. The judge discussed at [55] that a return to Nigeria may allow  the
         fourth appellant,  'with  the  support  of  the  first  and  second
         Appellant' to 're-establish contact with his  father'.   The  judge
         had considered the evidence including that the  fourth  appellant's
         father had, until late 2013, been in contact with him by  telephone
         from Nigeria.  It is not the case that the judge was unclear as  to
         who the fourth appellant would be living  with  in  Nigeria  as  an
         analysis of all her findings indicates that the judge was satisfied
         that a return to Nigeria with his foster family  was  in  his  best
         interests.  However the  judge  was  also  of  the  view  that  the
         possibility of re-establishing contact with his father  in  Nigeria
         'would enhance his family life.'  That  was  a  consistent  finding
         that was open to her on the evidence before her.

     28. I am satisfied that when considered in its entirety the judge  made
         adequate findings properly open to her. The second ground of appeal
         therefore also has no merit in my findings.

    Decision:

     29. The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
         involve the making of an error on a point of law and shall stand.


Signed:     Dated: 4 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

