
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32698/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18th September 2017                 |On 20th September 2017               |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     DL
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Gaisford, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
Appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr Singh, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Jamaica.


    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

 2. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity. The factual backgrounds relates to medical health
    issues. No report of these proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify her or any member of her family.  This direction applies  both
    to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 3. The Appellant, with permission, appeals against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, who in a determination promulgated on 9th  January
    2017 dismissed her claim for leave to remain on Article 8 grounds.

 4.    The  Appellant's  immigration  history  is  set   out   within   the
    determination at paragraphs [2]-[6] and in the decision  letter  issued
    by the Secretary of State.  It can be summarised  briefly  as  follows.
    The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on a visit visa in 2000 and
    subsequently apply for further leave to  remain.  The  application  was
    refused and  her  appeal  against  that  decision  was  refused  by  an
    adjudicator in a  determination  promulgated  on  6  August  2002.  The
    Appellant did not leave the United Kingdom  and  in  2008  applied  for
    permission to marry her British citizen partner. Such a certificate was
    issued and she married her spouse in 2009. The Appellant was told  that
    the marriage would not give her a right to reside in the United Kingdom
    and a further application for leave was made in 2012. This was  refused
    and a further application was submitted in August 2014. It appears that
    other applications were  also  refused  including  an  application  for
    judicial review (see determination at paragraphs 16 and 17).  Following
    this an application was made which was considered on the basis  of  her
    rights under Article 8, both inside  and  outside  of  the  rules.  The
    decision letter is dated 2 October 2015  and  was  the  decision  under
    challenge before the First-tier Tribunal.

 5. The basis of the Appellant's Article 8 claim is summarised and recorded
    in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal at paragraph  [8]  which  is
    also referred to in the reasons for refusal letter however it is  right
    to observe that the medical evidence that formed the essential core  of
    her claim had not been before the  Secretary  of  State  and  thus  the
    decision letter did not deal with that aspect of her Article 8 claim.

 6. The Appellant exercised her right  to  appeal  that  decision  and  the
    appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal on the 24th November 2016.

 7. It is recorded in the determination at paragraph [22] that as a  result
    of the medical evidence the Appellant would not be giving oral evidence
    but two witnesses were called on her behalf, including her spouse.  The
    judge set out the findings of  fact  and  analysis  of  the  issues  at
    paragraphs [14] to [37]. The judge began by considering the refusal  of
    permission in the judicial review application (paragraph 17 and 18). As
    to EX1(b),  the  judge  considered  the  evidence  of  her  partner  at
    paragraph 21 and  considered  the  supporting  evidence  including  the
    medical report at paragraphs 22 to 29. The  judge  concluded  that  the
    evidence did not show  a  person  suffering  from  a  major  depressive
    disorder and that the reasons set out at paragraphs 30 - 32 there  were
    no insurmountable obstacles "for her reintegration into Jamaican life".
    Thus the judge found the Appellant could not meet the  requirements  of
    Appendix FM. Similarly,  the  judge  found  that  there  were  no  very
    significant obstacles to her integration (paragraph 34) and that  there
    were no compelling reasons to demonstrate that a grant of leave outside
    of the rules was required. The judge did not accept there was  evidence
    of any threats to her (paragraph 36). The judge also rejected  a  claim
    made on Article 3 on medical health grounds medical health at paragraph
    37.

 8. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that decision and the grounds
    are set out in the papers  dated  23rd  January  2017.  Permission  was
    granted by Judge Ford on 24 July 2017.

 9.  There are 6 grounds which relate to the findings of fact made  in  the
    light of the evidence that was before the Tribunal and contained in the
    documentary evidence and the oral evidence.

10. At the hearing before this Tribunal Mr Gaisford, who did not  represent
    the Appellant in the First-tier Tribunal, relied upon the grounds  that
    were before the Tribunal.  He relied upon the grounds as pleaded taking
    the Tribunal through those grounds by reference  to  the  determination
    and where necessary by reference  to  the  evidence  contained  in  the
    bundle.  In doing so he identified the areas in the  findings  of  fact
    which were not considered in the light of the evidence that was  before
    the Tribunal.

11. Mr Singh  had  the  opportunity  of  discussing  the  grounds  with  Mr
    Gaisford. He accepted that the core part of her claim as to the  effect
    of her medical health upon the relevant issues had  not  been  properly
    considered by the Tribunal and also the issue relating to threats  made
    and that they went to the core of the claim thus it materially affected
    the decision and was an error of law.  The determination should be  set
    aside.

12.  In the light of that concession made by  Mr  Singh  that  there  is  a
    material error of law in the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal,
    it is the case that both parties agree that  the  determination  cannot
    stand and must be set aside.

13. The judge's consideration of the medical evidence begins at  paragraphs
    22 - 29. That consideration is challenged in a number  of  respects  in
    the grounds as outlined in the grant of permission.  At  paragraph  23,
    the judge found that it was not clear on what basis  the  diagnosis  of
    suffering from a major depressive order  has  been  reached  and  makes
    reference to some parts of the factual  history.  However,  the  report
    sets out in a  number  of  paragraphs  the  evidence  upon  which  that
    diagnosis was based upon which included the Appellant's presentation at
    interview (paragraph 31 onwards), the symptoms paragraphs 42 -  59  and
    her physical symptoms (paragraph 61 - 64), anxiety (65) and traits  (67
    - 70). This led to the conclusion of the expert at paragraph 131 ( page
    17).

14. The report also sets out her history  and  background  and  whilst  the
    author of the report is a psychologist, her  experience  and  expertise
    were set out at pages 2 and 4  alongside  the  use  of  the  diagnostic
    criteria  in  reaching  the  conclusions.  Whilst  the  judge  did  not
    expressly say so, it appears from the assessment of the report that the
    judge did not consider the report should be  afforded  any  weight  but
    that it was approached with "caution" (paragraph 28). This was based on
    the findings set out at paragraphs 23 -  29.  In  particular  that  the
    medical notes did not relate to any depression (24) and (25)  that  she
    had not had any medication. However, there  was  such  evidence  (pages
    275, 286 and 288 in the medical notes  and  that  she  been  prescribed
    previously medication at page 286. There  is  no  dispute  between  the
    parties that the  type  of  medication  referred  to  is  used  in  the
    treatment of depression. The notes also refer to  other  mental  health
    difficulties  other  than  depression  albeit   historically.   As   to
    counselling, this was in fact referred to at page 288 although again it
    is historic in nature as it is recorded in 2009. Whilst the  notes  are
    not easy to read, there is also reference to the Appellant's history in
    the report at paragraph 118. Both parties  submit  that  those  factual
    errors are such to undermine the overall conclusions and assessment  of
    the report.

15. As regards other evidence,  the  letters  from  the  church  and  other
    letters were submitted to provide evidence of  general  good  character
    and was not to demonstrate any mental health presentation. Mr  Gaisford
    also relies upon oral evidence given  by  her  husband  concerning  her
    presentation and mental health  difficulties.  Whilst  the  judge  made
    reference to her ability to run a business (paragraph 29) which  in  my
    judgement was open to her to place in the balance of the  evidence,  it
    was required to be considered in the light of  the  medical  report  at
    paragraph 36 and 96.

16. Ground 4 related to the findings made paragraph 36  of  the  nature  of
    threats. However as the grounds set out  there  was  some  evidence  in
    support of the factual claim made  (page  13)  and  in  any  event  the
    relevance of the fear of threat (even if factually unsubstantiated) was
    a matter referred to in the medical report at paragraph 96.

17.  In the light of the above matters, I am  satisfied  that  the  central
    submissions made on behalf of  the  Appellant  to  which  I  have  made
    reference to which concerns the core issue relating to the  Appellant's
    mental health and her factual circumstances in  the  UK  and  her  home
    country are made out. Thus I am satisfied for the reasons given by both
    advocates, that the central issue relating to  the  Appellant's  mental
    health and the effect upon the  core  issues  regarding  insurmountable
    obstacles, and very significant obstacles and in general return to  her
    home country, either alone or with her spouse, was  not  considered  in
    the light of  all  of  the  evidence  which  included  the  surrounding
    supporting evidence and, in the light of the  evidence  that  had  been
    given. It thereby rendered the findings of fact  and  analysis  of  the
    core issues to be flawed.  Thus the decision cannot stand and  will  be
    set aside. Both parties submitted that in the circumstances none of the
    findings could be preserved.

18. As to the remaking of the decision, both advocates submitted  that  the
    correct course to adopt in a case of  this  nature  would  be  for  the
    appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.  I gave time  for  Mr
    Gaisford to consider this further and he responded by email  confirming
    that this was the way in which the case should be reconsidered. In  the
    light of those submissions, I am satisfied that  this  is  the  correct
    course to take and therefore I set aside the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal and it will be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  hear
    afresh. It may require an  updated  medical  reports  and  for  witness
    evidence but it is not necessary for me to make any  onward  directions
    as this can be clarified by the Appellant's solicitors.

    Decision:

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on point of law; the decision is set aside and remitted to the FTT.



    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008. Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court
    directs otherwise, the Appellant is granted anonymity.   No  report  of
    these proceedings shall directly or  indirectly  identify  her  or  any
    member of her family.  The direction applies both to the Appellant  and
    to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could lead to
    contempt of court proceedings.




Signed[pic]                             Date: 19/9/2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

