

                                    [pic]
ST
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/32735/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 March 2016                             |On 12 April 2016              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    N M P
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Graham, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in this case is the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department.  However, for the sake of clarity, I shall use  the  titles
    by which the parties were known before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  when
    the Secretary of State was the respondent.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of India born on 18 June 1989.  He  appealed
    against the decision of the respondent on 5 August 2014 to  remove  him
    from the United Kingdom under s10 of the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    1999.  His appeal was allowed by First-Tier Tribunal Judge D Ross in  a
    decision and reasons promulgated on 9 September 2015.

 3. The respondent sought permission to appeal.  This was granted by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge M Robertson. His reasons for so doing are follows:

         "1.      The  Respondent  seeks  permission,  in  time,  to  appeal
             against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge D Ross  (the
             Judge), allowing the Appellant's appeal under the  Immigration
             Rules against the Respondent's decision to remove him from the
             UK as an Immigration Offender pursuant to  the  provisions  of
             s10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.  The Appellant had
             leave to remain as student [sic] and the reason given  by  the
             Respondent for  removal  under  the  1999  Act  was  that  the
             Appellant had used deception to gain entry to the  UK  because
             information  provided  by  the  Educational  Testing   Service
             established an anomaly with the speaking test indicated by the
             presence of a proxy. There was no curtailment decision.

         2. The sole ground of  appeal  is  that  the  Judge  did  not  have
             jurisdiction to hear the appeal.   This  ground  has  arguable
             merit. It is clear  from  the  notice  of  decision  that  the
             Respondent was of the view that the Appellant only had an  out
             of country right of appeal, and the Duty Judge also  confirmed
             that the issue of jurisdiction  was  to  be  considered  as  a
             preliminary point and this point was  not  considered  by  the
             Judge as a  preliminary  issue.  While  there  is  nothing  to
             indicate that the Respondent's representative raised the issue
             at the hearing, permission is granted on the basis of Nirula v
             The First-tier Tribunal [2011] EWHC 3336 (Admin),  R  (on  the
             application of Mohamed Bilal Jan) v SSHD (Section 10  removal)
             IJR UKUT 265 (IAC) and RK (Nepal) v SSHD [2009]  EWA  Civ  359
             [sic]."

 4. Thus the appeal has come before me.

 5. Both parties agreed that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  (FTTJ)  should
    have considered as a preliminary issue whether he had  jurisdiction  to
    hear the appeal, this issue having  been  identified  in  the  decision
    notice and grounds of appeal.  In Virk v SSHD [2013] EWCA  Civ  652  it
    was held that although the Secretary  of  State  had  failed  to  raise
    before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the   issue   of   that   Tribunal's
    jurisdiction to entertain a family's application for leave  to  remain,
    the Upper Tribunal was entitled  to  dismiss  the  family's  subsequent
    appeal against the First-tier Tribunal's decision on the basis that the
    First-tier Tribunal had not had jurisdiction, notwithstanding that  the
    point had not been raised below.

 6. Mr Duffy for the respondent submitted the respondent's decision dated 5
    August 2014 was one  within  the  meaning  of  s82(1)(g),  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act), as it was prior to  the
    changes implemented on 20 October 2014 as a result of  s15  Immigration
    Act 2014.  He submitted that the appellant was precluded by s92(1)  and
    (2) of that Act from appealing  against  the  decision  whilst  in  the
    United Kingdom, there being no human rights claim.   Mr Duffy submitted
    that the FTTJ had had no jurisdiction to hear the appeal because it had
    been lodged whilst the appellant was still in the UK.

 7. Mr Graham, for the appellant, relied on the grounds of  appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal. As regards the issue of jurisdiction, he  accepted
    that the decision fell within the scope of s82(1)(g).  The  appellant's
    principal issue was that it had been "an affront to natural justice not
    to make a curtailment decision".   He  submitted  that  the  respondent
    should have made a decision allowing an  in-country  right  of  appeal.
    That said, Mr Graham accepted that the FTTJ could  not  go  behind  the
    removal decision before him.

 8. The sole issue for me to decide is whether the  decision  of  the  FTTJ
    contains a material error of law. I  am  satisfied  it  does,  for  the
    reasons given by Mr Duffy.   A  decision  to  remove  pursuant  to  s10
    automatically terminates any extant leave; it  is  not  a  decision  to
    curtail leave under the Immigration Rules and so not a decision to vary
    leave as listed in s82(2) of the 2002 Act. It is a decision covered  by
    s82(1)(g).  Accordingly there is no in country right of  appeal  except
    on asylum and human rights grounds (RK (Nepal)) and s92(1) and  (2)  of
    the 2002 Act).  The appellant did not make a human rights claim.

 9. For this reason, the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  contains  a
    material error of law in that the FTTJ had no jurisdiction to hear  the
    appeal, the appellant having remained in the UK. I set aside the FTTJ's
    decision in its entirety.

Decision

10. The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law.  The decision is set aside.

11.  I  declare  and  determine  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal   had   no
    jurisdiction to hear the appeal. I  do  not  remake  the  decision.  It
    remains set aside.

12. Given that the issues  addressed  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  remain
    unresolved,  the  appellant  is  entitled   to   anonymity   in   these
    proceedings.


Signed           A M Black                         Date       1 April 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed           A M Black                         Date       1 April 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black
