

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32447/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 30 August 2017                             |On 04 September 2017         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Clifford O'Connor
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The respondent is a citizen of Jamaica who appealed to the  Tribunal
       on the basis  that  he  considered  he  was  appealing  against  the
       decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  refusing  to   revoke   the
       deportation order on the basis that his removal was a  violation  of
       his human rights.
    2. The relevant decision, however, was a revocation of  his  indefinite
       leave to remain and the substitution of it with a period of  limited
       leave.  As such, the decision carried no  right  of  appeal  to  the
       Tribunal and the Tribunal had no jurisdiction to hear an appeal.
    3. The respondent's solicitors wrote to the Tribunal on 9  August  2017
       in these terms:


         We write to inform the court that we  have  received  instructions
         from the respondent informing us that he  would  like  to  withdraw
         from the Upper Tribunal appeal.
         The respondent has also instructed us to inform the court that  he
         concedes that the [First-tier Tribunal Judge] made an error of  law
         in allowing the appeal...and that the matter before the court dealt
         with the revocation of his indefinite leave to remain...which  does
         not have a right of appeal...


    4. The appeal was listed before me at Field House on 30 August 2017 but
       I was not aware that the case was to proceed and did  not  have  the
       file at the hearing.  Mr Jarvis the Home Office  Presenting  Officer
       noticed it was listed but did not, as I recall, have the file.   The
       respondent, Mr O'Connor, unsurprisingly, did not appear nor  was  he
       represented.  Accordingly, there was no hearing save  for  the  fact
       that it was listed. I have now read the file.
    5. As the respondent has conceded that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's
       determination was made in error, I set it aside.
    6. I am satisfied that the respondent did not have a  right  of  appeal
       and his concession to that effect was properly made.
    7. Notwithstanding the somewhat unusual nature of  the  hearing  on  30
       August 2017, I  am  satisfied  that  no  injustice  is  done  by  my
       determining the appeal.

DECISION

           1. The Tribunal had no jurisdiction to hear  and  determine  the
              appeal.
           2. The Judge made an error on a point of law and I substitute  a
              decision setting aside his determination and ruling that  the
              Tribunal had no jurisdiction to entertain an  appeal  to  the
              Tribunal.







                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL






