
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32645/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22nd May 2017                             |On 14th June 2017             |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

                            Joseph Dwamenah Antwi
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Balroop, Counsel, instructed by Starck Uberoi
LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Ghana  born  on  10th  April  1970.   His
    appeal  against  the  refusal  of  a  permanent  residence   card,   as
    confirmation of a retained right of residence as the former  spouse  of
    an EEA national, was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge D  A  Pears
    of 10th October 2016 under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006  [the
    Regulations].

2.   The Appellant had been granted a residence card on  16th  October  2009
    valid until October 2014 on the basis of his marriage to Grace  Baffour
    [GB]. He applied for a permanent residence card on 15th September 2014.
    It was not in issue that the Appellant had married somebody bearing the
    name Grace Baffour in Accra  in  July  2005  and  the  Decree  Absolute
    dissolving the marriage was made in the Principal Registry at the  High
    Court  in  London  on  15th  June  2011.  The  Respondent  refused  the
    application on the grounds that the identity of GB was used by at least
    two other individuals and the Appellant did not meet  the  requirements
    of Regulation 10(5) or 10(6).

3.   It was not accepted that the Appellant's marriage  to  GB  was  genuine
    and subsisting because on 21st December 2008 a person using an identity
    card in the name of GB also had in her baggage a Ghanaian  passport  in
    the name of Georgina Frimpoong Amponsah-Antwi (Y1).  Further,  on  20th
    December 2008, there was reason to believe that the Appellant was using
    the alias of Kewsi Achempong [KA], although the Appellant claimed  that
    KA was his brother.

4.   A woman arrested on 2 July 2010 (Felicia Blay [FB]) claimed she was  GB
    of Flat 1, [-], London, N1 and was  working  for  Mite  [sic]  Cleaning
    Company.  She then  accepted  that  GB  was  not  her  real  name.  The
    Respondent considered  that  FB  had  been  working  illegally  in  the
    identity of GB.

5.   The Respondent was not satisfied that the Appellant's EEA  Sponsor  was
    genuinely working in the UK because a non-EEA national was found to  be
    working using the identity of GB. The Respondent was not satisfied that
    the actual GB was exercising  Treaty  rights  up  until  the  point  of
    divorce. Further, the marriage to GB was one of convenience.

6.   The Respondent doubted the Appellant's  identity  because  he  had  not
    provided the passport on which he originally entered the UK,  but  only
    one issued in London in March 2008, and the photograph in that passport
    bore a significant resemblance to the photograph in the German passport
    of KA. That was evidence that the Appellant and KA are one and the same
    person.

7.   For these reasons the Respondent refused to issue a residence card  and
    the Appellant appealed. The  appeal  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge D A Pears and he heard evidence from the Appellant.  He  did  not
    find the Appellant to be a credible witness and  dismissed  the  appeal
    under the Regulations.

8.    The  Appellant  appealed  on  three  grounds.  Firstly,  the   judge's
    consideration of the Appellant's oral evidence combined with a  failure
    to give reasons for discounting that evidence was perverse.  There were
    no discrepancies in the Appellant's  evidence  and  the  judge  wrongly
    focussed on the Appellant's demeanour in concluding that he was  not  a
    credible witness. The judge's findings were contrary to the findings of
    the County Court Judge who found that the Appellant had been  a  victim
    of fraud. The judge had erred  in  law  in  assessing  the  Appellant's
    credibility and had failed to give  adequate  reasons  to  support  his
    adverse credibility finding.

9.   Secondly the judge's criticism of the Appellant's failure to  seek  and
    secure his brother's  evidence  in  support  of  his  appeal  was  also
    perverse. The failure to call a witness should not  be  commented  upon
    adversely and there was no obligation to call a witness  even  if  they
    are assumed to know something relevant to appeal. The criticism by  the
    judge of the lack of evidence from the  Appellant's  brother  had  been
    wrongly taken into account in assessing credibility.

10.  Thirdly, the judge had failed to give the Appellant an  opportunity  to
    reply to the allegations made against him, infringing  Article  6.  The
    Appellant submitted that the following issues were not put to  him  and
    he had not had a fair opportunity to respond to: the  evidence  of  his
    relationship with his ex-wife; how he could have been divorced  without
    his knowledge; and how he was able to produce recent e-mails  from  his
    brother and the police.

11.  Permission to appeal was initially refused by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    but was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley on  11th  April  2017.
    She states: "The Appellant knew the  issue  of  whether  he  was  in  a
    genuine relationship  with  his  wife  was  one  which  the  First-tier
    Tribunal would have to determine. There was no need for this to be  put
    specifically to him, and it was up to him to produce  evidence  it  was
    genuine.  However, I find it  arguable  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    erred in law in relation to the findings  of  the  County  Court  Judge
    regarding  the  Appellant  and  the  existence  of  his  brother  Kewsi
    Achempong and that he was a 'credible witness'.  It  is  arguable  that
    there is insufficient reasoning at paragraphs  42  to  48  to  reach  a
    different conclusion, and alternatively that the justification for  the
    disbelief of the  Appellant  is  irrational,   for  instance  that  his
    evidence is unconvincing because it was  'slick'.  The  Appellant  will
    have to show however that this error was material  given  the  apparent
    lack of evidence of his having a genuine relationship with Ms Baffour."

The Judge's Findings

12.  The judge made the following findings:

         "41. It was perfectly clear from the refusal letter that there were
             a number of issues to the forefront namely that it was alleged
             that the Appellant was involved in a marriage  of  convenience
             and that the Appellant and Kwesi Achempong were  one  and  the
             same person. The Appellant's answer that he thought the latter
             issue was resolved has superficial appeal but simply does  not
             stand up to examination since the refusal  letter  making  the
             point is dated September 2015 and the passport issue with  the
             police was in 2012 and the County Court judgment was 2013. The
             Appellant knew and would have been advised of  the  importance
             of a statement and or  attendance  from  his  brother  (if  he
             exists) and  the  absence  of  such  evidence  undermines  the
             credibility of the Appellant's case.


         42.  I have borne in mind the views  and  findings  of  the  County
             Court Judge but  he  was  resolving  a  different  issue  with
             different evidence.


         43.  I watched the Appellant give evidence and  it  was  a  skilful
             display. He gave his answers with  hardly  a  hitch  save  his
             wilful failure to understand the question about Sidney bearing
             part of his name rather than part of  Kewsi's.   His  evidence
             was slick and unconvincing. I entirely agree that his evidence
             has been crafted to meet the case against him whether it is to
             explain why he rather  than  Kewsi  booked  the  tickets,  the
             apparent recent  recollection  of  the  disappearance  of  the
             identity papers from a safe or why he had  documents  relating
             to Grace Baffour after he separated.


         44.  I accept of course that the Appellant was not asked why  there
             was no evidence of his relationship with Grace Baffour but the
             burden of proof is on the Appellant and the fact remains  that
             there were no cards,  e-mails,  photographs,  statements  from
             friends to show  it  was  a  real  marriage.  Of  course  some
             documents might have been lost but there is nothing  not  even
             letters from friends or his brother in support of his case.


         45.  The Appellant married a person called Grace Baffour  in  Ghana
             in July 2005. There  is  no  evidence  that  person  was  ever
             granted a visa to come to the UK or that she ever did.


         46.  The identity of Grace Baffour has been used by  at  least  two
             other people as appears from the Respondent's evidence and the
             person called Grace Baffour seems to have been assiduous in  a
             number of different employments.


         47.  There are perplexing claims which  cumulatively  cause  me  to
             further doubt his credibility namely the Appellant  saying  he
             was divorced without his knowledge,  his  ability  to  produce
             documents  relating  to  Grace  Baffour  dated   after   their
             separation, his electoral registration at one address when  he
             was living at another, his custody of his  brother's  passport
             and, despite the Appellant's claim, there is no evidence  that
             the police accepted  they  were  different  and  returned  the
             brother's passport to  him and why if the Appellant's  brother
             is so elusive how were e-mails from him and to the  police  so
             recently produced.


         48.   I  found  the  Appellant  and  his  case  wholly  lacking  in
             credibility.


         49.  I have considered  all  the  evidence  and  I  find  that  the
             Appellant has failed to show that he person that he married in
             Ghana every (sic) exercised treaty rights.










         50.  If I am wrong about that I have considered the totality of the
             information  before  me,  including  the  assessment  of   the
             Appellant's  answers  and  any  information  provided,  I   am
             satisfied that it is more probable that a person called  Grace
             Baffour who was a Dutch national and the Appellant were  in  a
             marriage of convenience."

Documentary Evidence

13.  The document at V1 [Document V1] is a refusal/cancellation of leave  to
    enter/remain report. The name is given as Georgina Frimpoong  Amponsah-
    Antwi [GFAA]. The reasons for the refusal are: "That you have presented
    a Dutch identity card in the name of GB, but I am  satisfied  that  you
    are not the rightful holder of the identity card you have  produced  to
    me. Furthermore, you have subsequently produced a Ghanaian passport  in
    the name of GFAA, but you are a visa national and under the Immigration
    Rules you are required to have an entry clearance to enter the  UK  and
    you have no entry clearance. I therefore refuse you leave to enter  the
    UK under paragraph 325 of the Immigration Rules. I am further satisfied
    that you have used deception in this  application  and  that  you  have
    attempted to conceal your true identity by impersonating  the  rightful
    holder of the document. Your application  is  therefore  refused  under
    paragraph 327A of the Immigration Rules."

14. Document V1 goes on to state:


         "The pax arrived at Calais juxtapose ferry  port  on  a  Eurolines
    Coach from Dusseldorf accompanied by two female children.  For  herself
    she presented a Netherlands identity card in the name  of  GB  born  on
    24th  December  1970.   For  the  children  she  presented  the  German
    Kinderweis in the name of Sidney  Amponsah-Antwi  no  photograph,  born
    26th May 2003 and a German passport in the  name  of  Miriam  Amponsah-
    Antwi born 29th September 2006.
         It was immediately apparent that the pax was not the person in the
    photograph of the identity card. The pax did not understand  German  or
    Dutch and only seemed to  speak  English.   In  view  of  the  lack  of
    photograph on the child's Kinderweis there was also  doubt  as  to  her
    true identity.
         A search of the pax's baggage revealed two Ghanaian passports  one
    for the pax and one for the child Sidney but in the name  of  Stratford
    Amponsah-Antwi born 6.12.04. Neither document held a UK  visa  but  had
    valid German residency. The pax stated that the real Sidney had entered
    the UK yesterday.
         The pax was uncooperative and started to suffer from a  bad  cough
    and it was decided not to interview or fingerprint the pax  for  health
    and safety reasons.
         Previous records confirmed that a child  called  Sidney  Amponsah-
    Antwi had indeed arrived the day before at  Stansted  where  there  had
    been a serious concern for her welfare.  Although it appeared that  the
    child  had  been  allowed  to  proceed,  in  view  of   these   further
    developments, further reference was made to Stansted.  Furthermore  the
    false identity in which the pax had presented herself, GB, was  already
    in the system as an EEA resident.
         In view of the above the pax was refused entry under the authority
    of CIO Mr A Wells as she was not the rightful owner of the NLD ID  card
    and held no UK visa in her rightful document.  Both children were  also
    refused on the same grounds."


15.  The document at W1 [Document W1] is  an  IS  Minute  Sheet  giving  the
    applicant's name of Felicia Blay states that the subject  was  arrested
    by police on 2nd July 2010 for theft  and  on  suspicion  of  being  an
    immigration offender under the details of GB  born  in  Ghana  on  24th
    December 1970.  When questioned the person admitted her real  name  was
    Felicia Blay born on 4th January 1978 and that  her  Ghanaian  passport
    was with the Home Office. She stated that she  was  divorced  with  two
    children in Ghana and her parents and  siblings  were  in  Ghana.   She
    stated that she was working as a cleaner  for  Might  Cleaning  Company
    based at 25 Gresham Street, London, EC1 thus not claiming any  benefits
    and that she lived at Flat 1, [ ], London, N1 [ ].

16.  The IS minute sheet at Y1  [Document Y1] relates  to  Sidney  Amponsah-
    Antwi who was brought into the UK by Jenny Dennis to visit  her  uncle.
    The Immigration Officer called the Sponsor KA a German national who was
    to be responsible for Sidney in the UK. He stated that Sidney  was  his
    daughter and she would be staying with  him  for  one  month  and  that
    Sidney's mother would be arriving on 24th December 2008. The mother  is
    GFAA a Ghanaian national living in Germany holding a residence  permit.
    KA stated that he had been in a relationship with Georgina, but he  was
    not the biological father of Sidney.
     GFAA stated that KA was her brother and Sidney had arrived  in  the  UK
    as a tourist for two weeks and would be staying with KA, she  would  be
    arriving with her other two children by bus.  KA  stated  that  he  had
    booked the flight for Sidney on 9th December 2008.  Sidney did not know
    the sponsor when she saw him.
     Having been told that  KA  made  the  booking  an  Immigration  Officer
    sought confirmation and the name of the  booking  was  made  by  Joseph
    Antwi of [-], EN3 [-].

17.  The Appellant relied  on  payslips  showing  that  GB  lived  at  [  ],
    Enfield, Middlesex, EN3 [-] and payslips showing that she lived at [ ],
    Islington, London.

Submissions

18.  Mr Balroop submitted that the  judge's  reasons  for  disbelieving  the
    Appellant were based on his physical appearance and  the  way  he  gave
    evidence.  These  were  not  rational  reasons   for   making   adverse
    credibility findings. The judge relied on the fact that  there  was  no
    evidence that GB had been granted a visa.  She would not require a visa
    to enter the UK as an EEA national.

19.  Mr Balroop relied on the paragraph in Document V1  which  states:  'the
    false identity in which the pax has presented herself, GB, was  already
    in the system as an EEA resident'. He submits that the person  arrested
    was not the Appellant's wife and she had used GB's identity. Subsequent
    to this the Appellant was granted a residence card in October  2009  on
    the basis of his marriage. Therefore, it must have been accepted by the
    Respondent that the Appellant's wife was  an  EEA  national  exercising
    Treaty rights.

20.  Document W1 showed that a woman named FB had been  arrested  for  using
    the identity of GB.  Both of these people had stolen GB's identity  and
    this predated the Appellant's divorce. Two people have been using  GB's
    identity in 2009 and in 2010.  This could not be  the  person  who  was
    working in 2011 because in  both  cases  the  identity  documents  were
    seized.

21.  The Respondent in concluding that the marriage was one  of  convenience
    relied on three points. The lack of evidence that GB had  gained  entry
    to the UK, that GB's identity was used on two  separate  occasions  and
    that the Appellant and his brother were one and the same  person.  Only
    if the Respondent had discharged the burden was the Appellant  required
    to respond by showing  cogent  evidence.  However,  in  this  case  the
    Respondent had failed to discharge the burden.

22.  It was accepted in 2009 that  the  Appellant  was  married  to  an  EEA
    national who was exercising Treaty rights, therefore  GB's  entry  into
    the UK was not material. The first user of GB's identity  predated  the
    issue of the residence card. The second use of GB's identity was when a
    completely different person was arrested for theft. The Respondent  was
    effectively saying that a person was arrested using the name of GB  and
    therefore they doubted whether the Appellant's ex-wife had ever  worked
    in the UK. However, there was still a working history for GB after  the
    arrest of FB in 2010.

23.  In relation to the Appellant's brother no one was  disputing  that  the
    German passport in the name of KA was genuine. It  had  been  with  the
    police and  returned.  The  police  had  at  one  time  held  both  the
    Appellant's passport and the German passport of his brother. There  was
    a picture of the Appellant's brother at AA1.

24.  Accordingly, the Respondent had not discharged the  evidential  burden.
    The judge had accepted the Respondent's version and not looked  at  the
    evidence critically. He had looked at the Appellant's  evidence  first.
    The finding at paragraph 49 that the Appellant had failed to show  that
    the person he  married  in  Ghana  ever  exercised  Treaty  rights  was
    perverse. All the work history of GB could not be questionable.

25.  For the Respondent, Ms Ahmad  submitted  that  the  Appellant  had  not
    shown that GB, his ex-wife, had been exercising Treaty  rights  in  the
    UK. The HMRC records at U1 and U2 showed that GB  was  not  working  in
    June 2011, the date of divorce. There was no evidence that  she  was  a
    jobseeker. There was a break in her employment between March  2011  and
    July 2011. There was no challenge to the judge's finding  at  paragraph
    47 in the grounds of appeal.

26.  Document W1 showed that FB was arrested using  the  false  identity  of
    GB. The Appellant had not shown that his ex-wife was exercising  Treaty
    rights. The address on many of the payslips was the same as that  given
    by FB who also gave the same employer as that in the HMRC records.  The
    Appellant was relying on the payslips of FB in his application.

27.  In any event, the  judge's  finding  that  the  EEA  national  was  not
    exercising Treaty rights at the time of divorce was open to  the  judge
    on the evidence before him and the Appellant had not raised a challenge
    in the grounds of appeal or shown that there was any error  of  law  in
    the judge's decision in that respect.

28.  In relation to the burden of proof the judge properly directed  himself
    at paragraph 12  relying  on  Papajorgji  (EEA  spouse  -  marriage  of
    convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT 00038 (IAC).


         "(i) There was no burden at the  outset  of  an  application  on  a
             claimant to demonstrate that a marriage to an EEA national  is
             not one of convenience.


         (ii)  IS  (marriage  of  convenience)  Serbia   [2008]   UKAIT   31
             establishes only that there is an  evidential  burden  on  the
             claimant to address evidence justifying  reasonable  suspicion
             that the marriage is entered into for the predominant  purpose
             of securing resident's rights.


         In summary, where the issue is raised in the  appeal  the  question
         for the judge will therefore be, in light of the  totality  of  the
         information before me, including the assessment of  the  claimant's
         answers and any information provided, am I  satisfied  that  it  is
         more probable than not that this is a marriage of convenience?"


    Ms Ahmad submitted that the judge applied the correct burden of proof.

29.  There was evidence in 2009 that the passport of GB  had  been  used  by
    GFAA and the Appellant had bought a ticket for that person to  come  to
    the UK with her children.  Document Y1 showed that, on the confirmation
    form, the name of the booking was made by Mr Joseph Antwi 57 [ ], EN3 [
    ], Enfield. There was a connection between the Appellant and  GFAA  who
    was arrested in 2009.

30.  The Respondent had provided evidence to show  that  someone  else  used
    GB's identity in 2010. This was consistent with the HMRC records relied
    on by the Appellant. The Respondent had therefore raised  a  reasonable
    suspicion that the marriage was one of convenience and  discharged  the
    burden.  It  was  then  a  matter  of  whether,  on  the   balance   of
    probabilities, the marriage was one of convenience. The judge's finding
    that it was not a genuine marriage was open  to  him  on  the  evidence
    before him.

31.  In relation to the assessment of credibility the judge is  entitled  to
    take into account the Appellant's demeanour. Ground 3 of the grounds of
    the appeal was not made out.  Ground 2 was not  made  out  because  the
    Respondent had raised a concern that the Appellant and his brother were
    the same person. It was therefore for  the  Appellant  to  put  forward
    evidence upon which he intended to rely.

32.  Ms Ahmad relied on  paragraph  17  of  Greenwood  No.2  (paragraph  398
    considered) [2015] UKUT 00629 (IAC) which states:


         "The test for irrationality has been formulated in the  variety  of
         tried and trusted ways. Was it reasonably open to the judge  taking
         into account  all  material  factors  and  disregarding  everything
         extraneous  to  reach  the  conclusion  under  challenge?   Another
         formulation is did his conclusion fall within the band,  or  range,
         of conclusions reasonably open and available to him? There is  also
         the repeated admonition to appellate courts and tribunals that what
         they might have done as a first instant court or tribunal is not in
         point.  Thus  while  it  may  be  that  not  every  first  instance
         immigration judge would have reached the conclusion under challenge
         in this appeal this does not vitiate in law the decision."


    She submitted that when the evidence was looked  at  as  a  whole,  the
    findings were open to the judge and they had been reasonably made.

33.  In response, Mr Balroop stated that after FB was  arrested  there  were
    still employment records for GB  in  the  UK.  The  Appellant  was  not
    connected to FB. On 15th June 2011, GB was still a  qualifying  person.
    She had got another job within four months,  so  she  would  have  been
    actively seeking work.

Discussion and conclusions

34.  Ground 1: the  judge's  credibility  findings  were  perverse.  It  was
    submitted that the judge's assessment of the Appellant's oral  evidence
    was based on the Appellant's physical appearance and the way  in  which
    he gave evidence and therefore any adverse finding  was  irrational.  I
    accept Ms Ahmad's submission that the judge  is  entitled  to  rely  on
    demeanour and any defect in his  assessment  of  the  Appellant's  oral
    evidence at paragraph 43 is certainly not material to the  findings  at
    paragraph 44 to 47.

35.  It is submitted that the judge  failed  to  give  reasons  for  why  he
    attached little weight  to  the  County  Court  judgment.  However,  at
    paragraphs 41 and 42, the judge explained that the passport  issue  was
    with the police in 2012 and the County Court  judgment  was  2013.  The
    County Court Judge was  resolving  a  different  issue  with  different
    evidence.  These reasons were  sufficient  to  explain  why  the  judge
    attached little weight to the judgment. In any event, any defect in the
    judge's assessment of the Appellant's oral evidence  or  a  failure  to
    give reasons was not material given the judge's findings at  paragraphs
    44  to  48  which  were  sufficient  to  support  the  judge's  adverse
    credibility findings.

36.  Ground 2: the failure to submit evidence from the Appellant's  brother.
    The judge was entitled to take into account a  lack  of  evidence.  The
    Respondent alleged that the Appellant and his  brother  were  the  same
    person. The Appellant failed to produce evidence that he ought to  have
    been able to produce if his account  was  true.  The  judge  took  into
    account the Appellant's failure to submit evidence  from  his  brother.
    Again this was a matter on which the judge was entitled to rely in  his
    assessment of credibility.

37.  Ground 3 has no merit. It is for the Appellant to prove his  claim  and
    he has failed to do so. There was  no  unfairness  in  failing  to  put
    matters to the Appellant. The Appellant was well aware from the refusal
    letter of the matters in issue and the judge dealt adequately with  the
    evidence of the Appellant's relationship with GB at paragraph 44.

38.  The grounds relied on in the application for permission to  appeal  did
    not establish a material error of law. The Appellant  was  divorced  on
    15th June 2011. The last payslip was March 2011. The HMRC records  show
    that gap between March 2011 and July 2011.  On the  evidence  submitted
    by the Appellant he has not  shown  that  his  ex-wife  was  exercising
    Treaty rights up until the time of the divorce.  The Appellant  has  to
    show that he has resided in the UK for  a  continuous  period  of  five
    years in accordance with the Regulations. He has  not  shown  that  his
    former spouse was continually exercising Treaty rights up to  the  time
    of the divorce.

39.  The judge's finding, at paragraph 49, that the Appellant had failed  to
    show that the person he married in Ghana ever exercised  Treaty  rights
    in the UK was one which was open to the judge on  the  evidence  before
    him and this point was not challenged in the  grounds  of  appeal.  Any
    defect in the judge's assessment of credibility was not material.

40.  The documents V1, W1 and Y1 show that there  is  a  connection  between
    the Appellant and the two people who  admitted  to  fraudulently  using
    GB's identity in 2009 and 2010.

         (i) The Appellant had bought the ticket for the  GFAA's  daughter,
             Sidney, who arrived in the UK in February  2009.  Her  booking
             was made  in  the  Appellant's  name  giving  the  Appellant's
             address in Enfield.  GFAA  had  tried  to  enter  the  UK  the
             following day using GB's passport.


         (ii)     FB,  who  was  arrested  on  2nd  July  2010  using  GB's
             identity, gave her employment as 'Mighty Cleaning Company' and
             her address as Flat 1, [ ], Essex. The Appellant relies on the
             payslips of GB who lived at  the  same  address  and  who  was
             working for the same cleaning company (Mitie).  The  Appellant
             was seeking to rely on documents  which  connected  him  to  a
             person who admitted to fraudulently using GB's identity.

41.  Mr Balroop submitted that this was not relevant  because  there  was  a
    history of GB continuing to work after FB was arrested. Further,  after
    the arrest of GFAA, the Respondent  accepted  that  the  Appellant  was
    married to an EEA national exercising Treaty rights. Therefore, it  was
    irrational for the judge to rely on these documents. The Respondent had
    failed to show that because a  person  was  using  GB's  identity,  the
    'actual GB' was not exercising Treaty rights.

42.  Mr  Balroop's  submissions  explain  another  way  of  looking  at  the
    evidence, but disclose no error of law on the part of  the  judge.  The
    judge was not satisfied that  the  Appellant  was  married  to  an  EEA
    national, rather than a person fraudulently using the  identity  of  an
    EEA national, or that the person to whom the Appellant was married  was
    exercising  Treaty  rights  in  the  UK.  The  judge's  findings   were
    reasonably open to him on the evidence before him.

43.  I find that the evidence relied on by the Respondent is  sufficient  to
    satisfy the evidential burden that  there  was  a  suspicion  that  the
    marriage was one of convenience. The judge properly directed himself on
    the  burden  and  standard  of  proof.  The  judge  then  assessed  the
    Appellant's evidence and for the reasons he gave at paragraphs 44 to 47
    he did not find it credible.

44.  Accordingly, the Respondent had raised a reasonable suspicion that  the
    marriage was one of convenience and the Appellant had failed to  submit
    reliable evidence to show otherwise. The judge quite properly looked at
    the totality of the evidence, including the Appellant's  oral  evidence
    and the information upon which the Appellant relied. It was open to the
    judge, on  that  evidence,  to  find  that  the  marriage  was  one  of
    convenience.  I find that there was no error  of  law  in  the  judge's
    decision dated 10th October 2016 and I dismiss the Appellant's appeal.

Notice of decision

Appeal dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.


         J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 13th June 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


         J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 13th June 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances

