
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Ia/32860/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 July 2017                               |On 25 July 2017               |
|Prepared 17 July 2017                         |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                           mrs janet akoshia aryee
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Omorere, Counsel instructed by Bestway
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Ghana born on 10 June  1968  who  appeals
    against a decision of the Secretary of State made on 7 October 2015  to
    refuse  to  issue  a  residence  card  under  the  provisions  of   the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

2.   It was the  appellant's  assertion  that  she  had  married  a  Spanish
    citizen, Francis Adjeiwaa on 12 December 2013 in a  proxy  marriage  in
    Ghana.

3.   The appellant and her claimed  husband  had  been  interviewed  by  the
    respondent on 6 October 2015 after which the appellant had been refused
    leave to remain and detained.  The reasons for refusal are set out in a
    lengthy letter served on 9 October 2015.   There is a  lengthy  section
    therein  regarding  the  position  of  the  Home  Office  on  marriages
    conducted by proxy.  The writer of the letter of refusal relied on  the
    decision of the Tribunal in CB (validity of marriage:  proxy  marriage)
    Brazil [2008] UKIAT 00080 which  set  out  prerequisites  for  a  proxy
    marriage  to  be  accepted  as  valid.   It  was  stated   that   those
    requirements had been incorporated into instructions  to  the  European
    Casework Directorate and it was emphasised the  marriage  must  satisfy
    the requirements of the law of the country in which it took place.

4.   The letter also referred to the decision  of  the  Tribunal  in  Kareem
    (proxy marriages - EU law) [2004] UKUT 00024 (IAC)  which  stated  that
    any marriage certificate should be issued by a competent authority, and
    gave details of the evidence required. Not only  had  the  marriage  by
    proxy have to be recognised in the country in which it took  place  but
    any marriage certificate had to be issued by a competent authority  and
    evidence adduced that the claimed competent authority was an  authority
    with legal power to create or confirm the facts it  attested.   It  was
    also stated that there would have to be a validly  registered  marriage
    certificate produced or alternative form of evidence proving  that  the
    marriage took place as asserted, regardless of whether the marriage was
    conducted under civil law, Mohammedan law or customary law by proxy.

5.   It was emphasised that evidence to  show  that  a  proxy  marriage  was
    conducted in accordance with the law should also be  produced.  It  was
    stated that the appellant had submitted a Ghanaian  customary  marriage
    certificate which showed that she  was  married  to  her  EEA  national
    spouse in Ghana on 12 December 2013 by proxy and that the marriage  had
    been registered, but it was stated that such a marriage was governed by
    the Provisional National Defence Council  Law  112  and  the  Customary
    Marriage and Divorce (Registration) Law 1985 ( amended in  1991)  which
    removed the mandatory requirement  to  register  a  customary  marriage
    within a certain timeframe.  The terms relating to the registration  of
    customary marriage were also referred to.  It was stated  that  it  was
    accepted that the appellant had provided a Ghanaian customary  marriage
    certificate  and  therefore  demonstrated  that  she  had   voluntarily
    registered her marriage but it was said that the burden of proof was on
    her to demonstrate the registration was done  in  accordance  with  the
    Customary Marriage and Divorce (Registration) Law 1985.  Details of the
    requirements for registration were set out as were the requirements  of
    the Customary Marriage and Divorce (Registration) Law 1985.

6.   The letter  of  refusal  then  referred  to  the  marriage  certificate
    produced and stated there needed to be evidence of  Ghanaian  passports
    for both parties to the marriage or in the alternative  validly  issued
    birth certificates matched by the appellants' parents'  valid  Ghanaian
    passports and evidence of  relationship  between  the  parent  and  the
    child. It was alleged that birth certificates had not been provided  to
    show that the appellant and sponsor were Ghanaian.  It was also  stated
    that in the  first  schedule  to  the  customary  marriage  certificate
    submitted contained  a  field  entitled  "signature  or  thumbprint  of
    husband" and a field entitled "signature or  thumbprint  of  wife"  but
    that these had not been completed.  It was stated  therefore  that  the
    Home Office considered that the appellant had been  unable  to  satisfy
    the required conditions and thus the legal  validity  of  the  marriage
    could not be accepted for immigration purposes.

7.   Reference was made to the statutory declaration produced  which  stated
    that the appellant had been represented at her customary wedding  by  a
    family member but there was no evidence to show that the appellant  and
    the family member, her father, were related was claimed.  It was stated
    that  there  was  no  valid  statutory  declaration  to  accompany  the
    customary marriage certificate and in the absence of that evidence that
    they had both attended the wedding ceremony was required, but  had  not
    been produced. A letter from the Ghanaian High Commission referring  to
    documents  which  were  purportedly  attached  thereto  -  a  statutory
    declaration dated 29 August 2014 from a notary public, a  certification
    by the Second Deputy Judicial Secretary, a certificate  by  the  Deputy
    Director, Legal and  Consular  Bureau  and  the  Form  of  Register  of
    Customary Marriage issued by the Registrar in Accra which stated   that
    the High Commission might wish to consider whether or  not  these  were
    genuine was considered but it was alleged  that evidence had  not  been
    provided to show that that was the case.  It was  stated  therefore  it
    could not be accepted that the claimed proxy marriage had been properly
    executed.

8.   Moreover emphasis was placed on the judgment in  Kareem  on  the  basis
    that there was no evidence that the marriage was accepted as genuine in
    the country of the appellants' sponsors' nationality.

9.   The Secretary of State went on to state that  the  appellant  had  been
    given the opportunity to demonstrate the relationship in itself was not
    one of convenience and, having set out various discrepancies   in  what
    had been said at interview  it was concluded that the marriage was  one
    of convenience.  The letter also said that attempts had  been  made  to
    contact the sponsor's employer but that had not been successful.

10.  The grounds of appeal submitted by the appellant did  not  advance  the
    appellant's claim or deal with the matters  that  were  raised  in  the
    letter of refusal.  It was merely the asserted that both  parties  were
    Ghanaian nationals living in the UK and that they had been  married  by
    Ghanaian customary law and practice.   What  was  not  present  in  the
    grounds of appeal was any detailed analysis of the assertions  made  in
    the letter of refusal regarding the requirements for a  proxy  marriage
    in Ghana, cross-referenced to documents submitted by the appellant  and
    any argument to show that the marriage did meet the requirements of the
    Ghanaian customary law.

11.  The appeal was heard by Judge  Flynn  on  10  October  2016.   She  had
    before her statements from  the  appellant  and  the  sponsor.   It  is
    unfortunate that those statements do not  engage  with  the  letter  of
    refusal or argue that in fact the requirements of the Ghanaian law were
    met.  Various assertions were made regarding the relationship.

12.  Judge Flynn heard evidence from the  appellant  and  her  husband.  She
    noted that it was  argued  that  there  were  three  directly  relevant
    issues.  First was whether the sponsor was  exercising  Treaty  rights,
    secondly whether the marriage  was  recognised  in  Spain  and  thirdly
    whether or not it was one of convenience.

13.   The reality is, however that a further question had to be  considered:
    that was whether or not  it  was  accepted  that  this  was  a  genuine
    marriage in the sense that the requirements of the  Ghanaian  customary
    law were met. I consider that that is  a central issue in  this  appeal
    because following the decision in Awuku v SSHD [2016] EWCA CIV 1303 - a
    judgment which was handed down after the hearing and  the  promulgation
    of the determination,  it is clear that it is not relevant  whether  or
    not  the  marriage  is  recognised  in  the  country  of  the  European
    nationality of the sponsor - what is relevant is  whether  or  not  the
    marriage is recognised in the country in which  it  is  conducted.  The
    judgment in Kareem is no longer good law.

14.   While the judge considered in some detail the  evidence  produced  and
    considered there  were  so  many  discrepancies  therein  that  it  was
    indicated that this was a marriage  of  convenience,  she  also  placed
    weight on the decision in  Kareem  and  the  fact  that  there  was  no
    evidence to show that the marriage was accepted in Spain.

15.  I consider that the judge was placed in  very  considerable  difficulty
    in this case because  although  the  letter  of  refusal  set  out  the
    position in Ghanaian law the issue of whether or not  the  requirements
    of Ghanaian law as to the validity of this proxy marriage were met  was
    not aired before her: neither the grounds of appeal nor the submissions
    of either party focus on that issue.

16.  The first issue was therefore whether the marriage was valid  in  Ghana
    but there is no clear finding on that point.  The second issue is that,
    if the marriage is found to be valid, whether the  Secretary  of  State
    had proved that this was a marriage of convenience. As  is  clear  from
    the judgment in Collins Agho [2015] EWCA Civ 1198 the burden  of  proof
    lies on the respondent to show that the marriage is not genuine.  While
    the Secretary of State relied on various  discrepancies  these  do  not
    seem to me to be ones on which carried weight.

17.  I consider that there were errors of law not only  in  the  application
    of the determination Kareem, notwithstanding  that  that  decision  was
    good law at the time  of  the  hearing  and  the  promulgation  of  the
    decision, but also in the consideration of validity of the marriage  in
    Ghana and, following from that, consideration of where  the  burden  of
    proof lay to show that the marriage was  one  of  convenience.  If  the
    respondent  had  discharged  that  burden  then  the  consideration  of
    evidence and whether the marriage was a genuine marriage and  therefore
    the issue of discrepancies that arose at interview would only then fall
    to be considered.

18.    I therefore set aside the determination.  The appeal will proceed  to
    a hearing afresh in the First-tier Tribunal.  I would emphasise that it
    is incumbent on both parties to put forward arguments and  evidence  as
    to the validity of this proxy marriage and make  clear  submissions  on
    that issue.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed to the extent that it is remitted  to  the  First-tier
for a hearing afresh on all issues.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   [pic]                          Date: 21 July 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy




























