
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32865/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 30 June 2014                                 |On 31 July 2013            |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                            Joseph Osajie Ehimuan
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Ene, Immigration Consultancy and Training Bureau
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwncyz, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Joseph Osajie Ehimuan, was born on 5 October 1977 and is
    a male citizen of Nigeria.  The appellant appealed against the decision
    of the respondent dated 2 July 2013 refusing to grant him  a  Residence
    Card for Permanent Residence as a confirmation of his right  to  reside
    in the United Kingdom as a non-EEA national who has retained a right of
    residence after the termination of his marriage to his  former  spouse,
    an EEA  national.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  S  Phillips  QC)
    dismissed his appeal in a determination promulgated on 21  March  2014.
    The appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2.  The  appellant's  appeal  fell  to  be  considered  under   Regulation
    10(5)(d)(i)  and  Regulation  15(1)(f)  of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the  2006  Regulations").  The  judge
    noted that the appellant had entered the  United  Kingdom  in  December
    2001 and had, in July 2002, allegedly met Lucinda  Lopes  De  Brito,  a
    Portuguese national.  He claims to have  married  Ms  De  Brito  on  23
    January 2003.  A decree nisi in their divorce was made absolute  on  16
    January  2013.   The  appellant  had  applied  in  2008  for  Permanent
    Residence but had been unable to produce the documents required by  the
    respondent and his application had been refused.   He  did  not  appeal
    that decision.  A further application by the  appellant  for  Permanent
    Residence was refused on 9 January  2012.   The  appellant  did  appeal
    against that decision and his appeal was dismissed because he failed to
    produce a valid passport.  The application which is the subject of this
    appeal was made on 2 July 2013 and refused by  the  respondent  on  the
    basis that the appellant had not established that his (now former) wife
    had been exercising Treaty Rights for five years within the meaning  of
    Regulation 15(1)(f) of the 2006 Regulations.

 3. The appellant also claims that  he  has  a  new  partner  (Efosa  Petra
    Amadin) and that they have a daughter together,  A,  who  was  born  in
    February 2009 and that a second child is expected in April  2014.   The
    appellant claims that he wishes to marry Ms Amadin who  is  a  Nigerian
    citizen who, he claims, has settled status in the United Kingdom.

 4. The grounds of  appeal  at  [1]  and  again  at  [9]  assert  that  the
    respondent had a duty to seek out and adduce evidence which would  show
    that Ms Lopes had been exercising Treaty Rights  at  the  date  of  her
    divorce from the appellant.  I find the respondent had no such duty  in
    law to assist the appellant in proving his case.

 5. Further, at [2] it is asserted in the grounds that "it is an undisputed
    fact that the appellant is the biological father of the child A ...  ."
    Indeed, it was on the basis that it was "arguable that the judge should
    have ... included a consideration of  the  effect  of  the  appellant's
    removal on his daughter [A] as it is not disputed that he is the father
    of the child" that Judge Cheales granted permission to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal [3].

 6. The assertion in the grounds is not supported by the  findings  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  In a detailed and thorough  determination,  Judge
    Phillips QC stated,  more  than  once,  that  he  did  not  accept  the
    appellant as a credible witness.  Detailed reasons are given  for  that
    finding (see [35-41]).  The judge concluded:

         I do not believe that [the  appellant]  has  presented  a  truthful
         account regarding cohabitation  during  the  marriage.   I  do  not
         believe that he has presented  a  truthful  account  regarding  the
         exercise of Treaty Rights by his wife during the marriage.  I go on
         to make my findings accordingly.

 7. As regards Article 8 ECHR, the judge accepted that  the  appellant  had
    established private life in the United Kingdom but he:

         did not find credible the appellant's claim regarding his  role  in
         the life of his claimed partner's daughter  ...  my  assessment  is
         what the appellant  states  regarding  their  claimed  relationship
         [with Ms Amadin] and their claimed child and what Ms Amadin  states
         in her statement in these respects is not credible. [49].

    Having found [53] that the respondent's decision would bring  about  an
    interference with the appellant's Article 8 rights, the judge  went  on
    to conclude:

         The appellant in  my  view  has  given  an  incredible  account  in
         relation to his relationships with, firstly,  his  wife  and,  now,
         with his claimed current partner.  Neither has given evidence,  nor
         has any other witness  testified  in  support  of  the  appellant's
         claims regarding these relationships.

 8. On the basis of that finding, the judge  found  that  any  interference
    with the appellant's Article 8 rights would be proportionate.

 9. I leave aside for the moment the question as  to  whether  or  not  the
    judge should have considered Article 8  ECHR  at  all  given  that  the
    appeal related to the refusal of a Residence Card  (in  consequence  of
    which it is unclear that the appellant would be removed from the United
    Kingdom).  However, insofar as Article 8 ECHR may have been engaged  in
    this appeal, I can find nothing wrong with the judge's  reasoning.   It
    is abundantly clear that the judge has not accepted  any  part  of  the
    appellant's evidence as  truthful.   In  consequence,  it  is  not  "an
    undisputed fact" that the appellant is the  biological  father  of  the
    child A.  That much appears to have been accepted  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal, notwithstanding the assertion that the appellant was the father
    of the child; at [4] it is asserted in the grounds that "whether or not
    A is [the appellant's] ... biological daughter] can be  established  by
    DNA evidence"; if it were an "undisputed fact" that the  appellant  and
    child were related as claimed, it is difficult to see why DNA  evidence
    would be required. I observe again that it is not for the respondent to
    make the appellant's case for him  and,  if  the  appellant  wished  to
    adduce better evidence to show that he was the father of the child,  it
    was open to him to obtain a DNA report  prior  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    hearing accordingly.  The fact remains that the judge  did  not  accept
    the appellant's evidence at all or that of his "claimed"  partner.   As
    noted above, the judge at [54] expressly  found  that  the  appellant's
    evidence regarding his claimed current partner and  claimed  child  was
    simply not credible.  In the light of that finding, what the grounds of
    appeal assert regarding Section 55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009 ("the best interests of the child") and the  human
    rights of Ms Amadin and A are simply not  sustainable.   Likewise,  the
    assertion in [8] that "it is factually inaccurate  to  imply  that  the
    appellant is not the biological father of baby A" was nothing more than
    a disagreement with the finding of the Tribunal.

10. Mr Ene sought to rely on a direction to Home Office  caseworkers  which
    indicates that caseworkers may exercise  a  discretion  to  contact  HM
    Revenue and Customs in cases such as this.   However,  he  produced  no
    evidence to show that the direction  had  not  been  followed  in  this
    instance and the direction is, in  any  event,  discretionary  and  not
    mandatory.

11. In summary, the grounds complain that the judge ignored "agreed  facts"
    when he did no such thing but had, in fact, rejected every part of  the
    appellant's evidence as unreliable.  The grounds  of  appeal  asserting
    that the judge failed to have  proper  regard  to  the  rights  of  the
    appellant's claimed partner and child fall away because the  judge  did
    not find that Ms Amadin and A were the current  partner  or  biological
    child of the appellant.  As regards the appeal concerning the  exercise
    of Treaty Rights at the time of the divorce by the  appellant's  former
    wife, I find that there was no obligation upon the respondent  to  take
    steps to prove the  appellant's  case.   In  any  event,  as  with  the
    remainder of the  appellant's  evidence,  the  judge  had  rejected  as
    unreliable the appellant's evidence regarding his former wife.

12. I find that the First-tier Tribunal did not err in law for the  reasons
    asserted in the grounds of appeal or at all.  This appeal is dismissed.



DECISION

13. This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 20 July 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

