
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32313/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 March 2015                      |On 23 March 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HOLMES


                                   Between

                                     LSY
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms McCrae, Counsel instructed by Halliday Reeves Law
Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr Dewison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellant is a citizen of Malaysia. She entered the UK on 7 March
       2008 with a valid grant of entry clearance  as  a  student  until  31
       October 2010. An application made for a variation of that  leave  was
       refused on 16 December 2010, so that the Appellant was an  overstayer
       from 31 October 2010.

    2. On  28  January  2011  the  Respondent  issued  to  the  Appellant  a
       certificate of approval of marriage, for  a  proposed  wedding  to  a
       British citizen, Mr Wan Can Go. Once that wedding had taken place the
       Respondent granted a period of DLR to the  Appellant  from  11  April
       2011 until 11 April 2014. On 9 April 2014 the Appellant applied for a
       variation of that leave, but it was refused on 7 August 2014  on  the
       basis the marriage  was  not  longer  subsisting.  As  a  result  the
       Respondent went on to make a removal decision by reference to s47  of
       the 2006 Act the same day.

    3. The Appellant's appeal against these immigration decisions was  heard
       on 30 October 2014, and it was allowed under the Immigration Rules in
       a Decision promulgated on 18 November 2014  by  First  Tier  Tribunal
       Judge Hands.

    4. First Tier Tribunal Judge Cox granted the  Respondent  permission  to
       appeal the decision on 19 January 2015 on the basis it  was  arguable
       the  Judge  had  either  failed  to  apply,  or  had  misapplied  the
       provisions set out in Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules.

    5. The Appellant filed no Rule 24 Notice.

    6. Thus the matter comes before me.

   The errors in the Judge's approach

    7. The appeal was pursued before the Judge on the  basis  the  Appellant
       claimed to meet the requirements of Appendix FM  to  the  Immigration
       Rules, and even if she  did  not,  her  appeal  against  the  removal
       decision ought to be allowed outside the  Immigration  Rules  on  the
       basis  her  removal  to  Malaysia   would   be   a   disproportionate
       interference in her Article 8 rights, notwithstanding the failure  of
       her marriage. During the course of the  marriage  the  Appellant  had
       given birth to two children, both of whom were  entitled  to  British
       citizenship derived from  their  father,  her  ex-husband.  Thus  the
       available evidence upon the true arrangements for the  upbringing  of
       these children, and the true nature of the Appellant's involvement in
       their lives required a careful consideration by the Judge.  The  need
       for a careful examination of that evidence  was  highlighted  by  the
       point taken by the  Respondent  against  her,  namely  that  although
       certain documents relating to these children purported to  have  been
       signed by the same person, the signatures were so distinct that  this
       was unlikely to have been the case.

    8. The Judge found [15]  that  she  was  not  satisfied  that  the  same
       individual had signed the birth certificates of the children as their
       father, and the letters said to set out their father's  agreement  to
       custody and contact arrangements for those children.  She also  found
       that the Appellant had not provided her true address  either  to  the
       school attended by her children, or to the Respondent  in  connection
       with the application, or to  the  Tribunal  in  connection  with  her
       appeal [18]. She found the Appellant an unreliable witness [18],  and
       decided that she could place little weight on  the  documents  relied
       upon by the Appellant to corroborate her claim to have a role in  the
       lives of her children [15, 16].  Nevertheless the Judge  went  on  to
       find [17] that the Appellant did have some involvement in  the  lives
       of her children - although she failed to make any findings as to what
       that involvement consisted of.

    9. Those findings, if they were to  stand,  would  not  only  bring  the
       suitability requirements of Appendix FM into play, but also  beg  the
       question of what actual involvement in the lives of her children  the
       Appellant had enjoyed since the breakdown of her marriage. The  Judge
       made no reference to these issues, and thus made no findings of  fact
       in relation to them before finding that the Respondent "did  not  err
       in law in refusing  the  Appellant  further  discretionary  leave  to
       remain in the UK based on her relationship with her sons"  [19],  and
       apparently dismissing the Article 8 appeal [20].

   10. The Judge then returned however to the Article 8 appeal, and  decided
       that the Appellant did not meet the requirements of  Appendix  FM  E-
       LTRPT, because she did not have sole responsibility for her two sons,
       and  was  not  the  parent  they  normally  lived  with  [24].  Based
       apparently upon the display of affection between  the  Appellant  and
       the two children who attended the hearing, the Judge then found  that
       the Appellant did take an active role in the lives  of  her  children
       [29] and thus that the requirements of  Appendix  FM  were  met.  The
       appeal was then allowed under the Immigration Rules [31].

   11. I am satisfied that the Judge's approach to the evidence was such  as
       to render the Determination unsafe. I  have  in  these  circumstances
       considered whether or not to remit  the  appeal  to  the  First  Tier
       Tribunal for it to be reheard. In the circumstances of the  appeal  I
       am satisfied that this is the correct approach, and I note Mr Dewison
       does not seek to suggest otherwise. In circumstances where  it  would
       appear that the relevant evidence has not properly been considered by
       the First Tier Tribunal, the effect of that error of law has been  to
       deprive the Appellant of the opportunity for his case to be  properly
       considered by the  First  Tier  Tribunal;  paragraph  7.2(a)  of  the
       Practice Statement of 25 September 2012. Moreover the extent  of  the
       judicial fact finding exercise is such that having regard to the over-
       riding objective,  it  is  appropriate  that  the  appeal  should  be
       remitted to the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice
       Statement of 25 September 2012.

   12. Indeed it is common ground before me that the Decision is so  fatally
       flawed because of internal  inconsistencies  (in  particular  between
       [20] and [29]), and, a failure  to  properly  consider  the  relevant
       provisions of Appendix FM, and then make the  necessary  findings  of
       fact, that there is no alternative to my setting aside the  Decision,
       and remitting the appeal to the First  Tier  Tribunal  for  rehearing
       afresh. No findings of fact can survive.

   13. Having reached that conclusion, and with the agreement of the parties
       I make the following directions;

          i) The decision upon the appeal is set aside and  the  appeal  is
             remitted to the First Tier Tribunal for hearing after 15 April
             2015. The appeal is not to be listed before Judge Hands.

         ii) Any further evidence that the Appellant wishes to rely upon in
             relation to either her ability to satisfy the requirements  of
             E-LTRPT or S-LTR shall be filed and served by 5pm on 15  April
             2015.

Decision


   14. The Determination promulgated on 6 August 2014 did involve the making
       of an error of law and accordingly the decision upon  the  appeal  is
       set aside. The appeal is remitted to the First Tier Tribunal with the
       following directions;

          i) The decision upon the appeal is set aside and  the  appeal  is
             remitted to the First Tier Tribunal for hearing after 15 April
             2015. The appeal is not to be listed before Judge Hands.

         ii) Any further evidence that the Appellant wishes to rely upon in
             relation to either her ability to satisfy the requirements  of
             E-LTRPT or S-LTR shall be filed and served by 5pm on 15  April
             2015.



Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal JM Holmes
Dated 17 March 2015
