


                                                                      [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Numbers:
IA/32405/2015
                                                               IA/33286/2015
                                                               IA/33287/2015
                                                               IA/33289/2015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House               |                Decision & Reasons    |
|                                   |Promulgated                           |
|On 6 December 2017                 |                On 7 December 2017    |
|                                   |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANUELL

                                   Between

                      (1) Mrs OLUWASOLAPE AJOKE ADENIJI
                      (2) Mr ABINEMI ADENKUNLE ADENIJI
                 (3) Master ALEXANDER DAVID AYOMIDE ADENIJI
                  (4) Master NATHANIAL OLUWAGBOTMEI ADENIJI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    In person
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      Introduction


      1.    The Appellants appealed with permission  granted  by  First-tier
           Tribunal Judge PJM Hollingworth on 16 August  2017  against  the
           determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  R  Walker  who  had
           dismissed  the  linked  appeals  of   the   Appellants   seeking
           settlement outside the  Immigration  Rules  on  Article  8  ECHR
           grounds mainly on the basis of the best interests of  their  two
           young sons.  The decision and  reasons  was  promulgated  on  24
           October 2016.


      2.    The Appellants, a family, are all  nationals  of  Nigeria.   The
           First Appellant had lawful leave to enter the United Kingdom  as
           a visitor from 9  June  2009,  subsequently  varied  to  Tier  4
           (General) Student Migrant leave, with  her  husband  and  United
           Kingdom born children as her dependants, until 23 June 2014 when
           that leave was curtailed.  Application was then made  for  leave
           to remain on Article 8 ECHR grounds,  which  was  refused  on  6
           November 2014.  The Respondent's decisions  were  found  by  the
           First-tier Tribunal to be not in accordance with the law.  Fresh
           decisions were taken by the Respondent  on  22  September  2015,
           again refusing the applications.


      3.    Judge Walker first made findings of fact.  The  Appellants  were
           not  able  to  meet  the  Immigration  Rules,  Appendix  FM  and
           paragraph 276ADE.  Neither of the children had  resided  in  the
           United Kingdom for 7 years as at the date  of  the  application.
           The Third Appellant had ASD but was in mainstream  education  in
           the United Kingdom and was not receiving any specialist  tuition
           or treatment.  His parents knew and  understood  his  condition.
           Adequate facilities existed in  Nigeria  for  such  children  in
           Nigeria and his parents could protect him from backward views if
           encountered.  The judge rejected the Appellants' contentions  to
           the contrary.  He also rejected the other claims which the First
           Appellant and Second Appellant  made  about  the  problems  they
           would  face  on  returning  to  Nigeria.   There  would  be   no
           interference with family life and any interference with  private
           life was proportionate and in pursuit of a legitimate aim  under
           Article 8.2 ECHR.  The First Appellant and Second Appellant  had
           only been in the United Kingdom for a  temporary  purpose,  long
           since fulfilled.


      3.    Permission to appeal  was  granted  because  it  was  considered
           arguable (in summary) that the judge's best  interests  analysis
           for the Third Appellant was inadequate and that he  should  have
           adjourned the  hearing  to  enable  the  Appellants  to  produce
           further evidence.


      4.    Standard directions were made  by  the  tribunal.    A  rule  24
           notice opposing the appeal was filed by the Respondent.






      Submissions


      5.    The First Appellant and Second Appellant addressed the tribunal,
           expressing their concern that they had not been well  served  by
           their solicitors (no  longer  instructed)  and  that  the  first
           instance judge had not allowed them to say  all  that  they  had
           wished to.  He had not understood how different Nigeria was from
           the United Kingdom.  There would be no help available and autism
           was not understood. The determination should be  set  aside  and
           remade.


      6.    Mr Kandola for the Respondent relied on the rule 24  notice  and
           submitted that there was  plainly  no  material  error  of  law.
           Neither Appendix FM nor  paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration
           Rules had been met.  The judge's Article 8  ECHR  findings  were
           open to him. The substance of Agyarko [2017] UKSC  11  had  been
           applied.   It  was  understandable   that   the   decision   was
           disappointing to the Appellants, but the  submissions  made  and
           the grounds earlier filed amounted to no more than  disagreement
           with a properly reasoned determination.   The  judge  had  taken
           care to  engage  with  the  best  interests  of  the  individual
           children concerned, as the determination showed.  The  balancing
           exercise had been performed and  the  judge's  conclusions  were
           open to him.  Welfare and safeguarding had  been  addressed  and
           the judge's approach was correct.   The onwards  appeals  should
           be dismissed.




      No material error of law finding


      7.    In the tribunal's view the grant of  permission  to  appeal  was
           rather too generous, and failed to reflect  the  fact  that  the
           appeals were in reality misconceived.   Unfortunately  they  are
           typical of many appeals seen  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
           again in the Upper Tribunal involving families who  cannot  meet
           the Immigration Rules seeking to rely on Article 8 ECHR  grounds
           and relying on their children's best interests.   There are high
           hurdles to overcome.


      8.    The determination and the typed record of  proceedings  indicate
           that the judge gave the Appellants every opportunity to  address
           him on all relevant matters.  The summary  of  the  evidence  is
           full and careful, as is the summary of the submissions  made  by
           and on behalf of the Appellants.  Plainly the judge did his best
           to direct the First Appellant to the real  issues  and  did  not
           improperly restrict her evidence or submissions.


      9.    The Appellants had been on notice since the original  First-tier
           Tribunal decision in 2015 that  they  needed  to  present  their
           evidence about their son's best interests and  about  conditions
           in Nigeria.   They  also  were  well  aware  of  the  First-tier
           Tribunal appeal hearing deadline, of which they had four months'
           notice.  Indeed,  the  Appellants'  bundle   contained   various
           materials relating to autism in Nigeria, e.g. "Why children with
           Autism are often demonised in Nigeria" (28 September 2015),  and
           the judge was entitled to reach findings on which evidence as to
           the availability of adequate educational provision for the Third
           Appellant in Nigeria he preferred.    He was entitled to  prefer
           the evidence produced by the Respondent for the reasons he gave,
           which included the inability of the Appellants  to  produce  any
           satisfactory  evidence  in  rebuttal  despite   the   time   and
           opportunity they had had.  Moreover, the judge was  entitled  to
           find that the Third Appellant's needs  were  understood  by  his
           parents who would be able to help him. There was  no  procedural
           unfairness of any kind.


      10.   The very experienced judge correctly identified that the  issues
           before him were whether family life could be  lived  in  Nigeria
           and whether that would be proportionate in Article 8 ECHR terms,
           in  other  words,  whether  there   would   be   "insurmountable
           obstacles": see the reasons for refusal letter.  The  judge  was
           well aware that the best interests of two  minor  children  also
           had to be considered in the Article 8 ECHR balancing exercise to
           determine proportionality, again all approached through the lens
           of  the  Immigration  Rules.   Agyarko  (above)  was   followed,
           especially [42] and [43].


      11.   The tribunal agrees with Mr  Kandola's  submissions  as  to  the
           judge's analysis and findings.  Close attention was given to the
           situation of  the  two  minor  children,  above  all  the  Third
           Appellant: see [35] to [46] of  the  determination.   The  judge
           examined the appeal with empathy  and  considered  every  aspect
           with care.


      12.   The judge's findings  were  all  open  to  him,  and  cannot  be
           impugned as superficial, unfairly arrived  at  or  unreasonable.
           There was no tenable suggestion that the experienced  judge  had
           misunderstood any of the evidence.  Section 117B of NIA 2002 was
           required to be applied to the findings of fact.  The  Appellants
           had  been  in  the  United  Kingdom  precariously  (i.e.,  on  a
           temporary basis only, study, which had been fulfilled) for  many
           years by the date of the hearing.


      13.   The tribunal concludes that the  Appellants'  submissions,  like
           the onwards grounds, amount to  no  more  than  disagreement  or
           disappointment with the judge's decision.   The  tribunal  finds
           that there  was  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  decision
           challenged.






      DECISION


      The appeal is dismissed


      The making of the previous decision did not involve the making  of  an
error on a point of law.  The decision stands unchanged.

      Signed                                  Dated 6 December 2017




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell




