
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/32193/2015
                                                               EA/04109/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 April 2018                             |On 24 April 2018              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MR sadaqat ali
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L. Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent/Claimant:    Ms K. Reid, Counsel instructed by Maxim
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge I M Scott sitting at Taylor House  on
    7 June 2017) allowing the conjoined appeals of the claimant against (i)
    the decision made in 2015 to refuse to grant him ILR on the  ground  of
    ten years continuous lawful residence and (ii)  the  decision  made  in
    2016 to refuse to issue him with a  permanent  residence  card  as  the
    former spouse of an EEA national who had retained a right of  residence
    following their divorce and who had thereby acquired a permanent  right
    of residence.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity
    direction, and I do not consider that such a direction is warranted for
    these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

The Reason for the Grant for Permission to Appeal

 2. On 25 January 2018  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Farrelly  granted  the
    Secretary of State permission to appeal as (i)  it  was  arguable  that
    time spent in the UK further to the Treaty  provisions  does  not  come
    within the definition of lawful residence for the purposes of paragraph
    276A(b) and (ii) it was arguable that the  Judge  was  wrong  to  find,
    relying on Singh v  Minister  for  Justice  [2016]  QB  208,  that  the
    claimant had a retained right of residence because  his  ex-spouse  was
    exercising treaty rights in the UK at the date of the  commencement  of
    divorce proceedings.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

 3. At the outset  of  the  hearing  before  me,  Mr  Tarlow  withdrew  the
    Secretary of State's case in the EA appeal. He conceded that the  Judge
    had not erred in his application of Singh; and that his  findings  that
    the claimant had a retained right of residence under Article  13(2)  of
    the Citizen's Directive,  and  he  had  thereby  acquired  a  right  of
    permanent residence, were sustainable, and he did not seek  to  disturb
    them. However, he maintained an error of law challenge  in  respect  of
    the IA (human rights) appeal.

 4. Ms Reid accepted that the Judge had erred in law in allowing the  human
    rights appeal under the Rules. After  further  discussion,  she  agreed
    that, as the claimant had succeeded in his EA appeal, Article 8(1)  was
    not engaged in a human rights appeal outside the Rules.

Discussion

 5. As the Secretary of State has withdrawn her case in the EA  appeal,  it
    is not necessary for me to address it; and, on  reflection,  I  do  not
    consider that it would be appropriate to do so - precisely because  the
    arguments advanced in the grounds of appeal have  not  been  developed,
    but have been abandoned.

 6. In the human rights appeal, the Judge misdirected himself  in  treating
    time spent in the UK under the Community Treaties as  counting  towards
    lawful residence for the purposes of the Immigration Rules. So  he  was
    wrong to allow the human rights appeal on the ground that the  claimant
    had accrued ten years' continuous lawful residence under the Rules.  As
    the error was material to the outcome of the human rights appeal, I set
    aside his decision.

 7. As the claimant has succeeded in his EA  appeal,  Article  8(1)  is  no
    longer engaged. The refusal of ILR does not interfere with any  private
    or family life which the claimant has established in the UK, because he
    has the benefit of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal that he  has
    acquired a right of permanent residence under the  Community  Treaties.
    Accordingly, I remake the decision in the human rights appeal in favour
    of the Secretary of State.

Notice of Decision

The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  the  human  rights  appeal
contained an error of law, and accordingly the decision  is  set  aside  and
the following decision is substituted: the claimant's  human  rights  appeal
is dismissed.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal in the EA appeal did not contain  an
error of law, and accordingly the  decision  stands  and  the  Secretary  of
State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

I make no anonymity direction.


Signed                              Date 22 April 2018

Judge Monson
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge




















