
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32806/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On Papers 19 February 2019           |04 September 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                            LASISI ABUDU IBRAHIM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


   NOTICE PURSUANT TO RULES 48 AND 45/46 OF THE TRIBUNAL PROCEDURE (UPPER
                            TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008


                            NOTICE AND DIRECTIONS

 1. The Appellant seeks permission to appeal a  decision  of  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor promulgated  on  11  November  2016  ("the
    Decision").  The application has been made on a form which is  used  to
    seek permission  to  appeal  to  this  Tribunal  against  a  First-tier
    Tribunal  decision.  As  an  application  to  challenge  a  substantive
    decision of this Tribunal, the appropriate  course  was  to  apply  for
    permission to appeal the Decision to the Court of Appeal.  However,  in
    light of the circumstances set out below, I exercise my  discretion  to
    treat the application as if it were made on the form seeking permission
    to appeal to the Court of Appeal.

 2. It will be readily apparent from the foregoing that the application  is
    very substantially out of time (over two years).   The application  was
    not made until 19 February 2019.  The Appellant relies on the change in
    the law arising from the Court of Appeal's judgment in Khan v Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 1755 and the  European
    Court's judgment in Banger.  In fact, it is the  former  of  those  two
    judgments which is most directly relevant  because  the  basis  of  the
    application is that the Judge  wrongly  concluded  that  there  was  no
    jurisdiction to deal with  the  Appellant's  appeal  in  light  of  the
    judgment in Sala (EFM: right of Appeal) [2016] UKUT 00411  (IAC).   The
    judgment  in  Khan  dates  back  to  November  2017  and  there  is  no
    explanation of the delay in making the  application  since  that  date.
    However, the Appellant has not had a determination of his appeal on the
    merits because of case-law which was subsequently held  to  be  wrongly
    decided.  Notwithstanding the lengthy delay (which has resulted in  the
    Tribunal's file being destroyed) and in spite of the fact that no  good
    reason is given for the delay after November 2017, I have decided in my
    discretion that this amounts to another good reason to extend time  and
    I therefore extend time for the making of this application.

 3. I turn then to the substance  of  the  application  for  permission  to
    appeal the Decision.  Pursuant to Rule 48  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, I can treat an application for  permission
    to appeal as an application to review the  Decision  and  I  treat  the
    Appellant's application accordingly.

 4. Rule 45 permits the Tribunal to review  its  decision  if  one  of  the
    criteria in Rule  45(1)  is  met.   Rule  45(1)(b)  provides  that  the
    Tribunal may review its decision in accordance with Rule 46  if  "since
    the Upper Tribunal's decision, a court has made  a  decision  which  is
    binding on the Upper Tribunal and which, had it been  made  before  the
    Upper Tribunal's decision, could have had  a  material  effect  on  the
    decision." Following the Court of Appeal's judgment in  Khan,  that  is
    the position here.  Based on that judgment, it may  be  appropriate  to
    review the Decision and to set it aside.

 5. However, Rule 46(3) provides that, if I take any action in relation  to
    the Decision following a review without giving a party the  opportunity
    to make representations, the notice must state that and give that party
    the opportunity to make representations for the notice to be set  aside
    and for the Decision to be reviewed again.

 6. In light of the above, I have decided that the appropriate course is to
    give both parties the opportunity to make representations  in  response
    to my intention to review the Decision, to set it aside  and  to  remit
    the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal before proceeding to  review  it.
    I have given directions below.



Directions

1.   Within fourteen days from the date when this notice is sent, any  party
wishing to object to the course proposed at [6] above must  file  and  serve
on the other party written representations setting out their objections.

2.   If no representations  are  received  within  that  time  period,  this
Notice will be treated as a decision to review and set  aside  the  Decision
of Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Norton-Taylor  promulgated  on  11  November
2016 and the appeal will be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  re-
hearing.

3.   In the event that the appeal is remitted, the parties will be  expected
to agree a  consolidated  bundle  of  the  material  which  was  before  the
Tribunal when the appeal was heard previously and to file  a  copy  of  that
bundle with the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed[pic]                         Dated: 28 February 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
