
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/32226/2014
                                                               IA/32225/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision sent to parties on          |
|On 4 January 2016                    |On 21 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Shahnaz Akhtar
                                 Hira Asghar
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:  Ms J Fisher, Counsel instructed by Hartley Bain
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal allowing the  principal  claimant's  appeal  on
    human rights grounds,  pursuant  to  Article  8  ECHR  and  the  second
    claimant's appeal under paragraph 276ADE of the  Immigration  Rules  HC
    395 (as amended).

 2. The claimants are mother and (now adult) daughter.  Both claimants, and
    the principal claimant's husband, are Pakistani citizens and  none  has
    British citizenship.  At the date of decision the second  claimant  was
    20 years old and had been in the United Kingdom for 9 years.

 3. The principal claimant entered the United Kingdom on 2 occasions  on  a
    visit visa, each time giving what she says now were fictitious accounts
    of her marital status.  In August 2003,   she  stated  that  she  would
    travelling with a Mohammed Qureshi and their 3 children. She  now  says
    that she was never married to Mr Qureshi and has no connection  to  any
    children he may have.  She says she was married to Muhammad Rafiq,  who
    died in Pakistan in January 2005, and that he  is  the  father  of  the
    second claimant.

 4. When both claimants entered  the  United  Kingdom  in  2005,  again  as
    visitors, they claimed to be  travelling  with  Ali  Asghar,  who  they
    stated was the father of the second claimant. They did not embark  when
    their visas expired but remained  unlawfully  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    They continue to claim now that  Mr  Rafiq  is  the  second  claimant's
    father.

 5. In 2009, the principal claimant applied for a Certificate  of  Approval
    for Marriage to Ishaq Ahmed, who had been granted indefinite  leave  to
    remain 3 months earlier, after lengthy  overstaying.   The  application
    was granted and the marriage took place in September 2010. No  copy  of
    the application form for the CAM was before the First-tier Tribunal  or
    the Upper Tribunal, so it is not clear whether  on  this  occasion  the
    principal claimant gave a true account of  her  circumstances,  and  in
    particular whether she disclosed her  overstaying  and  lack  of  legal
    status in the United Kingdom.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted to the Secretary of State on the basis
    that it was arguable  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  misdirected
    itself in failing to apply  the  'compelling  circumstances'  test  for
    Article 8 ECHR outside the Rules (see Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department  v  SS  (Congo)  &  Ors  [2015]  EWCA   Civ   387);   making
    contradictory findings as to whether the parties  could  reasonably  be
    expected to continue their family  life  outside  the  United  Kingdom;
    erroneously treating each of the  claimants  as  though  she  would  be
    returned alone to Pakistan, although the Secretary of State's intention
    was to return them together, and the principal claimant's husband might
    well return with them; and finally, that the First-tier Tribunal failed
    properly to apply part 5A of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 to the family and private life relied upon in this appeal.

 7. The decision in relation to the second claimant contained an additional
    factual error, in that the First-tier Tribunal found that  she  entered
    the United Kingdom on 6 October 2005 aged 11 and had been in the United
    Kingdom for 'more than half her life'.  If the second claimant  was  20
    at the date of decision, she had been in the United  Kingdom  for  less
    than half her life.

 8. The First-tier Tribunal did not give proper weight to the  deceit  used
    by the principal claimant in both of her applications for visit  visas,
    in 2003 and 2005, nor  the  appropriate  weight  to  be  given  to  her
    application to regularise her  immigration  status  in  2009,  with  an
    application for a CAM. A CAM application is not an immigration decision
    and could not regularise the claimants' status.  In addition, given the
    principal claimant's previous fictitious applications for visit  visas,
    and mendacious accounts of her marital circumstances therein, absent  a
    copy of the CAM application, I  do  not  consider  that  it  serves  to
    strengthen her account at all.  It is not evidence that  the  Secretary
    of State was on notice of her being in the United Kingdom unlawfully at
    the date when the CAM was granted.

 9. At paragraph 63 of the decision, the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  found
    that there were no insurmountable obstacles to the  principal  claimant
    and her husband continuing their family  life  in  Pakistan,  and  that
    there were no matters 'going beyond choice or  convenience'  preventing
    them from enjoying family life there. The principal claimant's  husband
    had travelled to Pakistan as recently as 2012.

10.  At  paragraphs  83-86,  the  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge   takes   an
    unsustainable position on the 'little  weight'  provisions  of  section
    117B(4) and 117B(5) of the 2002 Act.   He does not give 'little weight'
    to the period when these  parties  have  been  in  the  United  Kingdom
    unlawfully or precariously.  The decision cannot stand and must be  set
    aside and remade.

11. I am satisfied that the proper course is for the decision to be  remade
    in the First-tier Tribunal with no findings of fact or law preserved.

Conclusions

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law. I set aside the decision.

The decision in this appeal will be remade in the First-tier Tribunal  on  a
date to be fixed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to  Rule  13  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)
Rules 2014.  I do not consider it  necessary  to  make  an  anonymity  order
pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed:  Judith AJC Gleeson    Date: 19 January 2016
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

