

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
IA/32721/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |    Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 27 June 2017                        |    On 7 July 2017                  |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                             Wanphen Pliangplang
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Bellara of Counsel, instructed by Legend
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Moxon promulgated on 21 November 2016 in which he dismissed the  appeal
    of Ms Pliangplang against a decision of the Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department dated 28 September 2015 refusing leave to remain in the
    United Kingdom.  The appeal comes before the Upper Tribunal pursuant to
    permission to appeal granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson  on
    17 May 2017.


2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Thailand born on 27 September 1968.   She
    is the wife of Mr Wararat Singnoi, also a citizen of Thailand  born  on
    15 January 1981.  She arrived in the UK on 12 February 2010 with  entry
    clearance as a dependant of her husband, conferring leave  valid  until
    28 January 2014.  On 9 September 2011 her leave was varied to that of a
    dependant of a Tier 2 Migrant to run until 1 August 2014.

3.   On 31 July 2014 the Appellant made an  application  for  settlement  as
    the dependant of her spouse.  In support of  the  application,  amongst
    other things, she submitted  a  ESOL  Skills  for  Life  (Speaking  and
    Listening) Entry 3 level  certificate  issued  by  Pearson  Edexcel  as
    evidence of competency in the English language.  This  certificate  was
    purported to have been awarded in March 2014.


4.   During the course of the application the Appellant was  interviewed  by
    Immigration Officers  on  29  May  2015.   Thereafter  the  Appellant's
    application was refused by way of Notice of Immigration Decision  dated
    28 September 2015 with reference to paragraphs 319E and 322(1A) of  the
    Immigration Rules for reasons set out in a 'reasons for refusal' letter
    ('RFRL') of the same date.


5.   The Respondent essentially  relied  on  two  matters  in  refusing  the
    Appellant's application, both primarily  with  reference  to  paragraph
    319E(g) of the Rules.  The first is set out in these terms in the RFRL:

         "You failed to submit evidence that you have  sufficient  knowledge
         about life in the United Kingdom in accordance with Appendix  KoLL.
         Your legal representative stated that you had  booked  to  sit  the
         Life in the UK test in the second week of  August  2014.   We  have
         checked Home Office records and noted that as at the date  of  this
         letter you have taken and failed the Life in the UK  test  fourteen
         times."


    There is on file a computer-generated record of those fourteen attempts
    and it was not denied before the First-tier Tribunal that that was  the
    relevant history.


6.   In respect of English language the following was said in the RFRL:

         "You submitted a Pearson Edexcel Entry Level certificate issued  22
         March 2014 certifying that you had attained Level Entry 3  of  ESOL
         Skills for Life  (Speaking  and  Listening)  on  completion  of  an
         approved programme at Asta College.  However, you were requested to
         attend an interview at UKBA offices on 29 May  2015  in  connection
         with your application and it was noted at this interview that  when
         questioned  about  your  English  language  qualification  and  the
         programme you undertook to achieve it you failed to  understand  or
         respond appropriately to the majority of questions  asked  of  you.
         It was considered therefore that you had not attained Level Entry 3
         of ESOL Skills for Life (Speaking and Listening) and that  you  had
         submitted false information in support of your application."

    In this regard in addition to finding that paragraph  319E(g)  had  not
    been satisfied the Secretary of State also invoked paragraph 322(1A) of
    the Rules.


7.   The Appellant lodged an appeal with the IAC.  In her grounds of  appeal
    she wrongly asserted that the  only  reason  for  the  refusal  by  the
    Respondent was in relation to the  allegedly  false  ESOL  certificate.
    She otherwise pleaded in the grounds that the Secretary  of  State  has
    not discharged the burden of proving the falsity of that document,  and
    also claimed that there would be obstacles  to  establishing  a  family
    life in Thailand.  The grounds of appeal do not  in  terms  or  at  all
    address the issue in respect of the Life in the UK test.


8.   On appeal before the First-tier Tribunal the Appellant relied  in  part
    upon a witness  statement  signed  on  3  November  2016  and  a  'Pass
    notification letter: Life in the UK test' produced subsequent to a test
    date of 26 September 2016.  The Appellant's documents were forwarded to
    the Tribunal under cover of a letter dated 3 November 2016, the hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal being listed for 4 November 2016.


9.   The Appellant's witness statement,  again  erroneously,  suggests  that
    the 'sole reason' (see paragraph 6 of the witness  statement)  for  the
    Respondent's  refusal  was  in  respect   of   the   English   language
    certificate.  Again,  mirroring  the  grounds,  the  witness  statement
    otherwise emphasises that the burden of proof was on the Respondent  in
    this regard and asserts that the document was genuine.


10.  The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  refused  the  Appellant's  appeal  for
    reasons set out in the Decision promulgated on 21 November 2016.


11.  It is to be noted at paragraph 3 of the Decision that  the  Appellant's
    representative indicated at the commencement of  the  hearing  that  no
    reliance was being placed on Article 8, and the claim in the grounds of
    appeal of significant obstacles to integration  into  Thailand  was  no
    longer being pursued.  Accordingly the  issues  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal related  to  the  application  for  variation  of  leave  with
    reference to paragraph 319E of the Rules, and also the issue in respect
    of paragraph 322(1A) in respect of the  English  language  certificate.
    The Judge concluded against the Appellant  in  both  regards  and  also
    declined to attach any weight to the 'pass  notification  letter'  that
    had been forwarded to the Tribunal the date before the hearing.


12.  Challenge is brought against the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  decision
    pursuant to permission granted in these terms:

         "Whilst the Judge has given adequate reasons for not giving  weight
         to the life in the UK test certificate provided at  the  hearing...
         it is arguable, as stated in the grounds, that it is not clear from
         the decision whether the burden of proof had been  unfairly  placed
         on the Appellant where an allegation was  made  by  the  Respondent
         that she had submitted a false document."


    Indeed, it is that essential point that Mr Bellara has amplified in his
    submissions before the Tribunal, and it is in respect of  that  central
    point that Mr Avery has argued on behalf  of  the  Respondent  that  in
    effect the Secretary of State's case and evidence had 'stood up' before
    the First-tier Tribunal.




13.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge sets out the  core  of  the  Respondent's
    case in the preliminary parts of his decision.  He then in  due  course
    proceeds to set  out  with  reference  to  the  witness  statement  and
    documents on file, and  also  the  presentation  at  the  hearing,  the
    Appellant's response to those matters.  So, for example,  at  paragraph
    14 he identifies that the Appellant denies  deception  in  her  witness
    statement and asserts that  there  was  nothing  to  suggest  that  her
    English language was below the required entry level.


14.  The Judge then sets out the Appellant's explanation as to  the  answers
    provided at the interview that caused the Respondent such consternation
    in the refusal.  At paragraph 16 the Judge states:

         "Within the Sponsor's statement it asserts that  in  interview  the
         Appellant had replied 'Asta College' when asked which  college  she
         had studied and that it just  sounded  like  'Excel  College'.   In
         reply to the question of who  had  paid  for  her  course  she  had
         replied 'my partner paid'  which  had  sounded  like  'my  personal
         pay'."


15.  The Judge also observed the following in  respect  of  the  Appellant's
    conduct at the hearing:

         "During the hearing the Appellant gave evidence with the aid of  an
         interpreter.  She tried to speak English but  her  ability  was  so
         limited that it was difficult to understand what she was saying and
         I only understood her to say that  she  can  understand  and  speak
         English slowly and that she can understand a bit."




16.  The Judge took all of those matters forward at paragraphs  18-20  under
    the heading "Findings of Fact".  At paragraph 18 the Judge says this:

         "I find it more likely than not that the Appellant has  not  passed
         the tests asserted.  I rely upon the high number of previous failed
         attempts, her obvious lack of  English  during  interview  and  the
         hearing, and the fact that she provided the wrong details as to the
         college in which the 2015 test was undertaken.   I  do  not  accept
         that she had said 'Asta' but was wrongly recorded  as  having  said
         'Excel'.  I note that she is recorded to have given this answer  on
         three occasions and I find it unlikely that the  interviewer  would
         have misunderstood on each occasion or would have  failed  to  seek
         clarification."




17.  The Judge goes on to conclude  in  these  terms  at  paragraph  20:  "I
    therefore find on the balance of probabilities that the  Appellant  has
    sought to mislead in relation to passing the tests in 2015  and  2016",
    before acknowledging that paragraph 322(1A) was therefore satisfied.
18.  I accept Mr Avery's submission  that  at  paragraph  18  the  Judge  is
    essentially  indicating  that  he  accepts   the   substance   of   the
    Respondent's  case,  and  he  does   so   applying   the   balance   of
    probabilities.  He then goes on to offer reasons which are  essentially
    the reasons relied upon by the Respondent in the RFRL.


19.  It is difficult, in my  judgment,  to  see  that  the  Judge  is  doing
    anything other than considering that the Respondent has established her
    case  in  preference  to  the  Appellant's  explanations  and  contrary
    assertions on appeal.  In other words, the Respondent  has  raised  the
    apparent  irreconcilability  of  the   English   language   certificate
    presented by the Appellant  in  support  of  her  application  and  her
    manifest difficulty during the interview conducted in May  2015,  which
    was not only indicative of a lack of  sufficient  competence  but  also
    indicated that it was more likely than not that  the  English  language
    certificate could not be a genuine document. It seems to  me  that  the
    Appellant was therefore reasonably required to offer something  by  way
    of explanation to meet these concerns and to  reconcile  the  dissonant
    features of her application, but in substance failed  to  do  so.   She
    offered nothing more than a denial of the falsity.  She  did  not,  for
    example, provide any additional evidence by way of further test results
    which she could have sat for  the  purpose  of  the  appeal.   She  did
    provide a document in respect of 'Life in the UK' which the Judge,  for
    reasons I will come to in  a  moment,  it  seems  to  me  had  properly
    excluded from his consideration, but she did not offer anything by  way
    of further verification of her English language ability.


20.  As I indicate above, it seems to me the Judge was doing  no  more  than
    accepting that the Respondent had established  her  case  -  inherently
    therefore acknowledging that the Respondent had discharged  the  burden
    in that regard; there is no issue before me but that the Judge  applied
    the relevant standard of balance of probabilities.


21.  So far as the Life in the UK 'pass notification letter'  filed  on  the
    day before the First-tier Tribunal hearing, it seems  to  me  that  the
    Judge was entitled to identify that this had been submitted  very  late
    and necessarily outside the period provided by the standard  Directions
    that had been issued in the appeal, and it  was  therefore  a  document
    that the Respondent  had  had  no  opportunity  to  verify.   In  those
    circumstances, and with regard to the  'overriding  objective',  in  my
    judgment the Judge was entitled to decide to proceed  with  the  appeal
    rather than adjourn it for further verification.  In any event, bearing
    in mind my conclusion in  respect  of  the  English  language  test  it
    becomes immaterial as to  whether  or  not  the  Appellant  could  have
    established before the  Judge  that  she  did  indeed  have  sufficient
    knowledge of life in the UK because it was necessary for her to satisfy
    both that requirement and the English language requirement in order  to
    succeed under the Rules.


22.  Accordingly I conclude that there is no identifiable error  of  law  in
    the Decision of the First-tier Tribunal and  accordingly  the  Decision
    stands.
Notice of Decision

23.  There is no error of law in the Decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    which accordingly stands. The Appellant's challenge  is  dismissed  and
    her appeal remains dismissed.


24.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.


The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed                                  Date: 6 July 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

