



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32441/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                        |             Decision & Reasons     |
|                                         |Promulgated                         |
|On 29th June 2015                        |              On 12th August 2015   |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts

                                   Between

                              mr muhammad usman
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Shah
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision  of  Judge  Turnock
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 26th January 2015.

Background

 2.  The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan  born  8th  February  1987.  He
    entered the UK on 24th February 2011 with entry clearance as a  Tier  4
    (General) Student valid until 17th May 2013. An extension to this leave
    was granted until 14th June 2014.

 3. On 19th May 2014 he applied for leave to remain  as  the  spouse  of  a
    British citizen. The Respondent refused his application  on  27th  July
    2014 after having considered Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE to  276DH
    of the Immigration Rules.

 4. In particular the Respondent was not satisfied that the  Appellant  had
    met the requirements of the Immigration Rules, concerning  the  English
    Language Test. As set out above, the Appellant applied for (on 2nd  May
    2013) an extension of his student visa which  was  granted  until  14th
    June 2014. In support of that application the Appellant  submitted  the
    results of a TOEIC test taken on 10th April 2010  and  administered  by
    Educational  Testing  Service  (ETS).  The  test  result  however   was
    cancelled by ETS as set out in the Respondent's  refusal  letter  which
    says,

         "During an administrative review process ETS  have  confirmed  that
         your client's test scores was  (sic)  obtained  through  deception.
         Because the validity of your client's test  results  could  not  be
         authenticated, your client's score from the  tests  taken  on  14th
         April  2014  have  been  cancelled.  Your  client  is  specifically
         considered a person who  has  sought  leave  to  remain  in  UK  by
         deception following  information  provided  to  us  by  Educational
         Testing Service (ETS) but an anomaly with  your  client's  speaking
         test indicated the presence of a proxy test taker."

 5.  In  assessing  the  Appellant's  Article  8  ECHR  Human  Rights,  the
    Respondent  maintained  that  as  the  Appellant  could  not  meet  the
    suitability requirements under the  Immigration  Rules  there  were  no
    compelling circumstances such as  to  outweigh  a  consideration  under
    Article 8. Having assessed  the  evidence  before  him,  Judge  Turnock
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal both under the Immigration  Rules  and
    Article 8 ECHR. The Appellant appealed that  decision.  Permission  was
    granted by the FtT. Thus the matter comes before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal Hearing

 6. Mr Shah who attended on behalf of the Appellant relied upon the grounds
    seeking permission. The main thrust of his argument centred around [20]
    of the Judge's decision. He argued that the Judge had erred in  relying
    on statements supplied by the Respondent in relation to the methodology
    used to identify where the deception had taken place and which  he  set
    out in his determination. It is the Appellant's case that he never used
    a proxy test taker and has not used deception. Mr Shah added  that  the
    Judge had  relied  too  heavily  on  the  statement  submitted  by  the
    Respondent because there was no corroborating evidence to what were  in
    effect generic statements. He said that as there was no  such  evidence
    the Respondent should have provided an opportunity to the Appellant  to
    retake the test. Further, the Judge had failed to take into account the
    fact that the Appellant is genuinely married to a British  citizen  and
    the validity and subsistence of the marriage has not been challenged.

 7. Mr Diwnycz in replying relied on the Rule  24  response.  He  submitted
    that  the  response  was  clear.  The  Appellant  could  not  meet  the
    Immigration Rules whatever, because as Judge Turnock  had  outlined  in
    [24] when the Appellant had applied for leave to remain as a spouse, he
    was not relying on the test which had been taken for  the  purposes  of
    renewing his student application. The document that he  sent  with  his
    application to remain as a spouse was a different test certificate.  It
    was one from EMD (Qualifications) Limited dated 14th April  2014.  This
    test supplier was not on the recognised list. Therefore  the  Appellant
    could  not  meet  the  English  language  requirement  whichever   test
    certificate he was relying on.

Error of Law

 8. Contrary to the assertions made in the grounds of appeal I am satisfied
    that Judge Turnock's decision was based upon a very careful and rounded
    assessment of the evidence and was  supported  by  clear  and  cogently
    reasoned findings. He has fully engaged with  the  evidence  which  was
    before him. The  grounds  are  misconceived,  because  they  focus  too
    heavily on the cancelled ETS test, rather than looking at the EMD test;
    the result  of  which  was  that  the  Appellant  could  not  meet  the
    Immigration Rules because he had  provided  an  English  language  test
    certificate from a test provider which was not  approved  by  the  Home
    Office.

 9. The Judge having properly found that the Appellant could not  meet  the
    requirements  of  the  English  language  test   (and   therefore   the
    Immigration Rules) went on  to  consider  whether  there  was  evidence
    before him sufficient to show that refusal of  leave  to  remain  as  a
    spouse, would amount to  a  breach  of  the  Appellant's  rights  under
    Article 8 ECHR. After fully considering all the evidence before him, he
    found that there would be no breach of Article 8. That was  a  decision
    open to him on the evidence before him.

10. For the foregoing reasons the decision of Judge  Turnock  discloses  no
    error of law and this appeal is accordingly dismissed.

Decision

11. Appeal dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made



Signature                                             Dated
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
