
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32317/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 October 2015                    |On 7 October 2015                    |
|Prepared 5 October 2015              |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                           Ibrahim Adesakin Yusuf
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Akeem Ayeni of Messrs Ineyab Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Chris Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a citizen of Nigeria born on 2 April 1983, appeals  with
    permission against a decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Majid, who in a determination promulgated on 20 May 2015 dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal against a decision of  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    refuse to issue a residence card as the spouse of an EEA national.

2.   It  was  the  appellant's  claim  that  he  had  married  a  Portuguese
    national, Paula Filipa Coelho Da Cruz Eusebio, on 26 June 2014.

3.   After the appellant's application  had  been  received  an  Immigration
    Officer visited the address on the tenancy agreement submitted  by  the
    appellant with his application in order to verify the  authenticity  of
    the relationship between the appellant and the sponsor.   The  door  of
    the house was opened by a Nigerian national, Mrs  Adebisi  Oshodi,  who
    stated that there was no male living at the address and  that  she  did
    not know the appellant or his EEA  sponsor.   However,  an  Immigration
    Officer had seen a male at the rear of a  neighbour's  property.   That
    male was handcuffed and it was established that he was  the  appellant.
    The property was then inspected.   A  Thames  Water  payment  card  and
    Lloyds visa card were found in the sponsor's name  but  there  were  no
    clothes, toiletries or other belongings relating to the  sponsor.   The
    Immigration Officer was told by the appellant that the sponsor  was  in
    Portugal and that he was unable to find a  photograph  of  her  on  his
    phone.  It appeared that there was documentation which  suggested  that
    the appellant lived at the address with a Rashidat Morunrayo Yusuf.   A
    national insurance card was found for the sponsor as well as one for  a
    Carlos Alberto Lima Dais Da Graca.  Given  that  the  sponsor  was  not
    living at the address the authenticity of the tenancy agreement was not
    accepted.

4.   The application having been refused the appellant appealed,  requesting
    that the appeal be dealt with on the basis of  the  papers  before  the
    Tribunal.  These included  a  chronology,  a  skeleton  argument  which
    argued, in particular, that the  marriage  was  genuine  and  that  the
    Secretary of State had not discharged the burden of proof upon  her  to
    show that it was not, and that the appellant's Article  8  rights  were
    also infringed by the decision. The relevant IDIs were also included as
    was a witness statement from the appellant stating that he had met  the
    sponsor in Streatham Common station and asserted that he had shown  the
    officers clothes belonging to his wife and pictures.  He asserted  that
    he had provided a lot of information  to  support  the  fact  that  the
    marriage was genuine to the Immigration Officer.  He said that his wife
    had been in Portugal but had come back to Britain on  20  August  2014.
    There was a witness statement from the sponsor, who said that  she  had
    been in Portugal and could not return until 20 August  because  of  her
    father's health and that her marriage was genuine  and  she  loved  her
    husband.  She could not be expected to leave the country with  him.   A
    bank statement and a number of photographs were also produced.

5.   In a second bundle, produced  before  the  hearing,  payslips  for  the
    appellant and his wife were also produced as well as utility bills  and
    documents  from  the  appellant's  niece.   A   supplementary   witness
    statement was submitted when the appeal was  adjourned  which  repeated
    the assertion that the appellant was cohabiting with his wife.  He said
    he could not comment on the statement of Mrs Adebisi Oshodi as  he  had
    not seen details of the interview with her and denied that  his  was  a
    marriage of convenience.

6.   The appeal was determined on the papers by Judge Majid on 15  May.   It
    does not appear from the face of the documents that he  had  considered
    the documentary evidence - certainly  he  makes  no  reference  thereto
    apart from asserting that he had looked at all the papers before him  -
    and he appears to have placed weight on the fact that  the  appellant's
    wife had been stated to be unable to take time off work.  He  dismissed
    the appeal.

7.   Mr Avery correctly accepted that there was a material error of  law  in
    the determination and that the judge had simply not  engaged  with  the
    facts or evidence before him and his determination lacked reasoning.

8.   I set aside the decision of the judge  in  the  First-tier  and  stated
    that I would go on to hear submissions and  remake  the  decision.   Mr
    Ayeni then made submissions placing weight on the fact that there  were
    no notes of the interview with the appellant which had taken place when
    the Immigration Officer  had  visited  his  home.  He  asserted,   with
    reference to the determinations of the Upper Tribunal in IS  (marriages
    of convenience) Serbia [2008] UKAIT 00031 and Papajorgji (EEA spouse  -
    marriage of convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT 00038 (IAC) that the burden
    of proof lay on the respondent to show that  this  was  a  marriage  of
    convenience and that that had not been discharged.  It was incumbent on
    the Secretary of State to produce the notes of interview and  this  had
    not been done and indeed there was no clear evidence  to  back  up  the
    respondent's allegations.

9.   I asked him why the appellant was not in court and he stated that  this
    had originally been a paper case and that that was the reason  why  the
    appellant was not in court and indeed why his wife was not in court.

Discussion

10.   I  first  considered  whether  or  not  the  Secretary  of  State  has
    discharged the burden of proof upon her to show that this is a marriage
    of convenience.

11.  I have considered the evidence before the Secretary  of  State  and  in
    particular the three pieces of evidence which were  sent  in  with  the
    application - the marriage certificate, the  tenancy  agreement  and  a
    Thames  Water  bill.   The  reality  is  that  those   documents   were
    insufficient to show that the appellant was in a genuine  marriage  and
    that when a visit was made to the  address  in  the  tenancy  agreement
    there was no evidence there that the appellant's wife was living  there
    and there was evidence from the person who answered the door  not  only
    that she did not live there but also that the appellant  did  not.   No
    further evidence was put to the Secretary of State after the  appellant
    was detained and indeed his wife, the Immigration Officer was told, was
    in Portugal.  I consider that that evidence is sufficient to show  that
    the Secretary of State had discharged the burden of proof upon her.

12.  The appellant was, of course, entitled to appeal and did  so.   Further
    documentary evidence was produced but the appellant took  the  decision
    not to appear at the  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Judge  nor,  of
    course, did he appear before me.   I  have  considered  the  additional
    documentary evidence which was put forward which included statements by
    the appellant and his wife.  The reality is that they  give  remarkably
    little detail of  their  married  life  and  although  there  are  some
    payslips for both the appellant and his wife and a bank  statement  for
    his wife those documents do not indicate that the appellant  is  living
    with his wife or that the marriage is genuine.  I consider  that  there
    is no evidential value  in  the  statements.   I  consider  that  I  am
    entitled to place weight on the fact that neither the appellant nor his
    wife gave evidence before me.  Had they done so they  might  have  been
    able to discharge the burden of proof which lies on  the  appellant  to
    show that this is not a marriage of convenience.  They did  not  do  so
    and I consider that the burden of proof has not been discharged.

13.  Although therefore I have set aside the decision of Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Majid I remake the decision and dismiss  this  appeal  on
    immigration grounds.  I would add that there is no evidence  before  me
    to indicate that the appellant is exercising  family  or  private  life
    here and I therefore do not consider that his rights under Article 8 of
    the ECHR are engaged.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed on immigration grounds.

The appeal is also dismissed on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

