
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA329842014
                                                                 ia329762014
                                                                 ia329792014
                                                                 ia329892014
                                                                 ia329932014
                                                                 ia329962014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26th April 2016                           |On 13th June 2016             |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY

                                   Between

                                     SIE
                                     KTE
                                    MJIA
                                    SRNE
                                     VOE
                                    NCAE
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms Manning (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Each Appellant has appealed, with permission,  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    against a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Hawden-Beal
    hereinafter "the judge") made after a hearing of  11th  November  2014,
    dismissing each appeal against decisions of the Respondent, all made on
    2nd August 2014, refusing to grant them further  leave  to  remain  and
    deciding to remove them from the UK.

 2. Nothing was said at the hearing regarding the making of  any  anonymity
    direction and no such  order  was  made,  in  respect  of  any  of  the
    Appellants, by the judge.  However, in the grounds of  application  for
    permission it was suggested that given that there  are  minor  children
    and there  is  a  sensitive  matter  concerning  a  medical  diagnosis,
    anonymity might be  appropriate.   I  agree  that  it  is  and,  hence,
    anonymity orders have been made in respect of each Appellant.

 3. The first two Appellants are married to each other.  The remaining four
    Appellants were, as at the date of the decisions of  the  Secretary  of
    State and, indeed, as at the date of  the  hearing  before  the  judge,
    minors.  Three of the four minor Appellants are  the  children  of  the
    first two Appellants and the other has been treated as a child  of  the
    family.  At the material times all of the Appellants were nationals  of
    Nigeria though I was told, at the hearing before me, that  one  of  the
    child Appellants (VOE) has now naturalised as  a  British  citizen.   A
    copy of her certificate of registration as a British citizen was handed
    to me at the hearing.  It was agreed, though, that that could not  have
    a bearing upon my decision concerning whether  or  not  the  judge  had
    erred in law in making her  decision.  Naturalisation  came  after  the
    judge had made her decision.

 4. The Appellants had all been in the UK for some years and,  indeed,  two
    of the child Appellants had been born here.

 5. As to health concerns, the male adult Appellant suffers  from  diabetes
    and the  female  adult  Appellant  has  been  diagnosed  as  being  HIV
    positive.

 6. The appeal came before the judge at a hearing of 11th November 2014  at
    which the parties were represented.  She heard evidence  from  the  two
    adult   Appellants   and   received   oral   submissions   from    each
    representative.

 7. In summarising the oral evidence the judge said this;

         "14. I heard oral evidence from the first appellant  who  confirmed
             her statement to me.  She said that she was not  currently  on
             medication for her HIV because when she was last on medication
             in 2008 it caused a  problem  with  her  liver  when  she  was
             pregnant with the sixth appellant and so her  consultant  told
             her to stop taking it  after  the  birth  to  prevent  further
             damage to her liver.  She is  currently  being  monitored  and
             will only be given medication as and when  she  needs  it  she
             said that she feels well in herself but has been advised to go
             and see her GP even  if  she  has  so  much  as  a  cold.   In
             July 2014 her viral load was 4500.  She cannot recall her CD4
             count but her GP had no concerns.

          15. She said that she came here in  2004  as  a  visitor  and  did
             intend to return but whilst here felt ill and saw a doctor who
             ran some tests because she was pregnant.  She then returned to
             Nigeria but when she came back in November 2004 she received a
             call on the UK sim card she had purchased previously  and  was
             told to see the GP immediately which was  when  she  was  told
             that she had HIV and had to have treatment immediately and  to
             be monitored so as not to pass it onto the child.    She  said
             that she does not pay for her treatment because she  was  told
             that it was free but she does pay for her prescriptions.   She
             said that she had not returned to Nigeria after  that  because
             she was told that her child needed  anti-retro  virals  for  a
             month, then had to be tested and re-rested at the  age  of  2.
             She said that although the child could  have  been  tested  in
             Nigeria she was concerned for the treatment  for  herself  and
             her child.  She said that the treatment in Nigeria is  not  of
             the same quality as here and she was not sure of the treatment
             she would receive there because access to such  treatment  was
             not easy.

          16. She confirmed that her husband had diabetes  and  she  thought
             that there was treatment for that condition in  Nigeria.   She
             said that she was aged 30 when she came to the UK  had  always
             lived  in  Nigeria  until  then  and  had  been  educated   to
             university standard before she  undertook  her  Youth  Service
             there.  She said that she had no direct relatives  in  the  UK
             only a cousin but had her two brothers and her widowed  mother
             in Nigeria who was cared for by her sister because her  mother
             was ill.  She said that she was in  contact  with  her  family
             because she asked how her mother was.

          17. She confirmed that English was an official language of Nigeria
             albeit that other states had different languages as  well  She
             confirmed that her children spoke English but  did  not  speak
             her native tongue she said that if the children went to school
             in her village they would have problems because  they  do  not
             speak the native language.  She said that  she  had  tried  to
             teach them that language but because they go  to  school  here
             and all their friends are English that  is  what  they  speak.
             She confirmed that when she came here she knew that she  would
             have to leave at some stage but  said  that  if  they  had  to
             return to Nigeria there is discrimination against  those  with
             HIV and the children will  be  tainted  by  her  health.   The
             children have been here all of  their  lives,  they  are  well
             settled and integrated here and she  did  not  know  what  she
             would do about their education in Nigeria because she did  not
             know where they would live  to  start  them  in  school.   She
             admitted that she had not paid for  the  children's  education
             here  in  the  UK.    She  said  that  friendships  could   be
             maintained by telephone and email only if she had access to  a
             telephone and email in Nigeria.

          18. She said that if they returned she could not live with her in-
             laws because they did not support her marriage  in  the  first
             place, would not accept her children and the house she grew up
             in only has three rooms, one which is used by her mother,  one
             by her sister and the other by her brother  when  he  and  his
             family come to visit.

          19. She said that she had lived in the Republic of Benin after she
             completed her Youth Service and after she  got  married.   She
             lived in her brother's  house  in  Lagos  after  her  marriage
             whilst her husband worked in  Benin  republic  and  has  never
             lived with her husband's family.  She said that she came  here
             for a break in 2004 because she was pregnant and her husband's
             family were putting pressure upon her and she came back in the
             November to get things  for  the  baby.   She  said  that  her
             husband had been funding his sister and her daughter but  when
             she could not cope, he took her in but could not have done  it
             without her because he would not  physically  have  cared  for
             her.  His sister is the only member of his family  who  speaks
             to her.

          20. I then heard from  the  second  appellant  who  confirmed  his
             statement to me and said that he and his  wife  had  tried  to
             teach the children their  native  language  but  they  do  not
             understand it or reply to it.  He said that he  had  lived  in
             the Republic of Benin for 8 years.  He went there in 1994, did
             his apprenticeship which finished in 1998 and  left  in  2002.
             He agreed that he came here on a business visa in May 2005 and
             intended to return to Nigeria  but  did  not  because  of  his
             wife's condition.  He agreed that his family and private  life
             have been built up here whilst he has been an over-stayer.  He
             confirmed that he had type II diabetes and has had  it  since
             2005.  He said that he could have treatment in Nigeria  if  he
             had the money.  He agreed that his wife's condition  could  be
             checked and monitored  in  Nigeria  but  the  availability  of
             treatment is not possible.

          21. He said that he came to the UK when he was  33,  having  lived
             and been educated in Nigeria until he  was  23  and  had  then
             lived in Benin when he had his own business in 1998.  He  said
             he had no family in the UK but had his parents and two sisters
             in Nigeria.  He said that his wife had never been accepted  by
             his family even though they let  her  care  for  their  grand-
             daughter because she is an Osu- an outcast.  He said that  his
             wife cares for his sister's child because the  sister  allowed
             her to and at that time his mother was ill and so  could  not.
             He said that his sister is  the  only  one  who  accepted  his
             marriage and that he is only in touch  with  her  because  she
             cares for their aged parents.

          22. He confirmed that his children spoke English which is  one  of
             the official languages of Nigeria but said that they could not
             go to school in Lagos because they were too young but if  they
             did they could be educated in English.  He said that  he  knew
             he would have to leave at some time when he came here  on  his
             visa and said that he did leave  after  his  first  visit  but
             stayed after that because he thought that  his  5 year  multi
             visit visa let him stay for 5 years.  He said that they could
             not go back to Nigeria because they have friends here  through
             the church and the children have family life  here.   He  said
             that they belonged to a Born Again church and he did not  know
             if there were similar churches in Nigeria.  They had not  paid
             for the children's education or his treatment because  his  GP
             told him diabetes treatment is free.   He  said  that  he  had
             shown his GP his passport and the GP had signed the form.

          23. He said that apart from staying on his 5 year visa because he
             thought that he could he also stayed  because  of  his  wife's
             condition and the monitoring of his child.  He  said  that  he
             did not leave after his child was given the all clear  because
             his wife is an Osu outcast.  He was warned not  to  marry  her
             and if he did return his parents would  not  accommodate  them
             and they would have nothing to do with them.  He said that  he
             is not well educated and the children will be tainted  and  so
             he decided to stay here.  He said that he could not return  to
             Benin to buy and sell as he did between 1998-2002  because  he
             has no home, no job and no family to  help  him.   Finally  he
             said that even though he thought his visa  let  him  stay  for
             5 years he went to see a solicitor in  2008  because  of  his
             wife's condition. "

 8. The judge then went on to consider whether any of  the  Appellants  met
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules or Article 8 of the  European
    Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) outside the Rules and said this;

         "24. Applying the relevant law  to  the  established  facts,  I  am
             satisfied that the appellants cannot meet the requirements  of
             Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE.  They either do not have the
             relevant status, have overstayed  their  visas  by  more  than
             28 days, they have not been here for long enough or  if  they
             have, it is reasonable to expect them to go back to Nigeria as
             a  family  unit,  especially  where  there  will  be  no  very
             significant  obstacles  to  them  re-integrating   back   into
             Nigerian society.

          25. As far as the children are concerned, the case of AZIMI-MOAYED
             (2013 UKUT 197(IAC)) makes it clear that the starting point is
             that it is in the children's best interests to stay with their
             parents which means that if their parents are to be removed so
             should they be because they are dependent upon them  and  part
             of their household.  Long residence in a  country  other  than
             the state of origin can lead  to  the  development  of  social
             cultural and educational ties which it would be  inappropriate
             to disrupt  in  the  absence  of  compelling  reasons  to  the
             contrary.  The Tribunal also found that the seven  years  from
             the age of four are likely to be more significant to  a  child
             that the first seven years of life because very young children
             are focussed on their parents rather than their peers.

          26. I have also considered the case of ZOUMBAS (2103  UKSC74)  and
             find that in this appeal the third appellant is now  aged 17,
             the fourth is aged 6, the fifth 12 and the sixth 9 years of
             age.  The third and fifth appellants were born in Nigeria  and
             the other two were born here in the UK and,  it  is  accepted,
             have known no other life  than here.  But that life  here  has
             been established when their parents and they had no  right  to
             be here, be educated or even medicated here.   I  accept  that
             the children are not at fault  here  and  are  dependent  upon
             their parents and bound by their decisions but the bottom line
             is that it is not unreasonable for them  all  to  go  back  to
             Nigeria as one family unit.  The parents  can  be  treated  in
             their home country for their conditions, albeit I suspect, not
             to the same standard or cost as here in the UK;  there  is  no
             evidence before me to say that the children have  any  medical
             needs, dependencies or abilities specially catered for by  the
             schools over and above those which children usually have  and,
             given that they all speak English, which the parents accept is
             a language in which they can be  educated  in  Nigeria,  their
             education will not suffer.  The eldest  child  is  of  an  age
             whereby she is likely to want to  further  her  education  and
             returning to Nigeria will not stop her because she  can  apply
             to return to the UK as a student.

          27. As far as returning to Nigeria  is  concerned  the  appellants
             claim that they will not be  able  to  live  with  the  second
             appellants family because the first appellant is  an  Osu-  an
             outcast and their marriage has not been accepted by his family
             and their children will be shunned.   The  second  appellant's
             sister has accepted the marriage because the  third  appellant
             is her daughter and is being cared for by the first and second
             appellants.   The  objective   evidence   submitted   by   the
             appellants as to the issues  facing  the  Osu  relate  to  the
             eastern part of Nigeria whereas the first appellant said that,
             after her marriage she lived with her brother in  Lagos  which
             is in the western part of Nigeria.  The  first  appellant  was
             not that discriminated against that she  was  not  allowed  to
             attend university  or  undertake  her  Youth Service.   I  am
             therefore satisfied that even if there  is  still  pockets  of
             such discrimination, it did not  affect  the  first  appellant
             whilst she was living in Lagos and there is no reason why  the
             family cannot go and live in  that  very  populous  city  upon
             their return.

          28. As far as discrimination over the  first  appellant's  medical
             condition is concerned, I do not accept that that  is  a  good
             reason for not removing the family back to Nigeria.  The first
             appellant is not on any medication and has  not  been  on  any
             since 2008.  Her condition is monitored closely and  there  is
             no reason why that cannot continue in Nigeria as she  and  the
             second appellant have accepted.  I therefore find that,  based
             on the evidence before me that there is treatment available in
             Nigeria  for  both  of  the  first  and   second   appellant's
             conditions, the children can continue with their education  in
             English in Nigeria, there is no family here  in  the  UK  with
             which they  have  a  close  relationship,  their  family  life
             appears, on the evidence before  me  to  be  centred  on  each
             other,  a  life  which  will  continue  in  Nigeria  and   any
             friendship they have built up whilst  here  can  be  continued
             using modern methods of communication.  I therefore find  that
             the appellants have not discharged the burden of proof and not
             met all the requirements of Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE.

          29. That then, according to the respondent,  is  the  end  of  the
             matter because she considers the immigration  Rules  to  be  a
             complete code insofar as  the  consideration  of  private  and
             family life is concerned.  However the case of  SHAHZAD  (2014
             UKUT 85 (IAC)) makes it clear that where a particular Rule has
             an  express  requirement  to  have   regard   to   exceptional
             circumstances and other factors, that rule is to be considered
             to  be  a  complete  code.   If  there  is  no  such   express
             requirement 'the approach in NAGRE (2013 EWHC 720) and GULSHAN
             2013 UKUT 640 (IAC)) should be followed; i.e.  after  applying
             the rules, only if there may  be  arguably  good  grounds  for
             granting leave to remain outside  them  is  it  necessary  for
             Article 8 purposes to go on to  consider  whether  there  are
             compelling circumstances  not  sufficiently  recognised  under
             them'.

           30.  There  is  no  express  mechanism  under  Rule 276ADE  for
             exceptional circumstances to be considered unlike, for example
             Appendix FM which has EX.1.  Therefore I  have  to  adopt  the
             approach of NAGRE and GULSHAN and find there  to  be  arguably
             good grounds for granting leave to remain  outside  the  rules
             and then go on to   consider  whether  there  are   compelling
             circumstances meriting  a  grant  of  leave  to  remain  under
             Article 8.

          31. The case of  MM(2014 EWCA Civ 985) at paragraph 128  seems  to
             question the utility of imposing this intermediate test on the
             basis that if the appellant cannot satisfy the  rules,  either
             there is or is not a further article 8 claim.  For the sake of
             completeness I have considered whether the appellants have  an
             article 8 claim as per RAZGAR (2004 UKHL 27).  I am satisfied
             that the appellants do enjoy family  life  together  but  that
             family life can be continued in Nigeria, to  where  they  will
             all be removed together.  I am  further  satisfied  that  they
             have established a private life here by virtue of  the  length
             of time that they have been here and that their  removal  will
             interfere with that private life.   The  decisions  to  remove
             them are in accordance with the law because they  cannot  meet
             the requirements of  the  rules  and  are  necessary  for  the
             maintenance of effective immigration control and the  economic
             well-being of the country.  That leaves  the  question  as  to
             whether the decisions are proportionate  and  I  am  satisfied
             that they are.

          32. I am satisfied that the second appellant knew full  well  that
             his visa did not allow him to stay here  for  5 years  as  he
             claimed because he had been issued a 6 month visa and then  a
             2 year visa before the 5 year visa and had been  to  the  UK
             previously and had left within the required time limit.  I  am
             satisfied that he came here knowing full well  that  he  would
             not be going back.  I am also satisfied that  when  the  first
             appellant came here in August 2004, at five  months  pregnant
             she suspected that she was not well because, if she  was  only
             here on holiday and had no close family here why would she buy
             a UK sim card?  Who was she going to call here?   If  she  was
             going to use it to call her husband back in Nigeria, the  cost
             of those calls from the UK on  a  UK  sim  card  would  be  as
             expensive as calling him from the UK on a Nigerian sim card.

          33. The fact that she suspected she was ill is  confirmed  by  the
             fact that with 8 weeks or less to go before she  was  due  to
             give birth, she came back to the  UK  to  go  shopping.   From
             personal knowledge I know that airlines will not carry a woman
             who is more than 28 weeks pregnant at the date of her  return
             journey unless she has a letter from her GP to confirm that in
             his opinion there is no reason to expect  an  early  onset  of
             labour.  I am satisfied that, when the  first  appellant  came
             here in November 2004, she knew perfectly well that  she  was
             awaiting tests results from her GP and was going to stay  here
             until she gave birth.  She came back to get those results  and
             to give birth here in the UK.  I am  further  satisfied  that,
             having got the all clear for the sixth appellant's  health  in
             2007, she and her husband then went on to have  another  child
             here in the UK in 2008, knowing full well that they would have
             to stay until that child was 2 years old to be finally tested
             for HIV and to be given the all clear.  The first  and  second
             appellants are health tourists and nothing more.

          34. They have confirmed that there are treatments and  medications
             available for their conditions in Nigeria but that  they  will
             have to pay for them and that they will not  be  of  the  same
             standard and quality as in the  UK.   I  have  had  regard  to
             section 117B  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
             Act 2002 and am satisfied that the appellants have established
             their  private  lives  when  their  immigration   status   was
             precarious  in  that  they  knew  full  well  that  they   had
             overstayed their visas.  I am further satisfied that they have
             been  a  burden  upon  society  in  that  they  had  had  free
             healthcare  for  themselves  and  their  children   and   free
             education for the children, to which they were  not  entitled.
             I place very little weight upon their private  lives  here  in
             the UK and am satisfied that the decision to  remove  them  is
             proportionate.

          35. I am further satisfied that if the respondent  had  considered
             the application solely under Article 8 as per EDGEHILL  (2014
             EWCA Civ 2) the result would still have been the  same.   The
             appellants, like the second appellant in that case, are a long
             way from meeting the requirements for  a  grant  of  leave  to
             remain under the long residence rule of 276B and therefore the
             decisions, whether under the Immigration Rules as  they  stand
             now or under RAZGAR test would be the same.  I find that  that
             decision to remove the appellants will not  place  the  UK  in
             breach  of  its  obligations  under  the  1950  Human   Rights
             Convention."

 9. Hence, the appeal failed.  That was not, though, the end of the  matter
    because an application for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
    was lodged.  The grounds offered at that stage were quite extensive but
    permission to appeal was refused by a Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    on 22nd January 2015.  The  application  was  renewed  with  the  Upper
    Tribunal but on only one ground which was to the effect that  the  long
    residence of the child Appellants in the UK had not been properly taken
    account of.  On 1st May 2015 a  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  granted
    permission and, in so doing, said this;

         "1.  The Appellants, citizens  of  Nigeria,  appealed  against  the
             Respondent's  decisions  to  make  immigration  decisions  and
             removal  directions  against   them   having   refused   their
             applications for further leave to remain.

         2.   The family's appeals were brought on the  grounds  that  their
             lengthy residence in this country, taking account of the  best
             interests of the children, meant  that  they  could  meet  the
             requirements of the Immigration Rules at Rule 276ADE  in  that
             at least three of the children had lived here  for  more  than
             seven years and their  removal  would  be  unreasonable.   The
             First-tier Tribunal (FTTJ Hawden-Beal) dismissed  the  appeal,
             finding that the family's links here were  not  sufficient  to
             make the children's return abroad unreasonable.

         3.   The grounds argue that the length of residence, three  of  the
             children having lived here for ten years,  are  sufficient  to
             render their removal unreasonable.  The witness  statement  of
             [MJIA], aged 17, explains that she has extensively  integrated
             into the community via activities with the church and a  youth
             club and mentors her young friends in various activities here.
              This provides an evidence-based case that she is  established
             in  this  country  and  she  refers  to   her   sisters   also
             participating alongside her, sufficient to establish the  kind
             of links identified in  Azimi-Moayed  [2013]  UKUT  197  (IAC)
             where the President explained that lengthy residence is likely
             to  lead  to  ties  of  such  strength  that  should  not   be
             interrupted absent compelling reasons.

         4.   This material needed reasoned engagement before the FTTJ could
             lawfully  conclude  that  the  family's   removal   would   be
             reasonable, whether that enquiry is conducted within the Rules
             by reference to Rule 276ADE or outside the Rules having regard
             to the Section 117B criteria.  Whilst the FTTJ  considers  the
             prospects of the children  integrating  into  Nigeria,  it  is
             arguable that material considerations were overlooked  by  way
             of the strength of their ties in the United Kingdom.

         5.   On balance there is sufficient here to make  out  an  arguable
             case that the judge's decision is unlawful and  I  accordingly
             grant permission on the single renewed Ground of Appeal  which
             complains of inadequate treatment of  the  children's  lengthy
             residence."

10. There was a hearing before me for the purpose of a consideration as  to
    whether or not the judge had  erred  in  law.   Representation  at  the
    hearing was as indicated above.

11. Ms Manning, for the Appellants, indicated she would rely only upon  the
    single Ground of Appeal which had been put to the Upper Tribunal.   She
    provided,  as  indicated,  a  copy  of  the  registration   certificate
    confirming that VOE is now a naturalised British citizen.  She said the
    judge had taken what she described as a "very minimalistic approach" at
    paragraphs  25  and  26  of  her  determination  when  considering  the
    interests of and the private life of the child Appellants.   The  judge
    had not adopted a balanced approach and  had  failed  to  look  at  any
    positive factors weighing in  favour  of  them.   She  made  particular
    reference to paragraph 3 of the witness statement of MJIA, who  is  the
    Appellant who has been treated as a child of the family, which was said
    to evidence her integration within the UK.  Posing there,  paragraph  3
    reads as follows;

         "3.  I have made lots of friends here and has  integrated  so  well
             here in the UK.  Growing up in the UK  has  been  a  rewarding
             experience and has encouraged me to be involved  in  my  local
             community and help out where I can."

    and the witness statement goes on  to  indicate  that  she  has  little
    recollection of her childhood in Nigeria and that she has been involved
    in church and community activities in the  UK.   Ms  Manning  submitted
    that the judge had attached no weight at all to the  private  lives  of
    the minor Appellants and that was contrary to the  approach  which  had
    been set out in PD and Others (Article 8 - conjoined family claims) Sri
    Lanka [2016] UKUT 00108 (IAC).  It was  apparent  from  what  was  said
    therein  that  what  is  required  is  a  careful  and   fact-sensitive
    exploration of relevant matters.  The judge  had  failed  to  do  that.
    Further, she had effectively taken points against the child  Appellants
    on the basis of the adverse view she had  taken  concerning  the  adult
    Appellants and the view that they were "health tourists".

12. Mr Mills, replying on behalf of  the  Respondent,  submitted  that  the
    judge had properly acknowledged the case which  had  been  before  her.
    She had set  out  relevant  facts  including  the  ages  of  the  minor
    Appellants and how long they had been here.  So the judge had  relevant
    factors in mind.  Paragraph 26 of the determination was, said Mr Mills,
    the key.  Here the judge had recognised that there would be no  medical
    or educational difficulties caused to the minor Appellants if they  had
    to return to Nigeria.  Whilst it is true that the judge had not set out
    the detail contained in the respective witness statements of the  minor
    Appellants it is difficult to see how or why that  would  have  made  a
    difference.

13. Ms Manning, in closing, reiterated her contention that  the  judge  had
    failed to go into  the  detail  of  the  private  lives  of  the  minor
    Appellants at all.  She had given no weight  to  the  matter  of  their
    integration within the UK.

14. I conclude that the decision of the judge did not involve the making of
    an error of law.  I can quite see that a different judge on a different
    day might have reached a different outcome  but  that,  of  itself,  is
    incapable of demonstrating legal error.

15. The judge properly considered the appeals with reference to what  seems
    to have been the only potentially relevant Immigration Rule  (paragraph
    276ADE) of the Immigration Rules and  Article  8  of  the  ECHR.   With
    respect to the child Appellants, and it is only the  judge's  treatment
    of those Appellants which is now criticised and challenged, she decided
    that one of them had not been in the  UK  for  a  sufficiently  lengthy
    period to meet the requirements of 276ADE and  that  whilst  the  other
    three had, it would be reasonable to expect them to return  to  Nigeria
    as a family unit with  their  parents  (paragraphs  8  and  24  of  the
    determination).  As to Article 8, the judge concluded that the  removal
    decisions which have been made in respect of all of the Appellants were
    proportionate (paragraph 31 of the determination).

16. The judge was aware of the lengthy (and there is no dispute  that  they
    are lengthy) periods of UK residence which  the  minor  Appellants  had
    had.  Such residence was acknowledged by the judge at paragraphs 8  and
    11 of the determination with the judge noting at paragraph 11 that  the
    four minor Appellants had sought permission to remain in the UK on  the
    basis that they have been in the country for between six and ten years.
     So I accept the point made by Mr Mills that the judge  must  have  had
    that in mind.  The judge was told in oral evidence (paragraph 17 of the
    determination) something of the difficulties it was claimed  the  minor
    Appellants would have in returning to Nigeria and  something  of  their
    integration in the UK.  Again, therefore, it seems to me that the judge
    must have had that in mind too.  At paragraph 26 of  the  determination
    the judge noted the age of the respective minor Appellants and that two
    of them had been born in the UK and had, as she put it, "known no other
    life than here".  Again, therefore, the  judge  had  those  matters  in
    mind.

17.  Against  the  above  background  I  do  not  accept  that,  when   the
    determination is read as a whole, it can properly be said,  as  did  Ms
    Manning, that the judge's approach was  "very  minimalistic"  when  she
    came to consider the situation of the minor Appellants.  It is true the
    judge did not go into particular detail in analysing the  contents  of,
    for example, the school reports regarding the minor Appellants  or  the
    witness statements  of  the  two  elder  ones  which  talked  of  their
    friendships  and,  in  the  case  of  one  of  them,  that  Appellant's
    involvement with a church.  However, in truth, those witness statements
    were, in any event, relatively brief and insubstantial.  I am satisfied
    that the judge did have a full appreciation of and did have full regard
    to their long residence and the fact that the two  youngest  Appellants
    had been born in  the  UK.   As  I  say,  that  is  apparent  when  the
    determination is read as a whole.  So, it does  not  seem  to  me  that
    there was a failure to weigh competing matters in the  balance  as  has
    been suggested.  However, the judge found it not unreasonable,  in  the
    context of  the  Rules  and  Article  8  insofar  as  that  links  with
    proportionality, for all of the Appellants to return to  Nigeria  as  a
    single family unit.  It was open to the  judge,  in  this  context,  to
    attach weight to  the  lack  of  evidence  suggesting  that  the  minor
    Appellants  had  any  particular  medical  needs,  that  they  had  any
    particular educational needs and that they could all speak  English,  a
    language widely used in Nigeria.

18. As to PD and Others, I am taken specifically to paragraph  22  of  that
    decision.  Part of that quotes from a different decision of  the  Upper
    Tribunal being JR and Others (Section 55 duty) [2014]  UKUT  552  (IAC)
    which talks of the necessity of conducting a careful examination of all
    relevant information and factors relating to a child's best  interests.
    It is that which Ms Manning says the judge failed to do.   I  was  also
    referred to  paragraph  40  which  talks  of  the  application  of  the
    reasonableness test being one involving a balance of all material facts
    and considerations.  Ms Manning specifically submitted that  there  had
    not been a balanced consideration, as I understand it with  respect  of
    the Rules and with respect to Article 8, because of what was said to be
    the  judge's  failure  to  look  at  the  positive  factors  from   the
    perspective of the minor Appellants.  It does seem to me,  though,  for
    the reasons already given, that the judge did  conduct  a  sufficiently
    detailed exercise and that  she  did  balance  competing  factors.   It
    cannot be said, despite the arguments  made  on  behalf  of  the  minor
    Appellants seeming to come quite close to this,  that  the  periods  of
    residence in the UK were such as to mean no other  outcome  apart  from
    the allowing of the appeals was permissible.

19. As I say, I can quite appreciate that  a  different  judge  might  have
    reached a different view but I am unable to conclude that, in  reaching
    the conclusions that she did, this judge erred in law.  Accordingly,  I
    am not able to set aside her  decision  with  respect  to  any  of  the
    Appellants.  That decision shall stand.

20. I do note, though, the granting of British citizenship to  one  of  the
    Appellants as referred to above.  That, as was agreed at  the  hearing,
    had come too late to  have  relevance  to  my  decision  it  not  being
    something which  was  before  the  judge.   However,  of  course,  that
    Appellant will not now have to leave the UK whatever is to be  required
    of the other Appellants.  If that Appellant does stay then  there  will
    inevitably be the splitting of the family and the fact  they  were  all
    likely to be removed together was  clearly  a  factor  in  the  judge's
    decision which weighed against them.   It  is  possible,  therefore,  I
    suppose, that fresh Article 8 applications, in the  new  circumstances,
    might be made but that is not, of course, a matter for  me.   I  simply
    elude to the possibility by way of a final observation.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law.  That decision shall stand.

Anonymity

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
all granted anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 13th June 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.


Signed                              Date 13th June 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway
