
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32173/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 12th March 2014                              |On 13th March 2014         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN

                                   Between

                         MS FAUSTINA IFEYINWA OKWARA
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Garrod (instructed by Addison & Khan,
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal, with  permission,  against
    the  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal   (Judge   Braybrook)
    promulgated on 3rd January 2013 by which it dismissed  the  Appellant's
    appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse her leave to
    remain as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant.

 2. The grounds seeking permission to appeal argue that the Judge erred  in
    finding that the Barclays Bank letter submitted  with  the  application
    did not meet the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  (paragraph
    41SD(a)(i) or(ii)), when another document - a document  signed  by  the
    owner of funds did comply with paragraph 41SD (b)(i) and (ii) which was
    an alternative to paragraph 41SD (a) (i) or (ii).

 3. That was the basis upon which permission to appeal was granted. However
    the application was submitted on 12th December 2012 with  the  Barclays
    Bank letter.  The sworn statement relied upon is only  dated  8th  July
    2013.  Accordingly it did not  comply  with  the  Rules  requiring  the
    evidence to be submitted with the application, nor can it be taken into
    account at the hearing (S.85A(4) Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002). We now have clear guidance form the Court of Appeal that  an
    Appellant must produce the evidence with the application and it is  not
    acceptable to produce it at any time before a decision is made (  Raju,
    Khatel and Others v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 754).

 4. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.




Signed                              Date 12th March 2014



Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
