
[pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32071/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15th October 2015                 |On 9th November 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AIQ
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Smart (Home Office Senior Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    In person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the Appellant in this appeal to the Upper Tribunal  as
    the Secretary of State.   I  shall  refer  to  the  Respondent  as  the
    Claimant.  The Secretary of State has appealed, with permission, to the
    Upper Tribunal in respect of a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Jerromes)  promulgated  on  11th  February  2015,  allowing  the
    Claimant's appeal against a decision of 30th July 2014 refusing to vary
    leave to remain and deciding to remove  her  from  the  UK  by  way  of
    directions.

 2. By way of background, the Claimant came to the UK as a student.  Having
    done so she formed a relationship with a British citizen, whom I  shall
    simply refer to as her partner, and the two have had a child  together,
    (S),who was born on 5th November 2014 and who is, of course, British.

 3. She and her partner married in the UK on 31st July 2013.  There  is  no
    dispute about the fact that they have a genuine relationship.

 4. In the circumstances the Claimant decided to apply to  vary  leave,  on
    the basis of her marriage, with a view to settlement in  the  UK.   The
    Secretary of State, though, concluded  that  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules, including the requirements contained within EX.1  of
    Appendix FM were not met.   Further,  the  Respondent  considered  that
    there were no exceptional circumstances such as to justify a  grant  of
    leave on the basis of Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights (ECHR) outside the Rules.

 5. The Claimant's appeal  was  heard  on  3rd  February  2015.   She  gave
    evidence as did her partner.  She represented herself and the Secretary
    of State was represented by Mr Smith, a Home Office Presenting Officer.

 6. In the determination the First-tier Tribunal considered the reasons for
    refusal, the relevant Immigration Rules and Article 8 of the ECHR.   It
    noted that, so far as the Rules were concerned, he was  constrained  to
    assess matters as at the  date  of  application  but  said  that,  with
    respect to  Article  8  outside  the  Rules,  it  should  consider  the
    circumstances as they were at the date  of  the  hearing.   Nobody  has
    quibbled with that.

 7. In dealing with Article 8 outside the Rules it said this;

         "22.1    In view of my conclusion that the Appellant does not  meet
                the requirements of the Rules, I have gone  on  to  consider
                Article 8.  For these purposes I must consider the facts  as
                they exist at the date of the hearing.  Since  the  date  of
                the  Respondent's  decision,  there  has   been   one   very
                significant change in the Appellant's circumstances in  that
                she has become a parent of a British citizen,  [S],  who  is
                now 3 months old.  In addition both [the  partner]  and  the
                Appellant are now in regular employment.   I  must  consider
                these factors as part of my consideration as to  whether  or
                not  the  Appellant's  application  raises  or  contain  any
                circumstances which, consistent with the  right  to  respect
                for private and family life contained  in  Article  8  ECHR,
                might warrant consideration of a grant of leave to remain in
                the UK outside the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

         22.2     Adopting the five step approach in Razgar:

                (i)    The decision interferes with the private  and  family
                    life of the Appellant and of [the partner]  and  [S]  as
                    they wish to stay together as a family unit in the UK.

                (ii)   That interference is more than technical or  academic
                    and Article 8 is engaged.

                (iii)  The decision is in accordance with the law being made
                    under  the  terms  of  statute  and  Immigration   Rules
                    approved by parliament.

                (iv)   The decision is in pursuit of a legitimate aim:  fair
                    and consistent immigration control.

                (v)    Based on an overall consideration of the facts of the
                    case as they stand at  the  date  of  the  hearing,  the
                    decision is not proportionate  to  the  legitimate  aims
                    pursued and interference in family and private  life  in
                    this particular case  is  not  necessary  for  effective
                    immigration control even when regard  is  had  to  s117B
                    (public interest).  I have specifically  considered  the
                    fact that the Appellant and [the  partner]  married  and
                    had a child at a time when the  Appellant's  immigration
                    status was precarious  and  I  have  heeded  Mr  Smith's
                    submission that in accordance  with  s117B(5)  I  should
                    place little weight on this but on  the  other  hand,  a
                    child should not be blamed for matters for which  he  or
                    she is not responsible,  such  as  the  conduct  of  his
                    parents.

                I have also considered that [S] is only  3  months  old,  is
                obviously not  in  education  and  there  are  no  potential
                medical or other difficulties that I have been made aware of
                which would make it difficult for him to adapt  to  life  in
                Pakistan.

                However, I am satisfied that despite these factors there are
                substantial grounds for believing that refusal of  leave  to
                remain would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences  not
                just for the  Appellant  but  also  for  [the  partner]  and
                particularly for [S] (both of  whom  are  British  citizens)
                taking into account the following:

                (a)    As a British citizen, [S] has rights  which  he  will
                    not be able to exercise if he moves to Pakistan; he will
                    lose the advantages of growing up and being educated  in
                    Britain.

                (b)    It would be in [S's] best interests to be brought  up
                    by both his parents; it is not  therefore  in  his  best
                    interests to disrupt  his  present  circumstances  by  a
                    forced relocation  of  his  mother  to  Pakistan  or  by
                    rupturing his  relationship  with  his  mother  (or  his
                    father) as a result of  separation.   It  would  not  be
                    reasonable  to  expect  [the  partner]  to  relocate  to
                    Pakistan; he has been in the UK for twenty years,  is  a
                    British citizen, is working full-time and  has  siblings
                    in the UK who he sees on a regular basis.

                (c)    There was no indication how long an  application  for
                    entry clearance might take  if  the  Appellant  were  to
                    return to Pakistan and seek entry clearance from there.

                (d)    Both the Appellant  and  [the  partner]  are  now  in
                    regular work and the Appellant has ambitions to  qualify
                    as a lawyer  which  is  consistent  with  her  level  of
                    education; if she remains, it is likely that the  couple
                    will continue to be self-supporting in  the  short  term
                    and in the long term and the family is unlikely to be  a
                    burden on taxpayers.

                (e)    The Appellant is integrated in UK society and  speaks
                    good English.

                (f)    Whilst the Appellant may be able to fend for  herself
                    in Pakistan, it is far from clear that she would be able
                    to find suitable employment to support herself  and  her
                    family; I accept her evidence that her family disapprove
                    of her marriage to [the husband] and cannot be relied on
                    to give her support if she returns.

                In all the circumstances, and in particular bearing in  mind
                the best interests of [S] (whose best interests as  a  child
                and a British citizen are not outweighed by  the  cumulative
                effect  of   other   considerations),   removal   would   be
                disproportionate  to  the  legitimate  aim  of   maintaining
                immigration control in the particular case of the  Appellant
                and her family.  If it were not  for  [S's]  interests,  the
                balance in my decision would be different."

 8. The Secretary of State applied for and obtained permission to appeal to
    the Upper Tribunal.  Such was granted by  a  Designated  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal in these terms:

         "3.  The First-tier Judge concluded that the Appellant did not meet
             the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules  but  went  on  to
             consider the appeal under Article 8  in  accordance  with  the
             Razgar guidelines.  The judge took into account the fact  that
             the Appellant's child was obviously not in education and there
             were no potential medical or other  difficulties  which  would
             make it difficult for  him  to  adapt  to  life  in  Pakistan.
             However, the judge concluded that despite those factors  there
             were substantial grounds for believing that the decision under
             appeal would result in unjustifiably harsh  consequences,  not
             just for the Appellant but also  for  her  husband  and  their
             child.

         4.   Grounds  submitted  by  the  Respondent's  representatives  in
             support of an application for permission to appeal argue  that
             the First-tier Judge made several  material  misdirections  in
             law regarding Article 8.  In the first place, it is  submitted
             that  the  First-tier  Judge  had  no  regard  to  the  public
             interest.  The Appellant cannot satisfy the Immigration  Rules
             (a fundamental basis of effective immigration  control).   The
             grounds assert that public interest requires  the  Appellant's
             removal by virtue of  Section  117B(i)  of  the  2002  Act  as
             amended.  The First-tier  Judge  failed  to  acknowledge  that
             citizenship is not a trump card and has focused entirely  upon
             his parents rather than upon the child himself.  It is pointed
             out that the First-tier Judge noted that if it  were  not  for
             the  child's  best  interests  then  the  decision  would   be
             different.  It is submitted that  this  elevates  the  child's
             interests   to   the   primary   consideration   and,   absent
             consideration of the public interest, the conclusion to  allow
             the appeal must therefore flaw.

         5.   The grounds also argue that the fact that there is no evidence
             that the Appellant would be able to find  suitable  employment
             in Pakistan is irrelevant.  It  is  the  Appellant's  case  to
             establish that her family and comparable private  life,  could
             not be reasonably enjoyed in  Pakistan.   The  grounds  submit
             there is no evidence to show that she would not have been able
             to obtain employment.

         6.   I am satisfied that  the  grounds  have  identified  arguable,
             material errors of law in  the  First-tier  Judge's  reasoning
             with regard to the  application  of  Article  8.   Accordingly
             permission is granted and all the grounds may be argued."

 9. There was a hearing before the Upper Tribunal and the  initial  purpose
    of that hearing was to consider whether or not the judge had  erred  in
    law such that his determination ought to be set aside.  Mr  Smart,  for
    the Secretary of State, referred me to the cases of AM (S 117B)  Malawi
    [2015] UKUT 260 (IAC), SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387 and Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department v Hayat (Pakistan) [2012]  EWCA  Civ  10.
    Having found that the requirements of the Immigration  Rules  were  met
    the  First-tier  Tribunal,  said  Mr  Smart,  should  have  looked  for
    compelling circumstances and, in their absence, should not have allowed
    the appeal.  It had not had sufficient regard to the importance of  the
    maintenance of effective immigration control and  to  the  requirements
    contained in Section 117B of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002.  It had further erred in using the child's citizenship as  "a
    trump card".  It had erred yet again in treating the Claimant's ability
    to maintain herself and to speak English as  matters  weighing  in  her
    favour.  That was the wrong approach in light of the  decision  in  AM.
    The Claimant argued that the First-tier Tribunal had made  the  correct
    decision on the facts.  I indicated to the parties I would  reserve  my
    decision as to the error of law issue.   Having  considered  matters  I
    have concluded that the First-tier Tribunal did not err in law and that
    its decision shall, therefore, stand.  I set out my reasoning below.

10. The First-tier Tribunal was cognizant with the requirement to take into
    account the public interest aspects of the case.  It mentioned it on  a
    number  of  occasions  at  paragraphs  7  and  22.2(iv),  22.2(v)   and
    22.2(v)(f) of the determination.  It also  referred,  specifically,  to
    Section 117B of the 2002 Act.  It cannot be  said,  in  general  terms,
    therefore, that it  had  no  regard  to  the  public  interest  in  the
    maintenance of an effective immigration control as the grounds contend.

11. Mr Smart took me to various provisions contained within 117A  and  117B
    of the 2002 Act.  In particular, he stressed that,  following  what  is
    contained in those sections, the maintenance of  effective  immigration
    controls is in the public interest and that  little  weight  should  be
    given to a private life established by a person at  a  time  when  that
    person's immigration status is precarious.   That  latter  point  stems
    from the wording of Section 117B(5) which it is  clear  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had in mind because it  was  expressly  referred  to  when  it
    summarised, at paragraph 19 of the determination, the submissions which
    have been made on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  and  was  then
    referred to again when it was explaining the conclusions  at  paragraph
    22.2(v).  It  expressly said that the submission made on behalf of  the
    Secretary of State with respect to that provision  had  been  "heeded".
    So, it is right to  say  that  it  had   weighed  in  the  balance  the
    importance of the interests of immigration control and the  requirement
    to attach only little weight to the private  life  aspects  bearing  in
    mind that although the Claimant's residence in the UK was at all  times
    lawful, it was precarious because she only ever had  limited  leave  to
    remain.

12. The grounds contended, as did Mr Smart before me, that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had wrongly treated the citizenship of the child  as  being  a
    trump card and had elevated the question of the  child's  interests  to
    being the primary consideration.  However, it was appropriate for it to
    take into account in the context of the Article  8  assessment  outside
    the Rules, the interests of the British citizen child.  The  judge  had
    referred, in this context, to the judgments  in  ZH  (Tanzania)  [2011]
    UKSC 4 and Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74 and had observed;

         "The best interests of  a  child  form  an  integral  part  of  the
         proportionality assessment under Article 8 and those best interests
         must be a primary consideration, although there will not always  be
         the only primary consideration  and  do  not  themselves  have  the
         status of the paramount consideration.  The best interests  of  the
         child  may  be  outweighed  by  the  cumulative  effect  of   other
         considerations."

13. That does not seem to me to amount to the  judge  mistakenly  directing
    himself to the effect that the interests of the child  is  the  primary
    consideration  and  Mr  Smart,  when  referred  to  that  part  of  the
    determination, was not able to submit that those words, of  themselves,
    amounted to any  misdirection.   He  did,  though,  as  again  did  the
    grounds,  submit  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had,   nevertheless,
    effectively  treated  the  child's  interests  as  being  the   primary
    consideration and stressed that it had indicated, in the closing  words
    of the determination, that if it had not been for the child's interests
    the decision would have been different. Certainly, it did say  that  at
    paragraph 22.2(v)(f).

14. The First-tier Tribunal, though, was not saying that the  interests  of
    the child were the paramount consideration or  were  the  only  primary
    consideration.  What was  being  said,  in  effect,  was  that  on  the
    particular facts of this case  the  interests  of  the  child  were  an
    important consideration which happened to tip the balance in favour  of
    the Claimant.  It seems to me that is it was saying  and  that  it  was
    entitled to say  that.   Other  factors  were  clearly  considered  too
    because they were referred to in the part of the determination which  I
    have set out above.  No error of law is identified.

15. The grounds also contended that there was no evidence to show that  the
    Claimant would not be able to obtain employment in Pakistan.  The First-
    tier Tribunal had heard the Claimant's oral evidence on the  point  and
    had said that it was "far from clear" that she would be  able  to  find
    suitable employment to support herself and her  family.   Having  found
    her to be credible it was entitled to take that view and  the  grounds,
    it seems to me, represent no more than a disagreement with that.

16. Mr Smart sought to make an additional point, not  referred  to  in  the
    grounds, to the effect  that  the  first-tier  Tribunal  had  erred  in
    positively weighing in the Claimant's favour her ability to financially
    support herself and her ability to speak English.  I agree that in  AM,
    it was decided that a Claimant can obtain no positive right to a  grant
    of leave to remain on these bases whatever the degree  of  his  or  her
    fluency in English or the strength of his or her  financial  resources.
    However, it does not seem to me that it judge erred in  that  way.   It
    did note that it was likely that the couple would continue to be  self-
    supporting and unlikely to be  a  burden  on  taxpayers  and  that  the
    Claimant was integrated into UK society and does  speak  good  English.
    However, it did not say anything to indicate  that  those  factors  had
    been treated as positive ones weighing in favour  of  the  Claimant  as
    opposed to them being treated as matters which did  not  weigh  against
    her.

17. Essentially, I  consider  that,  whilst  from  some  perspectives  this
    decision might seem on the facts to be a  somewhat  generous  one,  the
    grounds represent no more than a disagreement with the outcome.  I  can
    quite see that a different  First-tier  Tribunal  might  have  resolved
    matters against this Claimant but that does not mean an  error  of  law
    was made by this one. I conclude, therefore, that  the  decision  shall
    stand.

Conclusions

The making of the decision by the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error of law.

The decision shall stand.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did make an order pursuant to Rule 45(4)(i)  of  the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.   I  am  not  wholly
sure that such an order was necessary but, since nothing was said  about  it
before me, I shall continue that order pursuant to Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

