
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/32366/2013
                                                               IA/32368/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 05 March 2014                                |On 20 March 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                            NIXSON JEKAB ANNAMALE
                     Sagarika Peramuna Peramuna Rallage
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr N Paramjorthy, Counsel instructed by Capital
Legal Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1.  The  Secretary  of  State  appealed  with   permission   against   the
    determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Andonian  allowing  the
    appeals of the appellants against refusal to vary their leave to remain
    in the United Kingdom as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) and dependant  and  to
    remove them by way of directions under Section 47 of the 2006 Act.

 2. Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes on the basis
    that the judge's finding  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  wrongly
    applied the "extension criteria" to the case was particularly difficult
    to follow.  Having  spent  some  time  considering  it,  Mr  Avery  has
    concluded, as indeed the Tribunal had, that the decision is correct and
    sustainable  and  he  therefore  withdrew   his   opposition   to   the
    determination at the appeal.

 3. There is therefore no material error of law in the determination  which
    stands.

Conclusions

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Consequential Directions

Forthwith on receipt  of  this  decision  the  respondent  shall  grant  the
appellant leave to remain for such period as is necessary to give effect  to
this determination.


Signed [pic]                        Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

