
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32497/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 September 2015                          |On 25 September 2015          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART

                                   Between

                        mrs lovette mojisola bobitey
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Fisher of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 23 February 1957.  On  30
    September 2008 she made application for leave to remain on human rights
    grounds refused on 14 May 2009.  On 26  July  2014  the  appellant  was
    served with form IS151A in terms of  her  liability  to  detention  and
    removal to Nigeria.

 2. The appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision was  dismissed
    by Judge Barber (the judge) in a decision promulgated on 11 March 2015.
     The judge dismissed the appellant's claims under Articles 3 and 8.  As
    regards Article 3, he found she did not meet the  high  threshold.   As
    regards Article 8, he found the appellant did not satisfy the Rules and
    that her removal would not engage Article 8 although he said if he  was
    wrong in that regard then he was  satisfied  the  interference  was  in
    accordance with the law and proportionate.

 3. The grounds claimed the decision was made on an incorrect basis.   That
    was because the judge said at [21] of his decision that  the  appellant
    was liable to deportation whereas it was a Section 10 removal.

 4. Further, the judge  erred  as  to  the  relevant  legal  test  for  the
    engagement of Article 8.  See ground [5] which refers to  [25]  of  the
    decision.  The grounds claimed the judge  confused  the  issue  of  the
    engagement of Article 8 and  that  undermined  his  overall  assessment
    rendering the decision unsafe.

 5. In any event, the grounds claimed the judge failed to properly  conduct
    a balancing exercise under Article 8 in that  he  overlooked  that  the
    appellant's illness developed here which was relevant as she would  not
    have planned the situation beforehand.

 6. The grounds claimed the judge failed to attach  appropriate  weight  to
    relevant issues, in particular that the appellant would have no family,
    financial, medical or social services care in Nigeria  whilst  all  are
    available here.

 7. Judge Osborne granted leave on 15 May 2015.  Judge Osborne did not find
    the reference to deportation at [21] of the decision to be material but
    he found it was at least arguable at [25] that the judge  confused  the
    engagement of Article 8 with the breach of the appellant's rights under
    Article 8.  It was from the appellant's point of view arguable that  if
    the judge was confused upon that fundamental aspect of applying Article
    8, his decision in relation to Article 8 was also confused.

 8. There was no Rule 24 response.

Submissions on Error of Law

 9. Ms Fisher relied upon the grounds.  She  submitted  that  there  was  a
    qualitative difference between reciting facts and  subjecting  them  to
    analysis.  She drew my attention to GS (India) [2015] EWCA Civ 40.   In
    particular at [85] and [86].  There was medical  evidence  at  page  66
    with regard to the appellant's risk of flying and page 68  with  regard
    to a cardiology review which should have been subjected to analysis  in
    terms of Article 8.  The judge began  his  discussion  from  the  wrong
    starting position.  He needed to identify and resolve key issues and he
    erred in law because he failed to do so.

10. Mr Kandola submitted that it was  clear  the  judge  had  in  mind  the
    appellant's circumstances and subjected them to analysis at [24] - [26]
    of the decision such that he did not err with regard to his findings or
    his dismissal of the appeal.

Conclusion on Error of Law

11. I do find that the judge erred in referring to deportation rather  than
    removal under Section 10 but that is not material.

12. I also find that the judge erred in confusing the engagement of Article
    8 with the potential breach of the appellant's rights under Article  8.
    Clearly, Article  8  was  engaged,  the  threshold  is  not  high.   AG
    (Eritrea) [2007] EWCA Civ 801 at [28] per Sedley LJ:

              "......while an interference with private or family life  must
             be real if it is to engage  Article  8(1),  the  threshold  of
             engagement (the 'minimum level') is not a specially high  one.
             Once the Article is engaged, the focus moves as Lord Bingham's
             remaining questions indicate, to the process of  justification
             under Article 8(2).  It is this  which,  in  all  cases  which
             engage Article 8(1), will determine whether there has  been  a
             breach of the Article."

13. In many cases the issue of substance will be the proportionality of the
    decision and the  Court  of  Appeal  has  emphasised  on  a  number  of
    occasions that the assessment of proportionality must be  properly  and
    adequately reasoned.  DM (Zambia) [2009] EWCA Civ 474.

14. The judge clearly erred when he said that because he found the  grounds
    under Article 3 were not made out then removal of the  appellant  as  a
    result of her medical condition would not  constitute  a  ground  under
    Article 8. It might not constitute a ground under Article  8  but  then
    again, it could do so.

15. I do not understand what he said  in  that  context  that  her  medical
    condition ......"must only be weighed in the balance."

16. Overall, I find there was no proper and adequate reasoning.

17. In my view, the judge made a material error of law.  I  find  that  the
    judge was confused regarding his approach to  Article  8.   The  appeal
    must be re-heard de novo.

Notice of Decision

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of law, is  set
    aside and shall be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing.

Anonymity direction not made.






Signed                              Date         22 September 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart

