
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/32415/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 9 July 2014                                  |On 9 July 2014             |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup
                                   Between

                              Atul Daulat Nikam
                        [No anonymity direction made]

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr A Burrett
For the respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Atul Daulat Nikam, date of birth 14.6.84, is  a  citizen
    of India.

 2. This is his appeal against the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Ross, who dismissed  his  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent to refuse his application made  on  23.12.11  for  leave  to
    remain in the UK as a Tier 4 (General) Student under the  Points  Based
    System (PBS).

 3. The Judge heard the appeal on 24.2.14.

 4. First-tier Tribunal Judge  Pirotta  refused  permission  to  appeal  on
    23.4.14. However,  when  the  application  was  renewed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein granted permission  to  appeal
    on 21.5.14.

 5. Thus the matter came before me on 9.7.14. as an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 6. In the first instance I have to determine whether or not there  was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such that the determination of Judge Ross should be set aside.

 7. The relevant background to the appeal may be summarised as follows.  On
    22.1.10 the appellant was granted leave to enter the UK  as  a  Tier  4
    General Migrant until 26.12.11.

 8. The application made in 2011 for leave to remain was refused on 17.2.12
    on the  mandatory  refusal  grounds  under  paragraph  322(1A)  of  the
    Immigration Rules, where false representations have been made or  false
    documents  have  been  submitted,  whether  or  not  material  to   the
    application, and whether or not to the applicant's  knowledge.  It  was
    asserted that the appellant had submitted false TOEIC English  language
    score reports. The Secretary of State's verification exercise  revealed
    in an email from TOEIC dated 1.2.12  that  it  had  no  record  of  the
    appellant ever having taken such English language tests in the UK.

 9. The appellant was unaware of this decision until 2013 when he  received
    the subsequent refusal decision in relation to an application made  for
    further leave to remain as a Tier  2  (General)  Migrant.  This  second
    application was refused  on  22.7.13  under  paragraph  322(2)  of  the
    Immigration Rules, on the basis that he had made false  representations
    for the purpose of seeking leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Migrant, by submitting false TOEIC certificates.

10. The appellant appealed against the earlier decision  and  it  was  that
    appeal which came before Judge Ross. It was accepted that  the  earlier
    decision had not been served on the appellant. The  grounds  of  appeal
    were that the respondent had failed to prove that a false document  had
    been submitted and that the decision was unfair.

11. At the outset of the appeal hearing before Judge Ross, the  appellant's
    representative applied for an adjournment. She had only  just  received
    the TOEIC email relied on by the respondent and wanted to make  further
    enquiries with TOEIC. Judge Ross refused the  adjournment  request,  on
    the basis that it was clear since the refusal decision that  TOEIC  did
    not accept that the submitted TOEIC score report was genuine.

12. Judge Ross found that the appellant had been aware since receiving  the
    second refusal decision in July 2013 that the TOEIC score reports  were
    not genuine and had taken no steps to contact TOEIC about  it.  He  had
    visited the college where the test was taken about a month earlier, but
    found that it had closed down. He maintained  that  he  had  taken  the
    test. He did not in fact go on to study, because he  wasn't  granted  a
    visa. Instead, he started working as a restaurant  manager,  hence  his
    application for a Tier 2 migrant leave to remain.

13. Judge Ross was satisfied that false information had been  provided  and
    that the respondent had satisfied the burden of proof. The  appeal  was
    thus dismissed.

14. In granting  permission  to  appeal,  Judge  Goldstein  stated,  "I  am
    persuaded that it is arguable that the Judge's decision to  refuse  the
    appellant's adjournment request and proceed with the hearing, may  have
    led to procedural  unfairness  in  relation  to  this  appeal.  In  the
    circumstances all the grounds may be argued."

15. The respondent's Rule 24 reply, dated 10.6.14, submits that  there  are
    no arguable errors of law and it was reasonable and open to the  judge,
    having considered the merits of an application for  an  adjournment  to
    refuse to exercise his discretion to  adjourn  on  the  basis  that  no
    benefit would have been derived from such  an  adjournment  bearing  in
    mind that  the  appellant  could  not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules, because it had been clear from the outset  that  the
    genuineness of the TOEIC score was disputed, and in particular  bearing
    in mind that the college has closed.

16. For the reasons set out herein, I am satisfied that there is  no  error
    of law in the  making  of  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    sufficient to require the determination of Judge Ross to be set aside.

17. The application was refused on the basis that  the  test  score  was  a
    false document submitted by the appellant. If the appellant did not sit
    any test, as the email from TOEIC suggests, it  must  follow  that  the
    certificate was dishonestly submitted.

18. I note from the email that the respondent sent all the details of  from
    the submitted certificate and there has been no suggestion  that  those
    details were in any way inaccurate. The college at which the  appellant
    allegedly sat the test was closed, so no  assistance  could  have  been
    forthcoming from the college. I agree with Judge Pirotta's  refusal  to
    grant permission in which she concluded that an adjournment would  have
    been pointless. TOEIC was not going to alter its stance and there  were
    no other parties who could have verified the certificates.

19. Mr Burrett told me that whilst  he  did  not  abandon  the  grounds  in
    relation to the refusal to grant  an  adjournment,  that  was  not  his
    primary submission. He told me, after  taking  instructions,  that  the
    appellant had made enquiries following the First-tier Tribunal  hearing
    but there was no further evidence to produce.  It  follows  that,  with
    hindsight, it can be seen that an adjournment would not  have  assisted
    the appellant and thus I can find no prejudice to the appellant by  the
    refusal to grant an adjournment.

20. Even now the appellant has been unable to demonstrate that  he  did  in
    fact take the test and that the results are genuine.

21. Mr Burrett's main submission was that the short determination by  Judge
    Ross was entirely inadequate to deal with the issue. He suggested  that
    there should have been further enquiries with TOEIC and that no  weight
    could be attached to TOEIC simply  checking  their  database.  He  also
    suggested that given the enquiry was made on 1.2.12 just over  a  month
    from the taking of the test, they  should  have  checked  the  database
    again. However, even now the appellant cannot  show  that  any  further
    enquiries or checks would have resulted in any  different  information.
    If there is no record of the appellant having taken the  test  and  the
    details from the certificate were accurately forwarded to TOEIC, as  it
    appears from the email and the certificate, I fail  to  see  what  else
    could have been said by TOEIC.

22. Mr Burrett submitted that the appellant discharged the burden on him to
    prove compliance with the English language requirement by production of
    the  TOEIC test score. The burden was on  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    demonstrate on the balance of probabilities  that  it  was  a  forgery.
    Relying on the email from TOEIC, Judge  Ross  was  satisfied  that  the
    burden on the respondent had been discharged. Mr Burrett suggested that
    the evidence comprising only the email was  insufficient  to  discharge
    that burden. I disagree. TOEIC found that there was no  record  of  the
    appellant ever having taken the test, let alone passed it. There is  no
    ambiguity about that point and I see no merit in the argument that  the
    respondent should have checked again or done something further.

23. In the circumstances, I find that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was
    entitled  to  rely  on  the  clear  evidence  of  the  email,  and   no
    countervailing evidence other than the  appellant's  assertion  to  the
    contrary, that the appellant had  not  taken  the  TOEIC  test  and  it
    follows that the submitted document must  be  false.  The  standard  of
    proof is on the balance of probabilities. It also must follow  that  if
    the appellant never took the test that his submission of the test score
    was dishonest. It was open to the  judge  to  find  that  evidence  was
    sufficient to discharge the burden on the Secretary of State.

24. Mr Burrett sought to argue article private life under 8 ECHR.  However,
    that was neither in the original grounds of appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal nor in the grounds of application for permission to appeal and
    I refused permission to add it as a ground at this stage.

25. Mr Burrett also sought to argue fairness, relying on that  having  been
    raised as a ground  of  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  It  was
    submitted that the prejudice was the delay in notifying  the  appellant
    of the 2012 decision. Again, this was not in the grounds of application
    for permission to appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  I  refused
    permission to add it at this stage. In any event, before there could be
    any merit in this ground the appellant would have to  demonstrate  that
    he had been prejudiced by the delay. Mr Burrett could only suggest that
    he would have been able to make  enquiries  with  the  college  sooner.
    However, I note that the appellant was notified of the 2012 decision in
    July 2013 and thus had over 6 months to make such enquiries before  the
    First-tier Tribunal appeal hearing but did nothing other than visit the
    college one month before the appeal hearing, only to find that  it  had
    closed down. In the circumstances, I am not satisfied  that  there  was
    any prejudice to the appellant and I  find  that  the  appellant  could
    succeed on this ground.

26. The grounds in relation to the discretionary grounds  for  refusal  are
    misguided. Paragraph 322(IA) is a mandatory  ground  for  refusal,  not
    discretionary. Once the respondent had  concluded  that  the  submitted
    document was false, the application had to be refused.

27. It remains the case that the only evidence that the appellant  met  the
    English language  requirement  is  the  TOEIC  certificate,  which  the
    respondent asserts not to be genuine. In the circumstances, his Tier  4
    application was bound to fail, regardless as to whether  the  appellant
    sat any form of the English language test, as it follows that he  could
    not demonstrate that he met the English language test requirements.

Conclusions:

28. For the reasons set out above, I find that the making of  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of an error on  a
    point of law such that the decision should be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed.
Signed: [pic]     Date: 9 July 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup



Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of the  Asylum  and
Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.
Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.








Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
(rule 23A (costs) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
2005 and section 12(4)(a) of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007).

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: There is no error of law and the appeal remains dismissed.

Signed: [pic]     Date: 9 July 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

