
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33108/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |                     Decision & Reasons|
|                                    |Promulgated                            |
|On 13 October 2015                  |                     On 14 October 2015|
|                                    |                                       |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum

                                   Between

                             LAURETTA TOBE OKOBI
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Jones, Counsel, instructed by Waterstone
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal Bennett who, in a decision promulgated  on  09  July  2014,
       dismissed the Appellant's appeal against a refusal by the Respondent
       to grant her a further period of leave to remain on the basis of her
       private and family life and against a decision to  remove  her  from
       the UK.


Background

    2. The appellant is a national of Nigeria, date of  birth  26  February
       1983. She entered the United Kingdom on 11 October 2010 as a Tier  4
       Student. She made an in-time application for further leave to remain
       on a form FLR(O) on 28  May  2012  indicating  that  she  was  still
       enrolled on a International Management course, that she was a single
       woman whose family all resided in the United Kingdom, that  she  had
       commenced a relationship with a young Nigerian man and was  pregnant
       through him, and that she was being provided for by her parents  and
       her siblings. The thrust of the application was that her removal, in
       light  of  the  aforementioned  circumstances,  would  constitute  a
       disproportionate breach of Article 8 ECHR.

    3. Her application was refused by the Respondent on 17 July  2013  and,
       on the same day, a decision was made to remove the  Appellant  under
       Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  The
       Respondent considered the application under  both  Appendix  FM  and
       paragraph 276ADE, both provisions having come into force on  9  July
       2012. The  Respondent  was  not  satisfied  the  Appellant  met  the
       requirements of  the  immigration  rules.  Nor  was  the  Respondent
       satisfied that the decision breached Article 8 ECHR.  The  appellant
       appealed these decisions to the First-tier Tribunal.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

    4. The Judge considered the evidence presented to him. The  Appellant's
       child had been born but her relationship  with  the  father  of  her
       child had broken down. The Appellant  was  being  supported  by  her
       family (primarily her father) and she spent her days  assisting  her
       mother, who, it was claimed, was in  very  poor  health.  The  Judge
       noted the Appellant's claim that she had no other family support  in
       Nigeria. The Judge noted that the Appellant had worked in Nigeria.


    5. It was argued on behalf of the Appellant that, as  Appendix  FM  and
       paragraph 276ADE came into being after the Appellant's  application,
       the Respondent's decision was 'not in accordance with  the  law'  as
       the Respondent should have  considered  the  Article  8  application
       unencumbered by any reference to the immigration  rules.  The  Judge
       indicated that, with reference to the decision to refuse to vary the
       Appellant's leave to remain, it was appropriate for him to  consider
       the application on  the  basis  of  the  evidence  before  him  with
       reference to any relevant provisions of  the  immigration  rules  in
       force as of 08 July 2012. However, in respect  of  the  decision  to
       remove the Appellant the Judge indicated, relying on  paragraph  400
       of the immigration rules (inserted by HC 194), that he  was  obliged
       to consider the possibility of any breach of Article 8 by  reference
       to paragraph 276ADE and Appendix FM.


    6. It was accepted by the  Appellant's  representative  [17]  that  she
       could not succeed under Appendix FM. The judge noted that  the  only
       possible  provision  of  the  immigration  rules  under  which   the
       Appellant's application could  have  been  made  was  paragraph  317
       (relating to adult dependent relatives). The Judge found,  giving  a
       number of reasons in support, that the Appellant would not be living
       in the most exceptional  compassionate  circumstances  were  she  to
       return with her child  to  Nigeria.  The  Judge  was  satisfied  the
       Appellant could continue to be supported by her family in the United
       Kingdom were she to  be  removed  to  Nigeria.  The  Judge  was  not
       satisfied there were any health  reasons  preventing  the  Appellant
       from returning with her child to Nigeria or looking  for  employment
       there. The Judge noted the absence of  any  independent  documentary
       evidence to support the proposition  that,  as  a  single  unmarried
       mother of a young child, the Appellant would  be  subjected  to  any
       kind of societal disapprobation or disadvantage. The Judge  was  not
       satisfied that the Appellant's mother was as ill as claimed and gave
       a number of reasons in support of this finding.

    7. The judge then  went  on  to  consider  whether  the  Appellant  had
       established Article 8 composite  private/family  life  relationships
       with her  family  in  the  United  Kingdom  with  reference  to  the
       authorities of Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31  and Ghising (family life
       - adults - Gurkha policy) [2012] UKUT 00160. The Judge  additionally
       considered the evidence relating to the Appellant's  child  and  his
       duty under section 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration
       Act  2009  and  was  satisfied  that  their  removal  would  not  be
       detrimental to the child. The Judge took  into  account  the  public
       interest in  immigration  control  and  found,  given  a  number  of
       reasons, that this outweighed the Appellant's Article 8 rights.

The Grounds of Appeal

    8. The Grounds contended that the Judge should have remitted the appeal
       back to the Respondent to enable her to decide the case afresh given
       that the application was made prior to 09 July 2012 but the decision
       was made afterwards. It was claimed that the  Respondent's  decision
       was not in accordance with HC 194 and therefore  not  in  accordance
       with the law.

Whether the First-tier Tribunal made a material error of law

    9. At the hearing Ms Isherwood provided me  with  a  copy  of  Singh  v
       Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 74. I  am
       satisfied that this authority fully disposes of the single Ground of
       Appeal. Following the amendments to the immigration rules brought on
       by HC 194, the immigration rules were again amended by HC 565.  This
       introduced a new provision, A277C. this read:


         Subject to paragraphs  A277  to  A280  and  paragraph  GEN.1.9.  of
         Appendix FM of  these  rules,  where  the  Secretary  of  State  is
         considering any application to which the provisions of Appendix  FM
         (family life) and paragraphs 276ADE  to  276DH  (private  life)  of
         these rules do not already apply, she will also do so in line  with
         those provisions.

   10. In the Court of Appeal's conclusions (at paragraph 56) it was  noted
       that, when HC 194  first  came  into  force  on  9  July  2012,  the
       Respondent was not entitled to take into account the  provisions  of
       the new Rules when  making  decisions  on  private  or  family  life
       applications made prior to that date but not yet decided.  But  that
       position was altered by HC 565 - specifically by the introduction of
       the new paragraph A277C - with effect from 6 September 2012. As from
       that date the Respondent was  entitled  to  take  into  account  the
       provisions of Appendix FM and paragraphs  276ADE-276DH  in  deciding
       private or family life applications even if they were made prior  to
       9 July 2012.


   11. As the decisions in the present appeal were made after 06  September
       2012 the Respondent was  lawfully  entitled  to  take  into  account
       appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE. Ms Jones did not demur  from  this
       conclusion.

   12. Ms  Jones  did  however  maintain  that  the  Judge  engaged  in  an
       unwarranted degree of speculation in stating, at paragraph 34,  that
       the Appellant would obtain employment if given leave to remain.


   13. In a very detailed decision the Judge carefully considered  all  the
       evidence before him. His analysis is impeccable and his  conclusions
       on the facts were ones  that  were  properly  open  to  him.  Having
       concluded that the Appellant could not succeed under the immigration
       rules the Judge then  went  on  to  consider  whether  her  proposed
       removal would breach Article 8 as a free-standing right.  The  Judge
       identified the approach identified in  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27  and
       applied that approach to his factual findings. In  his  analysis  he
       took account of all relevant considerations. I find no merit  in  Ms
       Jones's submission that the Judge engaged in unwarranted speculation
       at paragraph 34 when concluding that, if granted  leave  to  remain,
       the Appellant would find employment. The Appellant has  specifically
       indicated her wish to obtain employment in the  United  Kingdom  (at
       paragraph 22(k)). In any event mere  financial  dependency,  on  the
       particular facts of this appeal, is not, without any  more,  capable
       of establishing family life (Singh & Anor v Secretary of  State  for
       the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 630).


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained no material error of law.

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]                               14 October 2015

Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
