
IAC-HW-am-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33681/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower Birmingham         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26th March 2015                            |On 1st April 2015             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRENCH


                                   Between

                                sajad hussain
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Najma of Kher Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. On 12th August 2014 the Appellant was refused leave to enter the United
    Kingdom and his extant leave,  as  a  Tier  4  (General)  Student,  was
    cancelled.  It was alleged that he had employed deception in  order  to
    gain entry.  Those decisions were made under paragraphs 321A(2), 320(5)
    and 320(7A) of the Immigration Rules.  The Appellant's appeal, which at
    his request was decided on papers, was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge L S L Mensah in a decision promulgated on 7th November 2014.

 2. The Appellant, who at the time was representing  himself,  applied  for
    permission to appeal, contending amongst other matters that  the  judge
    had erred in the application of the burden of proof and that if she had
    doubts as  to  his  English  language  qualification  she  should  have
    adjourned for the Appellant to give evidence.  I granted permission  on
    26th January 2015 noting that it did appear that the judge had erred in
    stating that the burden of proof was upon the Appellant, which  was  at
    variance with various guiding cases including  JC  (Part  9  HC  395  -
    burden of proof) China [2007] UKAIT 00027.   She  did  not  find  fraud
    established  but  dismissed  the  appeal,  stating  that  she  was  not
    satisfied that the appellant had shown that he had  passed  an  English
    language test. That arguably placed  the  burden  upon  the  Appellant,
    where it did not lie under the paragraphs of  the  Rules  in  question.
    The Respondent served a response under Upper  Tribunal  Procedure  Rule
    24, contending that the decision was sustainable and  questioning  why,
    in the light of the documents before her, the judge had not found fraud
    established.

 3. In her decision the judge set out the burden of proof in the  following
    terms:

         "The Law

          a) The  decision  of  the  officer  to  refuse  the  application,
             specified paragraphs 321A(2)  and  320(5)(7A)  of  HC  395  as
             amended of the Immigration Rules as follows:

         As set out above.

          b) I reminded myself  that  the  burden  of  proof  lies  on  the
             Appellant, to satisfy me on the balance  of  probabilities  on
             all matters contained within specified paragraphs 321A(2)  and
             320(5)(7A) of the said Immigration Rules."

 4. At the hearing before me Mr Smart accepted immediately that  the  Judge
    had wrongly stated the burden of proof.  However initially he submitted
    that the error was not material because she had  provided  reasons  for
    not accepting English language documents  as  genuine.   He  said  that
    there  were  documents  before  the  judge,  including  statements   by
    officials from the  Home  Office  R  Collins  and  P  Millington  which
    addressed the matter of fraud.  I pointed out at this stage that  these
    documents were not on the file and it was not apparent  that  they  had
    been seen by the Judge.  She did not make specific reference  to  them.
    Ms Najma for her part said that from what she had seen it  was  unclear
    as to what documents had been before the judge and there was  no  clear
    indication that  the  documents  referred  to  by  Mr  Smart  had  been
    considered.

 5. In those circumstances Mr Smart did not  persist  with  his  submission
    that there was no material error and  suggested  that  the  appropriate
    route was for the matter to be further  considered  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Ms Najma for the Appellant concurred in that suggestion.

 6. I agreed with that proposed course of action.  In my view there  was  a
    clear error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  as
    referred to in the grant  of  permission  which  was  material  to  the
    outcome.   I  set  aside  her  decision,  in  accordance  with  Section
    12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act  2007  and
    Practice Statement 7.2(b).  Directions are given below.  There  was  no
    request made for an anonymity order and I can see  no  reason  for  any
    such order to be made.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error  on  a  point  of
law and has been set aside.

The case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal with directions.



Signed        Date 31 March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French




Directions (Sections 12(3)(a) and 12(3)(b)  of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and
Enforcement Act 2007

 1) The members of the First-tier Tribunal who are to reconsider the appeal
    should not include Judge L S L Mensah.


 2) None of the findings of Judge Mensah are preserved and the appeal is to
    be heard afresh.


 3) The appropriate  hearing  centre  is  Birmingham.   No  interpreter  is
    requested.


 4) Both representatives shall serve upon the Tribunal and upon each  other
    at least seven days before the hearing copies of all witness statements
    and other documents on which they seek to rely.




Signed        Dated 31 March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French

