
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33187/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11th April 2016                            |On 18th May 2016              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                        Ms Immaculate Mbotiji Longchi
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Ogunnubi, Counsel, instructed by TM Legal
Services
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant applies, with permission from First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    McDade, against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Eldridge,  who
    dismissed the appellant's appeal against the refusal of the decision of
    the Secretary of State to refuse her a permanent residence  card  under
    the EEA Regulations.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Cameroon who was  born  on  10th  October
    1977 and she was issued on 13th December 2003  with  a  residence  card
    valid for five years.  On 9th February 2010  when  she  applied  for  a
    permanent residence card her  application  was  refused.   She  made  a
    similar application on 11th October 2010 but again her application  was
    refused and she appealed this decision but her  appeal  was  dismissed.
    She was appeal rights exhausted.

 3. On 2nd April 2012 she again applied for a permanent residence card  but
    this was again refused on 13th September 2012.  Although that  decision
    was certified under  Regulation  26(5)  of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 she was afforded a right of appeal  and
    the matter was heard by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Eldridge.   As  he
    identified, the only issue concerned whether, during the  part  of  the
    necessary five year period, the EEA  national  on  whom  the  appellant
    relied  for  her  rights  of  residence,  had  comprehensive   sickness
    insurance cover (CISC) when he was a student.

 4. In her application she stated that she lived with her former husband in
    this country from 2003 until 2010 when  they  were  divorced.   It  was
    common ground he was initially a qualified person  until  2006  but  in
    that year he became a student and remained so in 2010.   They  divorced
    in 2010.  As Judge Eldridge found, it was a requirement  for  a  person
    who was an EEA national and who was a student to meet the  requirements
    of Regulation 4 and to have comprehensive  sickness  cover.   This  was
    confirmed in Ahmad v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2014]
    EWCA Civ 988.

 5. The grounds for permission  to  appeal  asserted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge   had  made  an  error  in  failing  to  consider   the
    appellant's private life in the United Kingdom and failed  to  consider
    her rights under Article 8 of the ECHR.  This was notwithstanding  that
    at paragraph 5 it is recorded in the decision that:

         "No other ground of appeal appears to  have  been  identified  and,
         pertinently, this was the only ground relied upon  by  Ms  Asanovic
         during the appeal before me.  She specifically informed me  at  the
         beginning of this hearing that the appellant was not now seeking to
         rely upon any rights under the European Convention on Human  Rights
         ('the European Convention').  I have determined the appeal on  that
         basis."

 6. Clearly  the  judge  dealt  with  the  one  issue  in  respect  of  the
    comprehensive insurance and the challenge in relation to  the  decision
    contradicting the  Directive  2004/38/EC  Article  7.2  and  indeed  no
    permission was granted in respect of that.

 7. As Mr Ogunnubi confirmed, no Section  120  notice  was  served  in  the
    reasons for refusal and therefore there is no question  of  removal  of
    the appellant.  The Court of Appeal explained the point  succinctly  in
    TY  v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 1233

    27.  'Since there is no section 120 one stop notice, the  appellant  is
         confined to the subject matter of the original decision. That is  a
         decision that the appellant does not fulfil the requirements of the
         EEA Regulations'.

 8. The appellant's appeal in relation to the EEA Regulations  was  decided
    and the appellant is unable to raise Article 8 grounds.  As  Mr  Melvin
    pointed out, should she wish to make an application for leave to remain
    in relation to her private or family life under the  Immigration  Rules
    she needs to make an application with the appropriate fee.

 9. There is no material error  of  law  and  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Eldridge shall stand.





Signed                                  Date 12th May 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

