
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
IA/33121/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |        Decision & Reasons           |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 31 August 2017                     |        On 11 October 2017           |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                           Mr Mohammed IRfan Jamil
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Hawkins of counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, a Home Office presenting officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Details of the Appellant

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who was born  on  11th  November
    1981.




The Appellant's Immigration History and Background to present Appeal

 2. The appellant entered the UK on 25 August  2006,  having  been  granted
    entry clearance as a student. On 2 November 2007, the appellant  sought
    and was granted leave to remain in the UK until  31  July  2009.  On  2
    February 2009, however, the appellant was  refused  further  post-study
    leave to remain. On 1 June  2010,  the  appellant  was  issued  with  a
    residence card as the family  member  of  a  national  exercising  free
    movement rights in the UK in  accordance  with  the  Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations 2006 (the 2006 Regulations).

 3. On 12 March 2015, the appellant sought permanent residence in the UK as
    confirmation of his retained right of residence following  his  divorce
    from EEA national, Ms Paukstite, a Lithuanian national.  On  8  October
    2015, the respondent refused the application under  Regulation  15  (1)
    (f) of the 2006 Regulations because the appellant had  not  established
    that his former spouse, an EEA  national,  had  continuously  exercised
    free movement  rights  up  to  the  point  of  their  divorce  and  the
    appellant, being employed, self-employed or self-sufficient  since  his
    divorce,  therefore  fell  within  that  regulation.  Furthermore,  the
    respondent did not accept the marriage to Ms Paukstite  was  a  genuine
    one, believing it to be one of convenience entered into solely for  the
    purposes of facilitating the appellant's leave to remain in the UK.

 4. On 19 October 2015, the appellant appealed the respondent's refusal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal (FTT). Judge of  First-tier  Tribunal  Swaniker
    (the Immigration Judge) did not find the appellant's  account  to  have
    been credible and concluded that the marriage between the appellant and
    Ms Paukstite was indeed a marriage of convenience.

 5. On 30 June 2017 I heard submissions in the Upper Tribunal at  an  error
    of law  hearing.  Following  submissions  by  both  representatives,  I
    decided that there was a material error of law in the decision  of  the
    FTT in that the reasoning of that tribunal  could  not  be  allowed  to
    stand. The finding that the sponsor had committed "perjury" appeared to
    be a "leap too far" and therefore it  was  appropriate  to  hear  fresh
    evidence from the  appellant  as  to  the  nature  of  the  appellant's
    relationship with Ms Paukstite. I therefore directed a further  hearing
    on 31 August 2017 at which the  appellant  was  to  supply  an  updated
    witness evidence and any other material he considered relevant  to  the
    issue before the Upper Tribunal. A full set of  directions  was  served
    with that decision, which was promulgated on 12 July 2017.

The resumed hearing

 6. At the resumed hearing, Mr Hawkins represented the appellant and  Mr  S
    Walker represented the respondent. There was initial  concern  by  both
    parties' representatives as to the lack of a "PNC report". However,  Mr
    Hawkins pointed out that there  was  reason  to  believe  it  had  been
    produced before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Mr  Hawkins  continued  to
    criticise the respondent for her preparation of  the  case,  indicating
    that information, for example, in relation to Ms Paukstite's conviction
    for offences under the Perjury Act 1911, was lacking.

 7. Mr Walker pointed out that Mr Singh,  the  respondent's  representative
    before the Upper Tribunal at  the  end  of  June,  indicated  that  the
    respondent's decision in this case was maintained.

 8. Mr Hawkins took me to a new bundle of documents served on the  Tribunal
    on or about 17 August 2017.  I noted that this contained a  substantial
    number of documents.  He also said that since the  last  hearing  there
    had been a further decision in relation to EEA rights in  the  case  of
    Sadovska [2017] UKSC 54. He said that paragraph  28  of  that  decision
    made it clear that the burden rested on  the  respondent  to  establish
    that the relationship relied on by a person claiming retained rights of
    residence under the 2006 Regulations  rested  respondent,  not  on  the
    appellant. It was for the respondent to establish that the marriage was
    one "of convenience". Later in the submissions I tried to establish the
    correct definition of  "marriage  of  convenience"  but,  although  the
    parties were unable to refer me to any statutory definition, Article  1
    of the EC Council Directive, on which the  2006  Regulations  had  been
    based (97/C 382/01), is quoted in paragraph 10 of Rosa [2016] EWCA  Civ
    14. That Directive had defined a "marriage of convenience" as:

         "... a marriage concluded between a national of a Member state or a
         third -country national legally resident in a member state  entered
         into with the sole aim of circumventing  the  rules  on  entry  and
         residence of third country nationals and obtaining  for  the  third
         country national a residence permit..."

 9. The  appellant  gave  oral  evidence  before  the  Upper  Tribunal.  He
    confirmed that his most recent witness statement (dated 16 August 2017)
    was true to the best of his knowledge and belief.

10. When cross-examined by Mr Walker, the appellant accepted  that  he  and
    his wife had not enjoyed a honeymoon together but had gone for  a  meal
    with friends and the  sponsor's  mother.  He  had  undergone  a  Muslim
    marriage to the sponsor at which he had met his mother in  law  on  8th
    October 2009, presumably for the first time. The formal civil  ceremony
    had been on 2 December 2009 and the sponsor had spent the following day
    (3 December 2009) with the appellant.  He was asked how  that  evidence
    was consistent with his  sponsor's  conviction  for  knowingly/wilfully
    causing to be made a false statement for the purposes of entry  in  the
    marriage register. This involved her entering a  bogus  marriage  on  3
    December 2009, i.e. the day the appellant and the sponsor were supposed
    to have been together. It was put to the appellant that  his  wife  had
    gone to prison for those offences. There was some debate over the  date
    the sponsor had gone to prison and come out of prison, but it seemed to
    be broadly agreed that she could not have been released before April or
    May 2012. It was put to the appellant that it was curious  to  say  the
    least that he was in Pakistan until April 2012, at a time when his wife
    is supposed to have been convicted  of  the  offence  of  perjury.  The
    appellant accepted that he and his wife had not had  children  together
    but when he had met her she had lived with her mother in "Yarmouth", by
    which, it subsequently transpired, he meant Great  Yarmouth.  His  wife
    had a son called R and a daughter called E, whom she saw every  two  or
    three weeks after they had been married. He admitted that his wife  had
    found it difficult to converse with his relations  given  the  language
    difficulties. The appellant said that although his wife to be had lived
    in Great Yarmouth when they had first gone out together, they have been
    able  to  sustain  their  relationship  and  marriage.  The   appellant
    confirmed his wife had been living in Great Yarmouth when they had met.
    This had been around March 2008. He  said  they  had  "just  hooked  up
    together". The appellant said he had  found  out  about  the  sponsor's
    children after the first (religious) marriage service, which appears to
    have been on 3 August 2009.

11. There was no re-examination.

12. The respondent relied on the reasons for  refusal  and  said  that  the
    evidence given was wholly unconvincing. The  Tribunal  was  invited  to
    find this appellant had entered into a false marriage  solely  for  the
    purposes of facilitating his leave to remain in the UK. It was of  note
    that the day after the marriage  the  sponsor  had  been  convicted  of
    entering a fake marriage on 3 December 2009.  At  that  time,  she  was
    supposed to be married to the appellant. It was most unlikely that  she
    would be committing an offence the day after they had  married  if  she
    was in a long-term relationship with the appellant. In the respondent's
    view, the sponsor was either  a  "bigamist"  or  the  marriage  to  the
    appellant was solely one of convenience. It was it was  also  described
    as being wholly unconvincing that the appellant had been in Pakistan at
    the time of his wife was supposed to be in prison in 2012. That was  at
    a time when the marriage was supposed to be subsisting. Respondent  had
    concluded the information supplied could not be relied upon in any way.
    No information had been given to the respondent as to  the  whereabouts
    of the sponsor. There are a number of inconsistencies in  the  evidence
    as to what her employment was and so forth. Mr  Walker  relied  on  the
    reasons for refusal in full.

13.  Mr Hawkins submitted that his client had  been  required  to  face  an
    allegation  that  had  not  been  properly  particularised.   A   close
    examination of the documents did not reveal a marriage of  convenience.
    The appellant had been accused of this but inadequate  particulars  had
    been supplied. For example, the Tribunal had not been supplied with the
    PNC record. At this point, however, Mr Hawkins  accepted  that  it  was
    handed in at  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  He  also  accepted  that  the
    appellant's evidence had been that, following  his  civil  ceremony  of
    marriage with the sponsor on 2 December 2009, the appellant  had  spent
    "the day with his new wife". This was at a time when Ms  Paukstite  was
    supposed to be committing a  criminal  offence.  Indeed,  this  was  an
    offence which the sponsor was sentenced to a term of imprisonment  for.
    Nevertheless, the appellant submitted  the  respondent  had  failed  to
    discharge  the  burden  of  proving  that  this  was  a   marriage   of
    convenience. I was referred to the correct  test  upon  asking.  I  was
    advised by Mr Hawkins that the test was set out in  the  case  of  Rosa
    [2016] EWCA Civ 14. At this point I was taken to paragraph  16  of  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal. There, the Immigration Judge dealt
    there with a meeting which had been conducted with the sponsor  at  HMP
    Peterborough. The record, which is included in the appellant's  bundle,
    was dated 14 April 1979. The sponsor is a  citizen  of  Lithuania.  The
    Immigration Judge went on to describe the PNC record of conviction  and
    found it to be "an unassailable document". The  Immigration  Judge  had
    gone on to accept the credibility of the PNC Record and Mr Pullman, her
    representative, had confirmed  a  willingness  to  go  ahead  with  the
    hearing notwithstanding this document. It indicated that on 10  January
    2012 the sponsor was convicted under the Perjury Act 1911 of  knowingly
    or wilfully causing a false statement to be made with a view to  making
    an entry onto the Marriage Register. The offences  were  said  to  have
    been committed on 1 August 2009 and 3 December 2009.  The  sponsor  was
    given a custodial sentence for that  offence,  it  being  considered  a
    serious offence. Whilst accepting these facts, it was not accepted that
    the Tribunal was entitled to draw the inference  that  the  appellant's
    account was untruthful. I was reminded that the  divorce  petition  was
    presented on 16 April 2015 (see C 1 of the respondent's bundle).

14. The other basis for refusal was that it was alleged  that  the  sponsor
    was not exercising Treaty rights up to April  2015,  when  the  divorce
    petition was presented. The appellant's  representative  accepted  that
    payslips are available after February 2015 and the gap is  therefore  a
    short one. It did not count for the purposes of the 2000 Regulations. I
    was referred to paragraph 10 of the appellant's large  bundle  prepared
    for the hearing.

15. At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision as to whether,  having
    set aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision,  it  was  appropriate  to
    remake the decision and, if so, whether to reach a different conclusion
    than the FTT. If I were to reach a different conclusion than the FTT it
    would follow that the  respondent's  decision  to  refuse  to  issue  a
    permanent resident card would have been wrong.

Discussion

16. It is unfortunate that before the Upper Tribunal there  was  less  than
    complete clarity as to the dates of the sponsor' s criminal convictions
    for marriage offences contrary to the Perjury Act 1911. In  particular,
    the respondent has been unable to produce the PNC Report referred to in
    paragraph 16 - 18 of the decision of the FTT. Realistically, Mr Hawkins
    accepted that the "PNC" document had been handed in at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. That document clearly had the dates of the offences, although
    there was a discrepancy as to the date Ms Paukstite  was  convicted  of
    those offences.  However, Mr Hawkins criticised the respondent for  her
    lack of attention to detail and this is a submission I  find  has  been
    properly made.

17. Following the hearing in June, I decided that there had been a material
    error of law in that the reasoning of the First-tier Tribunal had  been
    flawed. I set out the chronology leading to  the  sponsor's  conviction
    for perjury. I directed the further hearing, which took  place  at  the
    end of August 2017, partly to examine the circumstances leading to that
    conviction. I allowed the appellant an opportunity  to  present  "fresh
    evidence ...as to the nature of the marriage between  himself  and  the
    EEA national ...".

18. Having now heard that evidence, I am satisfied that the respondent  has
    discharged the burden of establishing that the relationship between the
    appellant and respondent was not a genuine and lasting one but had been
    entered as a "marriage of convenience". My reasons for that  conclusion
    are as follows:



      i) As I have stated above, the dates of the alleged offences  are  not
         disputed and these  include  a  conviction  for  an  offence  on  3
         December 2009. This was one day after appellant  and  Ms  Paukstite
         underwent a civil marriage ceremony on 2 December  2009.  According
         to the appellant, Ms Paukstite and he are said to  have  spent  the
         day after their civil marriage ceremony together. I am  unconvinced
         that the appellant would have been able to spend the day  with  his
         wife when she was committing an offence under the Perjury Act 2011.

     ii) I agree with the Immigration Judge that  the  appellant's  trip  to
         Pakistan in 2012 was implausible. On one version of the facts, this
         happened to "coincide" with the period of sponsor'  s  imprisonment
         for 30 weeks for the offences described and  therefore  provided  a
         convenient explanation for his absence during these events.

    iii) Whilst the Immigration Judge did not clearly define a  marriage  of
         "convenience", having now been referred the correct  definition  by
         Mr Hawkins, the appellant's relationship sponsor fell  within  that
         category in that it was entered with the sole aim of  circumventing
         the entry and residence of a non-EEA national.

     iv) Apart from the fact that the  evidence  pointed  to  a  very  short
         period of cohabitation between the parties, the fact that they  had
         diverse   cultural   backgrounds   and   a   possible    difficulty
         communicating, there was also a lack of any evidence of a  cultural
         or  other  assimilation  between  them.  More  significantly,   the
         appellant displayed a lack of knowledge of his wife, who apparently
         had two children by another man. Surprisingly, the first  time  the
         appellant claims to have heard of this was when he read the refusal
         letter (see paragraph 10 of the FTT's  decision).  When  questioned
         about this at HMP Peterborough on 8th  June  2012  (at  D  1),  the
         sponsor stated that she had a partner called  R  K,  who  was  born
         March 1975 and with whom she had two children. She did not  mention
         the appellant during that interview.

      v) The appellant's relationship with  the  sponsor  was  on  any  view
         brief, in that the parties separated in 2012.  There  was  later  a
         divorce petition, which was made nisi in February 2015 and absolute
         in April 2015. Sadly, it is not unusual  to  encounter  very  short
         relationships, but what is unusual here is the lack of any evidence
         of cohabitation during their relationship.

19. The second issue related to the sponsor's status in the UK.  There  was
    some confusion as to the nature of the sponsor's employment. There were
    also a number less important points requiring clarification. As I  have
    decided that the marriage between the appellant and the sponsor was one
    of convenience, and therefore is not one which entitles him to a  right
    of  residence  or  retained  rights  of  residence   under   the   2006
    Regulations, it is not necessary to go on to decide whether or not  the
    sponsor was exercising Treaty Rights. However, the  fact  is  that  the
    sponsor was convicted on 10 January  2012  or  28  May  2012  (see  the
    respondent's reasons for refusal letter dated 8 October 2015) under the
    Perjury Act 1911 of the offences described above tends to undermine the
    credibility of any evidence she gave both as to her relationship and as
    to her employment. The conviction was of, effectively, participating in
    a marriage of convenience. It is noteworthy that the  appellant  failed
    to refer to the sponsor's relationship with R K,  who  was  born  March
    1975. Mr K has two children. The sponsor,  when  interviewed,  did  not
    make any reference to the appellant. She may have been  committing  the
    offence of bigamy but it is unnecessary to consider this further in the
    light of my conclusions above.

20. The appellant was unable to  say  much  about  the  sponsor's  personal
    financial circumstances. However, it does appear from the document from
    HMP Peterborough, that the appellant's then partner was  relentless  in
    her deception.  The  respondent  accepted,  however,  that  she  was  a
    Lithuanian national born on 14 April 1979. I doubt there was sufficient
    reliable evidence to show that  the  sponsor  was  in  fact  exercising
    Treaty Rights in the UK.

21.  The respondent accepted that  this  is  not  a  straightforward  case.
    However, the ordinary civil standard of proof applied. I  am  satisfied
    that the respondent has discharged the burden of showing that this  was
    not a genuine marriage but rather was one of convenience.

Notice of Decision

The appeal under the EEA regulations is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 9 October 2017



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 9 October 2017



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury


