
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/33886/2015
     IA/33887/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 September 2017                   |On 10 October 2017                   |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        Yuqing Chen (first appellant)
                        Ling Yang (second appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr Karnik, instructed by Knightbridge Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and the respondents as
    the appellants as they  appeared  respectively  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The appellants, Yuqing Chen and Ling Yang,  are  mother  and
    daughter and citizens of China born on 12 November 1976 and 5  December
    1997 respectively.  They appealed against decisions of  the  respondent
    dated 27 October 2015 to refuse  to  grant  them  indefinite  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom on the  basis  of  the  first  appellant's
    marriage to a British citizen (Zuhaua Yang).  The  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Birrell) in a decision promulgated in December 2016, allowed the
    appeals on Article 8 ECHR grounds.  The Secretary of State now appeals,
    with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.  I shall hereafter refer to the
    first appellant as the 'the appellant'.

 2. The appeal turned on whether the  appellant  had  cheated  in  a  TOEIC
    English language test.  The grounds of appeal first complained that the
    fact that the appellant had been able  to  describe  the  test  process
    meant that she had not taken the test herself necessarily.  The grounds
    refer to the fact that the appellant in MA (ETS - TOEIC testing) [2016]
    UKUT 00450 (IAC) had attended  the  test  centre  and  had  provided  a
    photograph there but had still been found to have cheated and not taken
    the test himself.  Secondly, the grounds refer to  the  fact  that  the
    test centre attended by the first appellant, 77% of  the  test  results
    were found to be "invalid" and 23% had been found to be "questionable".
     The appellant's own result had been found to be "questionable" by  the
    respondent.  It is asserted the judge failed to take into account  that
    the appellant had taken her "questionable" test at a time when a  large
    number of invalid tests  had  been  taken  at  the  same  test  centre.
    Thirdly, the judge had found that the appellant had  completed  a  City
    and Guilds test at the Academy of Oriental Cuisine but  had  failed  to
    take into  account  that  this  ETS  test  had  been  taken  after  the
    qualification which had been disputed and therefore was not evidence of
    her English language ability  at  the  relevant  time.   The  fact  the
    appellant could now speak English should not be  determinative  of  the
    appeal.

 3. The judge stated [24] that  she  had  taken  the  whole  evidence  into
    account before reaching a  decision.   She  observed  [36]  the  77/23%
    findings of the report into the test centre to which the respondent has
    referred in the grounds of appeal.  The judge also observed [38]  that,
    "the striking feature in this case is that the first  appellant  having
    realised that she had not taken  a  valid  test  on  5  February  2014,
    relatively soon after on 16 August 2014 took a  City  and  Guilds  test
    ..." She noted that these  latter  test  providers  had  not  been  the
    subject of any enquiry or challenge by the respondent.  The  judge  was
    alert to the fact [40] that a later  demonstration  of  proficiency  in
    English was not something to which she should attach particular weight.
     However, she observed the relatively short gap  between  the  February
    and August 2014 tests and to the fact that the August 2014 test had not
    been challenged at all by the respondent and observed that, given  that
    she was able to pass the test in August 2014, she had little motive  to
    cheat in February 2014.

 4. Mr Bates, for the respondent, submitted that the judge  had  failed  to
    take account of the fact that, in MA  (see  above),  the  Tribunal  had
    found that an individual might have a number of different  motives  for
    cheating in a test even including in circumstances where he or she  had
    a proficiency in English.  Whilst I acknowledge that may be the case, I
    asked Mr Bates whether he considered Judge  Birrell's  decision  to  be
    perverse given the facts which were before her.  He said  that  he  did
    not consider it to be perverse.

 5. I considered the submissions of both representatives  carefully  before
    deciding that Judge Birrell did not err in law such that  her  decision
    falls to be  set  aside.   I  have  reached  that  conclusion  for  the
    following reasons.  First, I agree with Mr Karnik's submission that the
    grounds of appeal appear to suggest that the 23% of test results at the
    centre which were "questionable" should be considered as equivalent  to
    invalid results.  The judge has had regard to the percentage of invalid
    and questionable results at the centre  but  she  was  not  obliged  to
    assume, as the respondent appears to suggest, that  the  appellant  had
    cheated because her result was declared "questionable".  It was open to
    Judge  Birrell  to  conclude  that  the  questionable  nature  of   the
    appellant's test result as neither detrimental nor  supportive  of  her
    case.  Secondly, the judge has found that other evidence indicates that
    the appellant had no incentive to cheat in February 2014 given that she
    was able to pass an English language test only a few  months  later  in
    August the same year.  Likewise, the judge did not err in law  at  [40]
    by concluding  that  the  appellant's  performance  in  English  at  an
    interview with the Home Office a year after she had taken the  language
    test was not something upon which she had to place  great  weight.   As
    she observed, "Firstly (sic) I am satisfied that in the  same  way  the
    Upper Tribunal has indicated to me that I should not place great weight
    on the appellant's language proficiency before me if this hearing comes
    sometime after the language test being challenged by the same analogy I
    am satisfied that the appellant's performance at an interview with  the
    Home Office one  year  after  she  passed  the  language  test  is  not
    something I can place great weight on".   Given  that  Judge  Birrell's
    decision is not, as Mr Bates confirmed, being challenged on  the  basis
    that it is perverse, the only  question  is  whether  she  reached  her
    decision by an incorrect application of the relevant law  or  a  flawed
    assessment methodology.  For the reasons I have given above, I  am  not
    satisfied  that  the  judge  inaccurately  applied  the  relevant  law.
    Further, I find that her assessment of the evidence was fair and  even-
    handed; she reached findings which were open to her  on  the  evidence.
    In the circumstances, the Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

 6. This appeal is dismissed.

 7. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 28 September 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

