
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33716/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24th August 2017                           |On 6 September 2017           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY


                                   Between

                           mr motiur rahman suman
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                    Claimant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                             Appellant in the Upper Tribunal


Representation:
For the Claimant: Mr Alam of Counsel
For the Secretary of State:     Mr Staunton, the Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Cameron promulgated on 21st December 2016, in which
    he allowed the Claimant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
    reject the Claimant's application for indefinite leave to remain in the
    United Kingdom as a spouse of a  person  present  and  settled  in  the
    United Kingdom.

 2. Within the decision, Judge Cameron did not  upheld  the  refusal  under
    paragraph 322(2) of the Immigration Rules and then went on to allow the
    appeal under the Immigration Rules under paragraph 287. However, he has
    dismissed the appeal under Appendix FM and paragraph  276ADE  and  then
    gone on to dismiss the appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR.

 3. At the appeal hearing before me the Claimant has been represented by Mr
    Alam of Counsel and the Secretary of State has been represented  by  Mr
    Staunton the Home Office Presenting Officer.

 4. Within the Grounds of  Appeal,  two  Grounds  of  Appeal  were  argued.
    Firstly it is argued that the First-tier Tribunal Judge acted  unfairly
    refusing to adjourn the appeal following a request for  an  adjournment
    by the Home Office Presenting Officer on the day to allow the Secretary
    of State to obtain  further  evidence  to  support  the  allegation  of
    deception which it is said to include the report from Professor  French
    and the relevant  spreadsheet  extract  to  show  that  the  Claimant's
    English language test had been declared to be invalid.   It  is  argued
    that those documents were of such a  fundamental  nature  that  justice
    could not have been done without them  and  Professor  French's  report
    responded to the criticisms of ETS testing by Dr Harrison contained  in
    the case of SM and Qadir.  It is argued that Professor  French  is  the
    most experienced audiologist in the UK and that he had taken account of
    technical information about ETS's methodology and processes  which  had
    not been previously available.  That was evidence said to undermine the
    conclusions of SM and Qadir and it is argued that evidence  would  have
    made difference to the outcome.

 5. In the second Ground of Appeal it is argued that although the  Tribunal
    accepted the Respondent met the initial evidential burden upon it,  the
    Tribunal went on to find the Claimant's English language was not of the
    highest standard, but accepted that the Claimant had in fact taken  the
    test, but in so doing  relied  upon  the  Claimant's  English  language
    ability in that regard.

 6. It is argued that there may be reasons why a  person  who  is  able  to
    speak English may still utilise a proxy test speaker and that the judge
    has failed to appreciate that there may have been a reason why a  proxy
    may have  been  utilised  and  deception  employed  in  the  case.  The
    Secretary of State relies upon the Upper Tribunal decision in the  case
    of MA (Nigeria) [2016] UKUT 450 in that regard in  which  case  it  was
    accepted that a proxy test taker had been utilised  and  it  was  found
    that there may be many reasons why a proxy test  taker  may  have  been
    utilised even by  someone  who  speaks  English  including  a  lack  of
    confidence, fear of failure, a lack of time and commitment or  contempt
    for the immigration system.

 7. Permission to appeal has been  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Brunnen on 7th July 2017 who found that  the  Grounds  of  Appeal  were
    arguable and further found that it was also arguable although not being
    a point raised in the grounds  that  it  was  arguable  as  a  Robinson
    obvious point that the judge erred by allowing  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules since the  only  available  Ground  of  Appeal  under
    Section 84(2) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  was
    that the Respondent's decision was unlawful  under  Section  6  of  the
    Human Rights Act 1998, when in fact the judge dismissed the  appeal  on
    human rights grounds.

 8. I am grateful for the submissions of both Mr  Staunton  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State and Mr Alam on behalf of the Claimant which  I  have
    fully taken account of them and which I have recorded within my  Record
    of Proceedings.

 9. Regarding the first Ground of Appeal in regard to whether  or  not  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge acted  unfairly  in  refusing  to  allow  the
    adjournment sought by Ms Davies on behalf of the Secretary of State  at
    the  First-tier  Tribunal.   When  giving  reasons  for  rejecting  the
    adjournment request Judge  Cameron  noted  that  the  matter  had  been
    originally listed on 13th July 2016 and  the  Respondent  had  time  to
    prepare and submit any relevant evidence.  He did not consider  in  the
    interest of justice to adjourn the matter  further,  but  did  give  Ms
    Davies time to consider the Claimant's bundle a copy of which was given
    to her at the appeal hearing, which had not been  previously  given  to
    her.

10. In that regard the evidence which was sought to be submitted on  behalf
    of the Secretary of State is said to comprise the report from Professor
    French who has produced a somewhat generic report and was not  specific
    to the appeal of Mr Suman which was often relied upon by the  Secretary
    of State to substantiate the criticisms of  the  ETS  language  testing
    system and which dealt with  the  evidence  of  Dr  Harrison  which  is
    considered in the SM and Qadir case.  The Secretary of State also  says
    that she would have produced  the  copy  of  the  relevant  spreadsheet
    extract in order to show that the Claimant's test had been invalidated.



11. The evidence in fact relied upon by the Secretary of State at these ETS
    appeals in terms of the statements  of  Peter  Millington  and  Rebecca
    Collings and also the report of Professor French are generic statements
    and are sought to be relied upon in the majority, if  not  all  of  the
    appeals in ETS cases.  None of those witnesses  would  actually  be  in
    court to give evidence and it not a case  therefore  in  which  it  was
    being argued that the witnesses could not attend to  give  evidence  on
    that particular date and that therefore the adjournment  was  necessary
    in order to allow them to give evidence.  I was  told  by  Mr  Staunton
    that the report of Professor French was dated 28th April 2016.

12. The appeal in this case, although it was on a float list and  therefore
    was not before any specific judge was actually listed to  be  heard  on
    Tuesday 29th November 2016 at 10am at Taylor House  in  the  notice  of
    hearing which was  sent  out,  back  on  13th  July  2016.   Therefore,
    although the name of the judge who will be hearing the appeal  was  not
    specified, the date, time and place of the appeal was specified  within
    that notice of hearing.  It was not the  case  that  the  Secretary  of
    State would not have known when the appeal was to take place  or  where
    it was to take place.

13. Despite the appeal having been listed back in July the directions given
    at that time were that the Respondent  must  send  copies  of  all  the
    documents to the Tribunal and to the other party, which were to include
    a copy of the notice  of  decision  together  with  any  Statements  of
    Evidence,  application  form,  record  of  interview   or   any   other
    unpublished documents upon which she intended to rely, to arrive before
    10th August 2016.  The Secretary of State on the morning of the  Appeal
    on the 29th November 2016, sought the adjournment in order  to  produce
    documents that they had not produced and disclosed in  accordance  with
    the previous directions given by the Tribunal.  The judgment  of  Judge
    Cameron does not show that any explanation was advanced as to why those
    documents have not been served in accordance with  the  direction.   It
    was simply a case that they had not been  and  that  the  Secretary  of
    State was seeking the adjournment to allow that evidence to be adduced.



14. Given that Professor French's report is a  generic  report  criticising
    the ETS methodology in testing and seeking to argue that the error rate
    is extremely small, and was written in April 2016, it could and  should
    have disclosed in accordance with directions  and  not  simply  on  the
    morning of the appeal.  The directions from the Tribunal are made for a
    purpose and are designed to allow all the parties to know the  evidence
    which is being sought to relied upon in advance, and  the  parties  can
    properly prepare.

15. In respect of the spreadsheet although the judge noted at paragraph  34
    of the judgment that there was no direct evidence provided  other  than
    the statement the Claimant's test had been cancelled, the  judge  noted
    the Claimant himself did not dispute that ETS had  cancelled  his  test
    scores.  In that regard, therefore,  the  spreadsheet  would  not  have
    taken the matter any further forward because the  Claimant  himself  at
    the appeal hearing did not dispute that his test certificate  had  been
    declared invalid by ETS.

16. The judge in fact went on to accept that the initial evidential  burden
    on the Secretary of State was met and then went on to consider  whether
    or not an explanation had been provided by the Claimant in that regard.
    The judge then went on to consider all the evidence  in  the  round  in
    determining whether or not the Claimant  actually  did  sit  the  test.
    Although clearly the First-tier Tribunal Judge having  a  duty  to  act
    fairly, in circumstances where the previous  directions  had  not  been
    complied with by the Secretary of State, where the case had been listed
    since July and directions  were  made  that  the  documents  should  be
    disclosed by a date in August given that the  appeal  hearing  was  not
    until 29th November, I do not consider that the judge acted unfairly in
    failing to grant an adjournment for the Secretary of  State  to  adduce
    documents which could and should have been produced in accordance  with
    the original directions.  There seems to be no valid reason as  to  why
    those documents could  not  have  been  available  in  accordance  with
    directions, but even if that could not have been done for  any  reason,
    no explanation was given as to why they were not available on the  date
    of the appeal. It was for the Secretary of State to make sure that  all
    the relevant evidence was before the Tribunal.

17. The second Ground of Appeal seeks to argue in effect that the judge had
    sought to rely purely upon the English language ability as seen by  him
    at the appeal hearing and that the judge had failed to take account  of
    the fact that there may be reasons as to why someone who otherwise  may
    be considered to be able to speak English may exercise deception and to
    utilise the services of a proxy test taker as was the case in the Upper
    Tribunal decision of MA (Nigeria) [2016] UKUT 450 in  which  the  Upper
    Tribunal noted that  there  may  well  be  reasons  why  someone  could
    exercise deception even if they spoke English by  using  a  proxy  test
    taker, including but not exhaustively, a lack of  confidence,  fear  of
    failure, lack of time or commitment, or contempt  for  the  immigration
    system.

18. However, when one looks at the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Cameron, following the case of SM and Qadir v Secretary  of  State  for
    the Home Department (ETS evidence burden of proof) [2016] UKUT 00229,he
    properly  considered  the  evidence  that  had  been  produced  by  the
    Secretary of State and found that the initial evidential burden on  the
    Respondent had been met, based on the generic evidence actually  before
    him and  went  on  to  consider  the  evidence  of  the  Claimant  when
    considering the evidence in the round and considering whether or not  a
    valid explanation had been given and as to whether or not the  Claimant
    took the test. Having considered all of the evidence in the  round  the
    Judge accepted that the Claimant in fact had taken the test and had not
    exercised deception.

19. Although at paragraph 43 the judge noted that the Claimant did  have  a
    sufficient level of English language, the judge has not  simply  relied
    upon that as the only basis for finding that the Claimant did take  the
    test.  At paragraph 38 he noted the explanation given by  the  Claimant
    that he had been living in Bethnal Green at  the  time,  and  that  the
    college in Whitechapel was about one and a half miles away.  The  judge
    noted the Claimant said the college had been Home Office  approved  and
    he had  taken  the  test  there  because  it  was  faster  to  get  the
    certificate from there. The judge accepted the reasons given as to  why
    the Claimant utilised that  particular  test  centre  and  went  on  to
    consider the other documentary evidence  which  indicate  the  Claimant
    could speak English.

20. Although a judge clearly cannot simply rely  upon  the  Claimant's  own
    English language ability before him in considering  whether  or  not  a
    Claimant actually did take the test, the fact  that  someone  can  give
    evidence in English is a matter that he can take into account,  but  he
    has not simply relied upon that evidence.  The  judge  has  also  taken
    account of the previous courses undertaken by the Claimant  in  English
    and considered all the evidence including  the  location  of  the  test
    centre and why it was he  booked  in  there.  The  judge  accepted  the
    evidence of the Claimant  and  that  he  was  an  honest  and  credible
    witness, and found that he had actually undertaken the test.

21. Although it is argued by the Respondent that the judge  has  not  taken
    account of the fact there may be other  reasons  why  someone  who  can
    seemingly speak English may have utilised a proxy  test  taker,  having
    considered the Record of Proceedings those arguments were not  actually
    arguments  specifically  put  before  the  judge  by  the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer at the time of the appeal.  It was not argued before
    the judge that he may still utilised a proxy test taker down to lack of
    confidence, fear  of  failure,  lack  of  time  or  commitment  and  he
    seemingly was  not  challenged  on  those  grounds  at  the  First-tier
    hearing.

22. In that regard the judge is not under a duty to consider arguments that
    were not actually raised before him at the First-tier Tribunal hearing.



23. I find that on the evidence presented that, although other  judges  may
    well have reached a different conclusion, the judge has given  adequate
    and sufficient reasons for the decision that he reached and the reasons
    are sufficiently clear to enable the losing party to know why they have
    lost.  In such circumstances, I do not consider that the  judge  either
    acted in any way unfairly in this case or that  the  decision  in  fact
    with regards to the English language test involves any  material  error
    of law.

24. The judge then went on,  having  accepted  the  Claimant  had  properly
    undertaken the English language test, to find that  the  refusal  could
    not be upheld under paragraph 322(2) of the Immigration Rules regarding
    deception and then went on to consider paragraph 278 of the Immigration
    Rules in respect of the question as to whether or not indefinite  leave
    to remain should be granted. Between paragraphs 45 and 48 inclusive the
    judge noted that the only reason for  refusal  in  the  refusal  notice
    under paragraph 287 was the fact that his application  fell  under  the
    general Grounds for Refusal on the  basis  that  he  provided  a  false
    certificate.  The judge found that the Claimant and his wife were in  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship and there was an intention to  live
    together permanently and that they had adequate accommodation and  that
    they were able to maintain themselves without recourse to public funds.
     The judge was therefore entitled to find that the Claimant had met the
    requirements of paragraph 287 of the Immigration Rules.

25. However as this was an appeal heard at Taylor House  on  29th  November
    2016 in respect of a refusal which was dated 21st October  2015,  given
    the changes to the grounds and  rights  of  appeal  introduced  by  the
    Immigration Act 2014 the previous Ground of Appeal  that  the  decision
    was not in accordance with the  Immigration  Rules  was  no  longer  an
    applicable Ground of Appeal upon which the judge was either entitled to
    allow or dismiss the appeal at the appeal hearing before him.

26.  As is rightly stated by Judge Brunnen in the grant  of  permission  to
    appeal as at the date of the appeal hearing the only basis  upon  which
    this appeal could either have been allowed or dismissed was in terms of
    whether or not in this case the decision was unlawful as being contrary
    to Section 6 of the  Human  Rights  Act  as  being  in  breach  of  the
    Claimant's Article 8 rights under the  ECHR.   The  findings  of  Judge
    Cameron in that regard in allowing the appeal under paragraph  287  and
    then dismissing the appeal under Appendix FM and paragraph  276ADE  and
    then dismissing it under Article 8 in that regard, seems to be somewhat
    inconsistent and contradictory. The judge clearly did not have power to
    allow the appeal under paragraph 287 as  at  the  date  of  the  appeal
    hearing before him.

27. Clearly, however, the  fact  that  the  judge  did  consider  that  the
    requirements of paragraph 287 were met was a relevant consideration for
    the judge in considering the Article 8 claim  and  that  was  a  matter
    which could and should have been taken into account  by  the  judge  in
    considering the Article 8 claim.

28. Further having considered that the Claimant did meet  the  requirements
    of paragraph 287 of the Immigration Rules regarding indefinite leave to
    remain the judge was then wrong to proceed to  consider  it  under  the
    leave to remain as a partner provisions of Appendix FM, as those are  a
    separate set of provisions which  were  not  relevant  as  far  as  the
    Claimant was concerned. Had the judge found that  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 287 were not met. then the judge would be entitled to  go  on
    to consider it under Appendix FM when looking at  the  Article  8  case
    through the lens or through the prism of the Immigration Rules, but  in
    circumstances where he found that paragraph 287 were met that  was  all
    the judge needed to consider in terms of his analysis of the  Rules  as
    far as the family life provisions of Article  8  were  concerned.   The
    judge clearly was entitled to consider paragraph 276ADE in  respect  of
    private life.  As far as family life was concerned he was wrong then to
    go on to consider Appendix FM and whether or not paragraph EX.1 was met
    and whether or not there will be insurmountable obstacles to  a  family
    continuing family life outside of the UK in Bangladesh.

29. I therefore do find that the question as to whether or  not  the  judge
    had erred by allowing the appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules  is  a
    Robinson obvious point which although not raised within the Grounds  of
    Appeal is such an obvious point that it should be considered by me  and
    for the reasons I have just enunciated I do find  that  in  fact  given
    that there was no longer a Ground of Appeal that the decision  was  not
    in accordance with the Immigration Rules as at the date of the  hearing
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Cameron,  he  did  materially  err  in
    allowing the decision under the Immigration Rules, but then going on to
    consider it under Appendix FM and then dismissing it under Article 8 on
    the basis that he concluded that there  would  have  to  be  compelling
    circumstances for the case of SS (Congo) were a case be  allowed  under
    Article 8 outside the Rules, when he considered that  the  requirements
    of paragraph 287 were met.

30. I therefore do set aside the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Cameron but I do  preserve  his  analysis  and  findings  of  fact  and
    credibility between paragraphs 27 and 48 inclusive of the decision  and
    I preserve the judge's findings that the Claimant  had  actually  taken
    the English language  test  himself  and  that  he  had  not  exercised
    deception and the judge's findings thereafter that  the  Claimant  when
    looking at the Article 8 claim through the  prism  of  the  Immigration
    Rules met the requirements of paragraph 287.

31. In such circumstances as properly conceded by Mr Staunton on behalf  of
    the Secretary of State, if  the judge had not erred in his analysis  of
    the evidence presented by the  Secretary  of  State  in  terms  of  the
    question as to whether or not the Claimant had exercised deception  and
    whether or not the adjournment should have  been  granted,  the  appeal
    should have been allowed under Article 8.

32. Clearly the fact that the Claimant met the  requirements  of  paragraph
    287 for indefinite leave to remain is  a  relevant  consideration  when
    considering the Article 8 claim. I do, as I must consider the statutory
    criteria under Sections 117A-D  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.  I  do  bear  in  mind  that  the  maintenance  of  an
    effective immigration control is in the public interest and that it  is
    in the public interest that people who seek leave to  remain  are  both
    able to speak English and are financially independent.  In that  regard
    the findings preserved from Judge Cameron and the findings that I  make
    are the fact that the Claimant is able to speak English and that he was
    and is financially independent.

33. I also bear in  mind  that  little  weight  should  be  attached  to  a
    relationship formed  at  a  time  when  the  Claimant  was  in  the  UK
    illegally, but I do find  that  in  this  case  the  Claimant  was  not
    illegally in the UK when  the  relationship  was  formed  and  although
    little weight should be attached to a private life  formed  at  a  time
    when the Claimant was in the UK precariously, that does  not  adversely
    affect the Claimant in respect of his family life in this case,  rather
    than his private life.

34.  As  properly  conceded  by  Mr  Staunton  given  the  fact  that   the
    requirements of the Rules are met under paragraph 287 and there  is  no
    illegality otherwise on the part of the Claimant I  do  find  that  the
    decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  is  disproportionate  to   the
    legitimate public end sought to be achieved.  I do accept applying  the
    five stage Razgar test that the Claimant does have a family life in the
    UK with his wife which is life interfered with by  the  decision  under
    appeal and that the interference is of sufficient magnitude  to  engage
    Article 8.  I further do find that the decision taken was in accordance
    with the  law  and  is  necessary  in  a  democratic  society  for  the
    protection of the rights and interests of others.

35. However, for the reasons set out above I do find that the  decision  is
    disproportionate to the legitimate public aim sought to be achieved and
    I therefore do allow the appeal on Article 8 grounds.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Cameron  does  reveal  a  material
error of law and is set aside.
I remake the  decision  allowing  the  Claimant's  appeal  on  human  rights
grounds under Article 8  of  the  ECHR  the  decisions  being  unlawful  and
contrary to Section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1988.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Dated 5th September 2017
[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty







TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
the fee paid by the Claimant of �140 is to be repaid to him in full.


Signed                                  Dated 5th September 2017
[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty

