

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                     Appeal
No: IA/33566/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House                                    Determination
Promulgated
on 12 August 2014                                                on 26
August 2014


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL DIGNEY

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           FELECITACION BOLO (MRS)

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the appellant: Mr Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent: Mr Packer


                               DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The   respondent, a citizen of the Philippines, applied to  remain  in
      this country on the basis of her marriage to someone who  had  refugee
      status here. That application was refused but an  appeal  against  the
      decision allowed.  At the hearing the only point at issue, as  is  the
      case in this appeal, is whether EX1 of Appendix FM of the  Immigration
      Rules applies.  It was for the respondent to show,  on  a  balance  of
      probabilities that there were not insurmountable obstacles  to  family
      life continuing in the Philippines and the judge concluded that  there
      were.


   2. The first ground of appeal argues that  the  judge  did  not  properly
      apply Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640 and permission to appeal was  granted,
      inter alia, on that ground. That point is, to put it  at  the  lowest,
      misconceived, as Mr Duffy acknowledged. The judge decided the case  on
      the basis of the Immigration Rules and in those circumstances did  not
      go on to consider article 8.

   3. The other point relied on, and on which permission  was  granted,  was
      that the judge did not give adequate reasons for his conclusions  that
      the respondent and her husband could not relocate in the Philippines.

   4. The grounds of appeal contain two particular criticisms of the judge's
      reasoning. It is  said  that  the  judge  relied  on  an  untranslated
      document in reaching his conclusion that the respondent's family  were
      involved in a serious land dispute. The judge did not, in fact, do so;
      it is clear that he was relying on the respondent's evidence which  he
      accepted. If a fact finder accepts that a witness is truthful,  he  is
      entitled to accept what a witness says about a document, even if it is
      untranslated.

   5. The second point made is that the respondent failed to make an  asylum
      claim, although she realised that this was a possibility. There  is  a
      great deal of difference between being at risk of persecutory  conduct
      and there being insurmountable obstacles to return. The fact that  the
      respondent chose not to make an asylum claim  is  not  something  that
      should be held against her.

   6.  It follows that there is nothing in either of  the    two  particular
      criticisms that are made of the judge. The  appellant  must  therefore
      fall back on  the  argument  that  the  judge's  conclusions  are  not
      properly reasoned. In paragraph 29  of  the  determination  the  judge
      correctly directs himself on the law as to "insurmountable obstacles".
       He then goes on to explain why he concludes that they exist  in  this
      case. It could be argued that the judge could have given  more  weight
      to the respondent's husband's refugee status in this country, but  all
      the matters that he does refer to are relevant to the decision. Ground
      8 states that  the  Tribunal  relied  on  immaterial  matters  in  its
      assessment of the article 8 claim and gave undue weight  to  the  fact
      that the respondent was  married.  Leaving  aside  the  fact  that  an
      article 8 claim was not considered, clearly the fact of  the  marriage
      is a factor in this case, but I cannot see that  it  was  given  undue
      weight.

   7. "Insurmountable obstacles" is a broad and not clearly defined term and
      I conclude that the judge was entitled on  the  evidence  to  conclude
      that they existed here. He relied on matters that he was  entitled  to
      rely on and  did  not  rely  on  anything  that  was  immaterial.  His
      reasoning could not be stigmatised  as  irrational  or  perverse.  The
      definition has now changed slightly but as I am deciding  whether  the
      judge fell into legal error I have to consider the law as  it  was  at
      the time of the decision.


   8.  It follows that the original judge made no error of law. The original
      decision stands.

The appeal is dismissed


Designated  Judge Digney
Judge of the Upper Tribunal                                        15
August 2014
