
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33707/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 15th September 2017                    |On 2nd November 2017              |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL

                                   Between

                           miss jannatul ferdouse
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant's appeal against decisions to refuse to  vary  her  leave
    and to remove her, following an application made as long ago as October
    2015, was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Metzer  ("the  judge")
    in a decision promulgated on 15th December 2016.  The judge found  that
    the Secretary of State's adverse finding under paragraph 322(3) of  the
    Immigration Rules ("the rules") was made out in the light  of  evidence
    from HM Revenue and Customs.  This evidence showed that  the  appellant
    had breached the conditions of her  stay,  which  prohibited  her  from
    working.  The judge dismissed the appeal.

2.   In  the  grounds,  it  was  contended  that  the  judge  erred  as  the
    application of paragraph 322(3) of the rules is discretionary.  As  the
    appellant had an innocent explanation and her mistake in breaching  her
    conditions was unintentional, discretion should have been exercised  in
    her favour.  It was also contended that the judge  failed  to  consider
    the appellant's Article 8 case.  She was unable to continue her studies
    following refusal of her application for Tier 4 student leave.  Denying
    her further leave to remain before completing her course  would  breach
    her rights in the private life context.  The grounds include mention of
    CDS  (Brazil)  [2010]  UKUT  305,  said  still  to  be  good  law   and
    distinguishable from the Supreme Court judgment  in  Patel  and  Others
    [2013] UKSC 72 and the decision of the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Nasim  and
    Others [2014] UKUT 00025.

3.   In a rule 24 response from the Secretary of  State  dated  10th  August
    2017, the appeal was opposed on  the  basis  that  the  judge  directed
    himself appropriately.  The appellant had breached  her  conditions  of
    leave by working unlawfully.  Any failure regarding Article 8  was  not
    material as there were no prospects of success.

The Hearing

4.   There was no  appearance  by  or  on  behalf  of  the  appellant.   The
    Tribunal's case management file showed that notice of the  hearing  was
    sent to the address provided by her, and to her solicitors.   The  file
    contained a message from the solicitors  asking  that  the  hearing  be
    conducted "on the papers".

5.   Mr Duffy said that there was no full explanation  for  the  appellant's
    absence.  In any event, even if  the  judge  did  err  in  relation  to
    Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention, this was not  material.   The
    appellant had made no family life case and her private life ties  as  a
    person who had leave as a student  afforded  no  prospect  of  success.
    There was no material error of law in the decision.

Findings and Conclusions

6.    The judge's  decision  is  succinct.   It  contains  a  clear  adverse
    finding regarding breach of the conditions attached to the  appellant's
    leave and a conclusion that the ground of refusal in  paragraph  322(3)
    of the rules was made out.  Perhaps surprisingly, the  judge  dismissed
    the appeal "under the Immigration Rules" but without expressly reaching
    a conclusion on the human rights grounds of  appeal.   Any  failure  in
    this regard, however, is not material.
7.   The appellant's grounds of appeal  set  out  the  relevant  chronology.
    They include an explanation for her breach of condition, based  on  her
    belief that a right to work from an earlier period of leave  continued.
    So far as private life in the United Kingdom  is  concerned,  there  is
    very little indeed.   The  appellant  arrived  here  in  2009  and  has
    developed friendships.  The grounds also contain an  assertion  that  a
    family life has been established  but  there  are  no  details  at  all
    (paragraphs 14 and 15 of the grounds).

8.   A short bundle before the judge included a  witness  statement.   Apart
    from the explanation for the breach of condition, there is, again, very
    little showing the appellant's ties here.  There is  brief  mention  in
    paragraph 6 of private and family life and of close links with "lots of
    friends in the UK", said to show a "strong private life".  There is  no
    mention of family members in the witness statement at all.

9.   In these  circumstances,  the  appellant's  Article  8  case,  although
    pleaded, was not developed.  It has no  real  substance.   Taking  into
    account the Supreme Court judgment in Patel and Others [2013]  UKSC  72
    and guidance from the Upper Tribunal in Nasim and  Others  [2014]  UKUT
    00025, there were no prospects, on the evidence before  the  judge,  of
    the  appellant's  private  life  ties  (or  any  claimed  family  life)
    outweighing the public  interest  in  the  maintenance  of  immigration
    control.  Nothing in CDS (Brazil) assists the appellant as the evidence
    fell very far short of showing any substantial ties.

10.  I conclude that although the judge's decision did not expressly  engage
    with the Article 8 grounds, the error is  not  material  and  the  same
    overall conclusion, that the appeal fell to be  dismissed,  would  have
    been inevitable on the evidence before him.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  shall  stand,  as  it  contains  no
material error of law.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell

