







x

UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33326/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House on             |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|10 September 2105                    |on 12 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER


                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Ms Akosua D
                         no anonymity direction made
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr C Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr W Akaho, Solicitor, BWF Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the secretary of  state  and  to  the
    respondent as "the claimant."

 2. The claimant is a national of Ghana, born on 7 July  1972.  Her  appeal
    against the decision of the secretary of state refusing her application
    for a residence card pursuant to the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006
    ("the 2006 Regulations"), was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Lal
    "under the immigration rules" (sic) in a determination  promulgated  on
    11 November 2014.

 3. On 1 July 2015, the Tribunal set aside the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  It was accepted that the Judge erred in law in failing
    properly to apply the Upper Tribunal's decision in TA,  explaining  the
    decision in Kareem (Proxy Marriages -  EU  Law)  [2014]  UKUT  24.  The
    determination of whether  there  is  a  marital  relationship  for  the
    purpose of the 2006 Regulations must always be examined  in  accordance
    with the laws of  the  member  state  from  which  the  Union  citizens
    obtained nationality.  No evidence had been produced as to the laws  of
    France  from  which  the  Union  citizen  in  this  case  obtained  his
    nationality.

 4. There were moreover no  clearly  identifiable  reasons  justifying  the
    findings that the marriage was genuine and  durable.  The  decision  in
    that respect only amounted to two sentences. The record of  proceedings
    did not set out the  evidence  in  full  and  it  was  accordingly  not
    possible to ascertain the full nature and extent of the  evidence  that
    the Judge relied on.

 5. In the circumstances, I found  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge involved the making of material errors of law.

 6. Both parties accepted that the decision should accordingly be set aside
    and would have to be remade.

 7. In remaking the decision I found that the claimant and her partner were
    not to be treated  as  being  married  for  the  purpose  of  the  2006
    Regulations and that she accordingly had not established that she is  a
    family member for the purposes of Regulation 7 of the 2006 Regulations.

 8. With regard to Regulation 8, however, it was accepted on behalf of  the
    respondent that the claimant would be entitled to adduce  evidence  and
    make full submissions as to whether their relationship is  durable  for
    the purpose of Regulation 8(5) of the 2006 Regulations. The appeal  was
    accordingly adjourned.

    Hearing on 10 September 2015

 9. I have had regard to the bundles of  documents  relied  on  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal as well as the supplementary bundle produced to the
    Upper Tribunal. The latter bundle contained  the  documentary  evidence
    relied on by the claimant.

10. In assessing whether the relationship was  durable,  the  secretary  of
    state noted in refusing that claim that it is to be expected  that  the
    claimant demonstrates that she has been living together  with  her  EEA
    national sponsor for at least two years. Equally, it is  reasonable  to
    expect that both intend to  live  permanently  together  and  that  any
    previous relationship or marriage each may have had has broken down.

11. The secretary of state contended that no  evidence  had  been  provided
    that they resided together as a couple at the same address prior to the
    date of their customary marriage certificate. In addition, there was no
    evidence that they knew each other or had met  prior  to  the  date  of
    their customary marriage. As a result there was  insufficient  evidence
    suggesting that they are in a durable relationship.

    The claimant's case

12. The claimant attended the  hearing  and  gave  evidence.  She  had  the
    benefit of a Twi interpreter. She adopted her witness statement at  A1-
    A8 dated 20 October 2014. She was born on 7 July 1972 and is a Ghanaian
    national. She lives at 81 [ - ]London [ - ].

13. She came to the UK as a visitor in March 2003. Whilst here  she  met  a
    Portuguese national. They eventually decided to get married. On 3 April
    2004, whilst they were about to get married  at  the  Lambeth  Registry
    Office, she was arrested. She was detained and then released.

14. Her relationship broke down when her partner decided he had had  enough
    of the UK and left  for  Portugal.  She  did  not  wish  to  leave  and
    remained.

15. She lived at different addresses with friends who accommodated her.

16. In September 2007 she heard a programme relating to  a  pregnant  woman
    who had collapsed and died. Her baby however was saved.  There  was  an
    urgent request for a helper or carer for the baby. A  telephone  number
    was disclosed.

17. She got in touch with a Mr M who accompanied her to the hospital  where
    his newborn baby had been placed in an incubator.  Whilst  he  went  to
    Ghana to bury his wife, she looked after his children in  his  absence.
    She attended hospital on a daily basis to see the newborn child.

18. When he returned from Ghana, she was told by nurses that the  baby  had
    become attached to her and that she should  continue  her  visits.  She
    lived with Mr M for a few months. When the  baby  was  discharged,  she
    came to London for the weekends. She had resided in  Northampton  prior
    to that.

19. She came to London over weekends. In due course after Mr  M  noted  her
    commitment to the children, they started a relationship.

20. He moved into her home permanently at 353 [ - ]. They became close  and
    had a sexual relationship. They eventually agreed to get married.

21. This they did on 30 April 2008 and entered into a  customary  marriage.
    Her subsequent application for a residence card was refused.

22. Mr M went to Ghana with his two boys and left her on her own  with  the
    baby. He never returned. She was left with no choice but  to  care  for
    the baby herself. She received help from social  services.  She  became
    Kwame's sole carer and bonded with him. She decided to adopt him as her
    own child and obtained a parental responsibility order.

23. In March 2012 her Article 8 application was refused. Sadly, Kwame  died
    of various ailments and was buried in June 2012 in the  London  Borough
    of Southwark.  Her marriage to Kwame's father deteriorated  as  he  had
    abandoned her. Ultimately the relationship broke down and was dissolved
    on 19 May 2013.

24. She had moved to her current address where she had lived with the child
    for four years before his death. On  the  anniversary  of  the  child's
    death she held a gathering at her house 'to remember him'. Mr O was one
    of the sympathisers who were present on that occasion.

25. After the memorial event, Mr O called her  to  find  out  how  she  was
    coping.  They  became  friends.  He  offered  emotional  and  financial
    assistance. Eventually they fell  in  love.  He  visited  her  on  most
    weekends. Their relationship started on her birthday on 7 July 2013.

26. She and Mr O visit the child's grave on a monthly basis.

27. They became inseparable and he moved into her home in the first week of
    August 2013. His BT bill was sent to that address. Eventually he  began
    to discuss marriage with her.

28. On 18 October 2013, which  was  [Mr  O's]  birthday,  friends  came  to
    celebrate. He proposed to her in their presence  and  she  agreed.  She
    calls  her  husband  by  his  nickname.  They  agreed  to  get  married
    "customarily". He went to Ghana to inform their relatives  about  their
    intentions. He went there at the end of October  2013.  On  4  November
    2013, they got married "customarily".

29. Mr O returned to London on 10 November 2013. There was a celebration at
    home with a few friends.

30. She disputes  the  contention  that  she  gave  false  information  for
    obtaining a visa. She had fled from female circumcision which  she  had
    earlier stated.

31. She refers to the refusal of her application on the  basis  that  there
    was not sufficient evidence provided that she was residing with  Mr  M.
    It  had  been  contended  that  she  was  not  able  to  rely  on  that
    relationship as she was not residing with him. She contended that  that
    was wrong, that she was at the time the mother of his  child  whom  she
    adopted.

32. In the current application, she stated  that  her  husband  comes  from
    France, although they are both of Ghanaian parentage. Her husband  went
    personally to Ghana to perform the ceremony. If he did not love her  he
    would not have taken the trouble to buy a ticket to Ghana  to  see  her
    relatives.

33. She refers to various documents produced including photographs  of  the
    ceremony as well as those  regarding  'family  life'.  She  pointed  to
    various documents including utility bills, bank statements and the like
    to which I shall later refer.

34. Her husband works as a cleaner, earning about �1,000 a  month.  He  has
    been working with Asda since 2012.

35. She loves her husband. They plan to enjoy their companionship, intimacy
    and spend the rest of their lives together as a family unit. They  live
    together as a married couple.

36. In her oral evidence in chief she said that they came to court today by
    taxi. They started living together when they were married on 4 November
    2013. They lived together prior to that for about two months at 81 [  -
    ]. That was the property where she resided before her husband moved in.
    She still lives with him at that same address.

37. She was cross examined.

38. She said that there is no tenancy agreement relating to 81 [ - ].  This
    was property given by the Southwark council.

39. She was asked whether the council knows that  her  husband  lives  with
    her. She was given a letter by the council. The letter  relied  on  was
    from the electoral registration officer to "the occupier" at 81 [  -  ]
    dated July 2015.

40. There is no other tenant or occupier at the property:  only  they  live
    there. She married in November 2013 and said she lived with her husband
    for about two months before that. She said he came in about July 2013.

41. She was asked why she stated that he came two months  before  November.
    She said she did not check this properly. She  does  not  remember  the
    dates properly.

42. She was taken to paragraph 22 of her witness statement where she stated
    that he moved into her home during the first week in August  2013.  She
    said her child died on 19 May 2012. She met her husband a  year  later,
    at the anniversary celebration of his death on 19 May 2013.

43. She divorced Kwame's father on 19 May 2013.

44. She accepts that she was married within three  months  of  meeting  her
    husband. He is 61 years old and she is  43.  He  has  a  child  from  a
    previous marriage. She has not seen the child. His name  is  Kwasi.  He
    has not been to stay with them in the UK. Her husband had not told  her
    that Kwasi was living in the UK. When she met him her husband told  her
    he had a child.

45. She was referred to paragraph 6 of her husband's  statement.  Where  he
    stated that he has a child, Kevin O, who lives  with  his  mother.  She
    said his name is Kevin. He got the name 'Kwasi' from  her  husband.  He
    did use the name Kwasi as well. The name relates to  the  date  he  was
    born.

46. She does not know when Kwasi and his mother came to the UK.

47. Her husband does not have siblings. They have died. She does  not  know
    how many they had, nor their names.  They died before they met.

48. She said that her husband's siblings had  children.   Her  husband  has
    nephews and nieces. He has not told her that they are in the  UK.  They
    are in Ghana. None has visited him in the UK. No friend of her  husband
    from Ghana has stayed over.

49. She was referred to her husband's statement, where he  stated  that  he
    would like to take her on holiday. She said he has not  said  where  he
    would take her. They have not had a holiday in the UK.

50. She was asked what they do with the time they have together. They go to
    church on Sundays. He works six days a week from about  4am  until  3pm
    each day. They do not eat out. They have been to a cinema together.

51. It was put to her that the fact that she  cannot  say  much  about  him
    meant that they only cohabit and nothing more. She  denied  that.  They
    are married. They go to formal social parties such as when  someone  is
    having a baby function.

52. The last such social party they went to was on Sunday this  week.  That
    was at the church. She has been with her husband to a "funeral" on  the
    Sunday. She explained that this was a  memorial  service  which  was  a
    thanksgiving at the church in Milton Keynes.

53. She was referred to paragraph 29 of her statement in which  she  stated
    that she did not provide sufficient evidence that she was residing with
    Mr M. She was asked why she did not marry  him  in  the  UK.  That  was
    because he had family in Ghana.

54. It was put to her that  she  could  have  a  legal  marriage  with  her
    husband, Mr O, in the UK. At the moment they are living together and do
    not want to marry civilly. This is not her first engagement with an EEA
    national. She was previously engaged to a Portuguese national.

55. She was asked why she did not marry that national on another day.  That
    was because he said he was fed up. She did not want to go with  him  to
    Portugal. She did love him. She  had  not  wanted  to  marry  him  'for
    documents'.

56. She said that her husband's child's mother would not allow him to  come
    to them. She has not seen the child's mother and has not met her.

57. When asked about 'last Sunday', she said they went  to  Milton  Keynes.
    She repeated that this was a formal memorial ceremony. There was  food.
    This was a gathering. The celebration of a child's birthday  also  took
    place, however they went for the memorial service.

58. There was no re-examination.

59. Mr O attended the hearing and gave evidence. He gave his address as  81
    [ - ]. He adopted his witness statement, signed and dated on 20 October
    2014. He said there was one mistake at paragraph  17.  He  should  have
    stated that he would be celebrating his 61st birthday in October  2014.
    He had however stated on 20  October  2014,  the  date  he  signed  his
    statement, that he would be celebrating his 60th birthday.

60. He was born in Ghana on 18 October 1954. His parents are  deceased.  He
    left Ghana for France in 1981. He was educated in France. He married DO
    on 25 April 1998 in France. They had problems. This  persisted  and  in
    2009 he decided to come to the UK "for  respite."  He  also  wanted  to
    learn English.

61. He rented a studio flat in Milton Keynes. He obtained a  job  at  Tesco
    Warehouse as well as "a  driving  delivery  job."  He  divorced  DO  in
    January 2013. He has a child, Kevin O, with her,  who  stays  with  his
    mother.

62. On 19 May 2013 he attended a remembrance day for a  child  who  died  a
    year earlier. He noticed that the claimant had not recovered  from  the
    death of the child. He took her telephone number and called  her  after
    that. He went to visit her over weekends and assisted her in coping. He
    also  helped  her  financially.  Eventually,  he  developed  love   and
    affection for her.

63. They attended birthday parties and funerals together. She also took him
    to her child's grave. They continue to go once a month.

64. The relationship commenced on 7 July 2013 and developed. After a month,
    some time in the first week of August 2013, he moved in  with  her.  On
    his birthday party on 18 October 2013 he proposed to her at a gathering
    at the "home house." She accepted his proposal. She told him she  could
    not travel as she did not have leave to remain. He then decided  to  go
    to Ghana to enable him to get acquainted with her relatives and perform
    the customary rites and to finalise their marriage.

65. On 4 November 2013 the marriage was performed in Accra. He returned  to
    the UK on 10 November 2013. On 30 November they celebrated with friends
    at 81 [ - ]. They went to church on 1 December  2013  for  thanksgiving
    for their marriage.

66. He loves his wife dearly. He was "alarmed"  that  her  application  was
    refused. He had submitted his ID  card,  payslips,  utility  bills  and
    other documents.

67. He contends that he and the claimant are in a durable relationship  and
    have been living together since August 2013. Although he is French,  he
    wants to continue living with the claimant as his wife in  the  UK.  He
    now sees the UK as his home. He pays the bills and is  responsible  for
    rent and other expenses.

68. He wants to be able to travel with the claimant wherever he goes. He is
    not happy travelling alone.

69. He is now 61. His wife's application has been of major concern to  him,
    causing him anxiety.  He has lived with his wife since August  2013  to
    date.

70. He was asked how he spends his time with her. He works Monday-Saturday.
    He goes to church with her on Sundays. He last went to  church  on  the
    Sunday past to Milton Keynes to attend a memorial service[1].

71. In cross examination he said he is sure that it was the first  week  of
    August 2013 that he moved in with her.

72. He came to the UK in 2009. His child from his former relationship  with
    DO lives with his mother in the UK. They came here in  2009.  This  was
    because the child plays football for [ - ] under 20s.

73. He married DO at the Court in France who accepted their marriage.

74. Kevin is also called Kwasi. He explained that '......when you are  born
    on a Sunday in Ghana you are called Kwasi'. He sees  his  son  when  he
    plays football on Sundays.

75. He still has a relationship with him. He buys things for him.  He  goes
    to see him because of the football and sees him play every  two  months
    or so. He has not discussed with his wife where she would want to go on
    holiday with him. They have not had a holiday in the UK. They go to the
    local Camberwell church on Sundays.

76. There was no re-examination.

    Submissions

77. Mr Whitwell referred to the reasons for refusal  where  it  was  stated
    that the claimant had provided insufficient evidence  relating  to  the
    claim that theirs is a durable relationship. He submitted  that  living
    together and going to church does not amount to a durable relationship.
    There was little by way of any 'socialisation' apart from the attending
    of church.

78. He submitted  that  there  was  a  vagueness  as  to  when  they  began
    cohabiting together. He suggested  that  it  may  have  been  in  July,
    September or August 2013. Mr Whitwell accepted that  this  may  however
    not be the most significant matter.

79. There was no documentary evidence respecting  their  tenancy.  Further,
    the claimant stated that she did not want to get married civilly, which
    may show that this is not a durable relationship.

80. Mr Whitwell submitted that the evidence must be assessed in its  proper
    context. This  is  a  claimant  who  came  on  a  visit  visa  and  has
    overstayed. She then became engaged and attempted to marry a Portuguese
    national. This was stopped. They decided not to go  further  with  that
    relationship. This suggests that that had not  been  a  love  marriage.
    Accordingly,  the  current  relationship  needs  to   "be   scrutinised
    carefully."

81. With regard to the additional evidence, he accepted  that  there  is  a
    degree of consistency between them.

82. On behalf of the claimant, Mr Akaho submitted that there was  only  one
    issue, namely whether theirs is a durable  relationship.  That  is  not
    defined by the directive or under the 2006 Regulations. He referred  to
    YB (EEA Reg 17 (4) - proper approach) Ivory Coast  [2008]  UKAIT  00062
    where the Tribunal stated at [29] that it  is  clear  that  the  policy
    instructions themselves recognise 'at least in places' that meeting the
    requirements  of  comparable  immigration  rules  is  not   necessarily
    determinative. Paragraph 2  of  the  European  case  work  instructions
    emphasises that each case must be assessed on an individual basis,  but
    an example of where it might be appropriate to issue a  residence  card
    would be if a family member was very elderly or incapacitated.

83. The Tribunal there stated that in the light of their analysis,  it  was
    also clear that the IDIs at  5.5.2  stipulates  that  officers  "should
    satisfy themselves fully that the  person  meets  the  leave  to  enter
    requirements of an unmarried partner as  set  out  in  part  8  of  the
    immigration rules (other than  those  relating  to  entry  clearance)".
    There was no definition given by the Directive or  the  regulations  of
    the term "durable relationship." The policy instructions are helpful in
    indicating the general approach but should not be taken as  necessarily
    correct in every particular.

84. He also submitted that a  durable  relationship  does  not  necessarily
    entail cohabitation - Dauhoo (EEA Regulations - Reg 8 [2012] UKUT 79 at
    [21].  Durable relationships are not defined by the regulations and  is
    not measured by a fixed period of two years.

85. He submitted that theirs is a durable  relationship.  They  have  lived
    together for two years. Both said August 2013 was the date  they  began
    to live together.

86. They have married in  accordance  with  Ghanaian  customary  law.  They
    believe that there is no need to repeat it here in the UK. They  remain
    committed.

87. With regard to the claimant's history as an  overstayer,  he  submitted
    that after her Portuguese national partner left the  UK,  she  did  not
    decide to follow him. This was an  individual  decision.  It  does  not
    follow that the current relationship  is  not  genuine.  This  must  be
    assessed on its own terms.

88. The evidence that they gave in relation to his son, Kevin  (Kwasi)  was
    consistent and so was the evidence relating to their  association  with
    each other during the week, the work pattern as well as the  attendance
    of church.

89. He submitted that there is 'more than sufficient evidence' based on the
    documentation to  confirm  their  assertions  of  cohabitation  at  the
    relevant address. He submitted that the appeal  should  accordingly  be
    allowed.

    Assessment

90. I found the evidence of the appellant and her husband to  be  credible.
    There have not been any significant contradictions or discrepancies  in
    their evidence.

91. I have had particular regard Mr Whitwell's submission that regard  must
    be had  to  the  context  in  which  the  appellant  made  her  current
    application. That is indeed a very relevant consideration. I have taken
    into account the fact that the appellant was an overstayer who  entered
    into a relationship with a Portuguese national. Her earlier application
    for a residence card failed, resulting  in  her  sponsor  returning  to
    Portugal. However, she did not follow him there.

92. I have also had regard to the context in which she met Mr O.  This  was
    at a memorial service regarding the child whom she had adopted and  who
    sadly passed away a year earlier. It was on that  occasion  that  Mr  O
    noted how sad the appellant was and that resulted in telephone  contact
    between them.

93. Mr O was able to provide some comfort and  solace  for  her,  including
    assisting her financially at the time. In due course I accept that they
    did fall in love and that a proposal of marriage was accepted.

94. This resulted in a customary marriage. Although that marriage might  be
    valid in accordance with Ghanaian customary law, there was no  evidence
    placed before the respondent or the Tribunal that France was a  country
    which  recognises  the  validity  of  proxy  marriages  of  this  kind.
    Accordingly, the claimant and her partner could not be treated as being
    married for the purpose of the 2006 Regulations and she thus could  not
    establish under Regulation 7 that she is a family member.

95. It was evident from the evidence given by the claimant and  Mr  O  that
    they are aware of the day to day circumstances of each  other's  lives.
    Mr O set out his working  pattern  which  the  appellant  independently
    confirmed during her oral evidence. None  of  that  evidence  had  been
    available in either of their witness statements.

96. Moreover, although as submitted by Mr Whitwell, there is not much of an
    external social life, both said  that  their  social  life  and  social
    activity revolved around the church. They regularly attend on a Sunday.
    Moreover, they gave consistent evidence relating to their  recent  trip
    to Milton Keynes in order to attend a church ceremony there which was a
    memorial service for a deceased person.

97. There is no dispute that they have been living together at the premises
    situated at 81 [ - ]. Although  they  have  not  produced  any  tenancy
    agreement, the claimant stated that this was a house  provided  to  her
    when she had care of the child of Mr M. That child was in hospital  for
    nine months. Mr M proposed to the claimant and  moved  into  her  home.
    They did in fact get married customarily in April 2008. Her application
    for a residence card was refused.

98. Mr M went to Ghana with his two boys and left her alone with the  baby.
    He never returned. She then decided to adopt the child as her  own  and
    even obtained a court order  for  parental  responsibility.  The  child
    suffered from cerebral palsy and died on 19 May 2012. The  relationship
    with the child's father broke down and was dissolved in May 2013.

99. In the meantime the claimant had moved to her current address in [ -  ]
    where she lived with Kwame for four years prior to his death. I  accept
    that on the anniversary of the child's death there was a  gathering  at
    her house which resulted in her meeting her current partner, Mr O.

100. I accept from the evidence which has  not  been  challenged  that  they
    have been living together at the same address for over two years as  at
    the date of the hearing.

101. They have also married  in  accordance  with  Ghanaian  customary  law.
    Although evidence relating to their cohabitation has not been disputed,
    I have also had regard  to  the  documentary  evidence  produced  which
    confirms their assertions in this regard.

102. The claimant has produced gas bills between October and  December  2013
    which shows her address as 81 [ - ]. There are also  EDF  Energy  bills
    during November 2013. At D10-D14 there is a Home Serve policy  sent  to
    the claimant at that address on 30 November 2013. Further, there  is  a
    letter from the London Borough of Southwark dated 14 June 2012 sent  to
    the claimant at the address in which she is granted the exclusive right
    of burial at the Camberwell New Cemetery (14 June 2012).

103. There is moreover a landlord's gas safety letter sent to the  appellant
    in March 2015.

104. I have also had regard to a joint Barclays  statement  evidencing  that
    the claimant and Mr O operate a joint account - G2.  This  is  for  the
    period January to April 2015. There  is  also  an  account  summary  in
    respect of the joint account produced for the period  October  2013  to
    October 2014.

105. With regards to the documentation relating  to  the  sponsor  alone,  I
    have had regard to his payslips as well as his P60. His  Barclays  bank
    statement for the period 13 September until 10 October 2014  shows  his
    address at 81 [ - ].  There are also joint Barclays bank statements for
    the period November 2013 until the end of January 2013 (see 30-33).

106. There are joint bank statements produced for the period 14  January  to
    11 April 2014; 14 January - 11 April 2014; 12 July -  10  October  2014
    and 13 September - 10 October 2014.

107. There are a number of Barclays bank account statements  in  respect  of
    the sponsor alone at the address for the period 13 December 2013  -  10
    January 2014; 13 May 2014 -  12  June  2014;  13  November  2013  -  12
    December 2013.

108. There is a Thames Water bill sent to the sponsor  at  the  address  for
    the period 1 April 2014 to  31  March  2015  in  which  the  additional
    account holder is stated to be the claimant.

109. There is a BT bill sent to Mr O on 24 October  2013  at  that  address.
    There is also an NHS letter sent to Mr O at that address, issued  on  9
    October 2014, which is a confirmation of GP registration at  the  South
    London Primary Care Support Services in London [ - ]. There is a letter
    produced from the London Borough of Southwark  addressed  to  Mr  O  in
    which  his  polling  station  in  the   election   for   the   European
    parliamentary members scheduled for 22 May 2014.

110. I have also considered Mr Whitwell's submission that  the  relationship
    is not  "genuine"  on  the  basis  that  there  is  little  by  way  of
    socialisation apart from attending church. However, I do not find  that
    there is any merit in that  contention.  As  already  indicated,  their
    relationship has demonstrated a commitment and there is an endurance to
    the relationship which satisfies the relationship for  the  purpose  of
    the 2006 Regulations.

111. There is no requirement that they have  an  active  and  varied  social
    life. Their social contacts, friends and acquaintances  reside  in  the
    church, both locally  and  at  Milton  Keynes  where  they  attended  a
    memorial service a few days prior to the hearing.

112. I have also had regard to the  photographs  produced  relating  to  the
    funeral rites of Kwame M (E1-E9) as  well  as  the  customary  marriage
    photographs at E10-E15.

113. Regulation  8(5)  provides  that  a  person  satisfies  the  conditions
    applicable to "extended family members" of the EEA National if  she  is
    the partner of an EEA National and can prove to the decision maker that
    she is in a durable relationship with him.

114. There is no definition  in  the  2006  Regulations  as  to  "a  durable
    relationship."  Whether  or  not  the  appellant  is   in   a   durable
    relationship is a matter to be considered on the basis of the  evidence
    as a whole.

115. Having regard to all the circumstances, I find that  the  parties  have
    cohabited under the same roof for at least  two  years  and  that  this
    constitutes more than mere cohabitation. They are living together in  a
    committed relationship which has endured and which is permanent.

116. I am accordingly satisfied from  the  evidence  as  a  whole  that  the
    claimant and Mr O are in a durable  relationship  for  the  purpose  of
    Regulation 8(5) of the 2006 Regulations.

117. I have also had regard to Regulation  17(4)  of  the  2006  Regulations
    which provides that the secretary of state "may" issue a residence card
    to an extended family member not falling within Regulation 7(3) who  is
    not an EEA National on application if  the  relevant  EEA  National  in
    relation to the extended family member is a qualified person  (which  I
    find Mr O is); and in all the circumstances it appears to the secretary
    of state appropriate to issue the residence card.

118. Accordingly, Regulation 17(4) provides a discretion  to  the  secretary
    of  state  relating  to  the  issue  of  a  residence  card  in   these
    circumstances.

119. In the claimant's case, the respondent has not considered the  exercise
    of such discretion, having dismissed her application.

120. In the circumstances, the secretary of state is in the  first  instance
    required to consider the exercise of discretion before the Tribunal  is
    itself entitled to consider the exercise of discretion itself: FD  (EEA
    Discretion - Basis of Appeal) Algeria [2007] UKAIT 49.

    Notice of Decision

    Having set aside the decision of the first-tier Tribunal, the  decision
    I substitute is to allow the claimant's appeal to the extent  that  her
    application for an EEA Residence card remains  outstanding  before  the
    secretary of state.

    No anonymity direction is made.




    Signed        Date 9 October 2015


    Judge C R Mailer
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
-----------------------

[1]   When she gave her evidence, the claimant's  husband  remained  out  of
court. He came into court immediately after she completed her  evidence  and
began to give his evidence. I am accordingly satisfied  that  Mr  O  had  no
opportunity to speak to the claimant or his solicitor about her evidence.


