










UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33606/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House              |Decision and Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 3 May 2017                      |On 17 May 2017                          |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between

                         Mr Harpinder Singh Dhillon
                         no anonymity direction made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr A Burrett, counsel (instructed by Malik Law
Chambers)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of  India,  born  on  5  August  1974.  He
      appeals with permission against the decision  of  the  the  first-tier
      Tribunal promulgated  on  28  September  2016  dismissing  his  appeal
      against the decision of the respondent  refusing his  application  for
      leave to remain in the UK. The appellant entered the UK on 13 November
      2009 as a Tier 4 student. Following a subsequent  grant  of  leave  to
      remain until 28 February 2015, leave was  curtailed  on  21  September
      2014.


   2. His application made on 25 February 2015 for leave to  remain  on  the
      basis of his private life was refused on 16 October 2015. That was the
      decision appealed against [10]. The Judge  found  that  the  appellant
      could not satisfy the relevant provisions under the Immigration Rules.




   3. In considering the appeal pursuant to Article 8 outside the Rules  the
      Judge found  that  the  public  interest  outweighed  the  appellant's
      private life and that there were  no  exceptional  circumstances.  The
      decision to remove was proportionate.


   4. On 21 February 2017 Upper Tribunal Judge Gill  granted  the  appellant
      permission to appeal.  She stated that it is arguable that  the  Judge
      erred by failing to consider whether in  relation  to  the  Article  8
      claim it would be reasonable to expect the appellant's  two  year  old
      British citizen child to leave to the UK in order to enjoy family life
      with both of his parents.


   5. It was also arguable that the Judge failed to apply R (MA) Pakistan  v
      SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 705: the fact that a child is a qualifying  child
      by reason of continuous residence for at least  seven  years  must  be
      given significant weight in the balancing exercise.  By  analogy  that
      reasoning arguably also applied where a child is a qualifying child by
      reason of British citizenship.


   6. In the Rule 24 response the respondent did not oppose the  appeal  and
      invited the Tribunal to determine the appeal afresh. It was noted that
      the Judge  appeared  not  to  have  considered  whether  it  would  be
      reasonable to expect the appellant's child, who is a qualifying child,
      to leave the UK.


The appeal


   7. At the commencement of the hearing, Mr Singh confirmed that there  had
      been an error of law for the reasons given. In the circumstances,  the
      parties requested that the decision should be set aside  and  remitted
      to the First-tier Tribunal for a  fresh  decision  to  be  made  under
      Article 8.


   8. I accede to that request. I have considered the  President's  Practice
      Statement regarding the remitting  of  an  appeal  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal for a fresh decision. I  am  satisfied  that  the  extent  of
      judicial fact finding which is necessary for the decision  to  be  re-
      made is likely to be extensive.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error of law and the decision is set aside.


      I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal, Newport,  for  a  fresh
      decision to be made before another Judge.


      No anonymity direction is made.










      Signed                             Date  16 May 2017


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer

