
[pic]
IAC-AH-CO-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33818/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26th October 2015                 |On 24th February 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MR SHALVA KHECHUASHVILI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr G Davison (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The respondent is a citizen of Georgia.  His appeal against a  decision
    to refuse him leave to enter the United Kingdom, made  on  14th  August
    2014, was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Fowell ("the judge"), in
    a decision promulgated on 14th January 2015.

2.   The judge concluded that guidance  given  by  the  House  of  Lords  in
    Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40 fell to be applied.  The  Secretary  of  State
    found that the respondent's removal  to  Georgia  was  a  proportionate
    response and that he might apply for entry clearance to return  to  the
    United Kingdom to continue family life with his wife and daughter.  The
    judge found that  this  would  entail  a  period  of  delay,  which  he
    described as an "unknown factor". One aspect was the time it would take
    for the Home Office to consider  and  decide  the  respondent's  wife's
    application for indefinite leave to remain.  Another was  the  time  it
    would take before the respondent would be in a position  to  apply  for
    entry clearance from abroad and the further delay while his application
    was considered by the overseas post.  The  judge  assessed  the  likely
    delay as "several further months".   He  found  that  the  prospect  of
    "perhaps six months' separation from his family" and the impact on  his
    young daughter, three years old, to be "no small matter".  There  would
    also be financial difficulties in relation to child  care  arrangements
    in the United Kingdom.   The  judge  concluded  that  the  respondent's
    removal to Georgia would be a disproportionate response and allowed the
    appeal on human rights grounds.

3.   The Secretary of State applied  for  permission,  contending  that  the
    judge erred in his approach to the Article  8  assessment.   First,  he
    gave no consideration to the amendments to the 2002 Act  introduced  by
    the Immigration Act 2014,  in  assessing  the  proportionality  of  the
    adverse decision.  Relevant matters included the respondent's  unlawful
    status in the United Kingdom when his relationship with  his  wife  was
    established.  He was an overstayer at the time.   Subsequently,  having
    been refused entry clearance, the respondent entered the United Kingdom
    unlawfully.  The judge failed to consider that there were  no  apparent
    obstacles to the respondent's wife and daughter relocating  to  Georgia
    or Kazakhstan, the country of her nationality, to continue family  life
    there.   Moreover,  there  was  no  evidence  supporting  the   judge's
    assumption that an entry clearance application from abroad, made by the
    respondent,  would  take  several  months.   Similarly,  there  was  no
    evidence showing that his wife and child would be unable to cope during
    the temporary separation that an application from abroad would cause.

4.   Moreover, the judge moved  to  an  Article  8  assessment  outside  the
    immigration rules ("the rules") without first considering whether there
    were compelling circumstances in the case not properly recognised under
    them.

5.   Permission to appeal was granted on 24th February 2015.  In a  Rule  24
    response, it was contended on the respondent's behalf that the decision
    to allow the appeal was sustainable.  The judge set out and  was  fully
    aware of the respondent's immigration history.  The Secretary of  State
    made the decision to refuse leave to  enter  notwithstanding  the  fact
    that the respondent met the suitability requirements of the rules.  The
    Chikwamba principle was still good law and the judge  did  not  err  in
    taking it into account  in  the  Article  8  assessment.   The  grounds
    revealed a disagreement with the outcome but no material error of  law.
    Events had moved on and the respondent's wife now had indefinite  leave
    to remain.  The Secretary of State's decision letter  showed  that  the
    sole reason for refusing leave to enter was the lack of such  leave  at
    the  time  the  decision  was  made.   The  couple's  daughter  had  an
    outstanding application for registration as a British citizen.

Submissions on Error of Law

6.   Mr Tufan said that reliance was placed upon the grounds.  An  important
    authority was Singh and Khalid [2015]  EWCA  Civ  74.   A  freestanding
    Article 8 assessment required compelling circumstances to be shown, not
    fully recognised or catered for under the rules.   The  judge  had  not
    taken this guidance into account.  Even if the judge were  entitled  to
    make an Article 8 assessment outside the  rules,  he  was  required  to
    consider the  factors  set  out  in  section  117B  of  the  2002  Act,
    introduced by the 2014 Act.  The respondent's  immigration  status  was
    precarious, as was that of his partner, at the time their  relationship
    was established and developed.  It appeared that she now had indefinite
    leave.  The judge also failed to consider or assess whether family life
    might be continued in Georgia or Kazakhstan.

7.   A further relevant recent authority was Agyarko [2015]  EWCA  Civ  440.
    This case gave  important  guidance  on  the  insurmountable  obstacles
    issue.  At the time of the  application  for  leave,  the  respondent's
    partner did not have  settled  status.   The  respondent's  immigration
    history  was  poor.   Having  failed  in  his  application  for   entry
    clearance, he entered the United  Kingdom  unlawfully.   These  matters
    were relevant to the  Article  8  assessment  but  the  judge  did  not
    consider them.  Instead, he took into account and applied Chikwamba but
    this authority dated from before the major changes to the introduced in
    July 2012 and July 2014.  The Court of Appeal commented  on  Chikwamba,
    in Agyarko, particularly at paragraphs 27 to 31  of  the  judgment  and
    recent guidance on the correct approach now appeared in the judgment in
    Chen [2015] UKUT 00189 (IAC).  The onus was on the respondent  to  show
    why a period of temporary separation, while he sought  entry  clearance
    from abroad, was disproportionate.

8.   The judge's finding that  an  application  for  entry  clearance  would
    entail a delay of several months was unsustainable.  Mr Tufan handed up
    an illustrative printout from the gov.uk  website  showing  that  entry
    clearance cases in Tbilisi are likely to be completed within 30 days of
    application.  The judge erred in making his finding in the  absence  of
    relevant evidence.

9.   Mr Davison said that the judge clearly found at  paragraph  44  of  the
    decision that there was an unknown factor consisting of the  delay  and
    may have relied on his judicial experience.  The key issue in this part
    of the case was the judge's assessment of the position in the light  of
    Chikwamba and Hayat.  The potential delay was a material  factor.   The
    judge also had clearly in mind  the  respondent's  adverse  immigration
    history.  This was noted at paragraph 12(a) of the decision.  In making
    the adverse decision giving rise to the appeal, the Secretary of  State
    had not drawn an adverse inference from this factor but  found  instead
    that the respondent met the suitability requirements of the rules.

10.  So far as section 117B of the 2002 Act was  concerned,  the  judge  set
    out the background clearly, for  example  at  paragraph  25(a)  of  the
    decision.  The overall conclusion was sustainable as he clearly had the
    parties' cases in mind, albeit that there was no express  reference  to
    section 117B.  The  judge  could  not  be  criticised  for  failing  to
    expressly refer to Agyarko as judgment was given some months after  the
    decision was promulgated.

11.  In giving weight to the prospect of delay and separation of the  family
    members, the judge may well have taken into account an earlier delay of
    some three and a half to  four  years,  caused  by  erroneous  decision
    making on the Secretary of State's part.

12.  As at the date of the  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
    application for indefinite leave by the respondent's  partner  was  not
    resolved.  A clear submission was made that the appropriate course  was
    that he should be given leave on a discretionary basis,  in  line  with
    her.  Seen in this light, the  fact  that  his  partner  did  not  have
    indefinite leave may in fact have strengthened the  respondent's  case.
    Accepting  that  the  judge  had  not  clarified  this   aspect,   this
    nonetheless fortified the conclusion that the appeal fell to be allowed
    on human rights grounds.  The Secretary of State's grounds did not seek
    to challenge this part of the  case.   Paragraph  36  of  the  decision
    recorded the submission made on the respondent's behalf.

13.  In reply, Mr Tufan  said  that  the  judge  made  no  findings  on  the
    submission that the respondent should be given discretionary leave  and
    so there was no substance or merit in drawing attention to the  absence
    of a challenge in the Secretary of State's grounds.

Conclusion on Error of Law

14.  The Secretary of State gave reasons for  the  decision  to  refuse  the
    respondent leave to enter in a detailed letter dated  13  August  2015.
    The application was considered under  the  rules  and,  in  particular,
    Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE to 276DH.  As Mr  Davidson  submitted,
    paragraph 9 of that letter shows that although the Secretary  of  State
    was aware of the respondent's adverse immigration history,   a  finding
    was made that he  met  the  suitability  requirements  in  relation  to
    limited leave to remain as a partner.  That was not, of course, the end
    of the matter.  The eligibility requirements of  the  rules  were  then
    considered.  These requirements were not met, the respondent's  partner
    being a national of Kazakhstan with only limited  leave  as  a  Tier  2
    (General) Migrant, subject to continuing  employment.   Eligibility  on
    the basis of family life as a parent was then considered  but,  in  the
    light of his daughter's age and  nationality  and  the  fact  that  the
    respondent did not fall within the definition of a parent,  and  taking
    into account the prominent role in the child's upbringing taken by  her
    mother, the requirements of the rules in this  context  were  also  not
    met.  It followed that the respondent could not meet  the  requirements
    of EX.1 of Appendix FM.

15.   The  Secretary  of  State  also  concluded  that  the   private   life
    requirements of the rules in paragraph 276ADE  were  not  met  and  the
    decision letter shows that  the  best  interests  of  the  respondent's
    daughter were taken into account.  There was a  further  assessment  of
    whether there were exceptional circumstances which might warrant  leave
    outside the rules.  Again,  following  detailed  consideration  of  the
    case, the Secretary of State concluded that  exceptional  circumstances
    were not shown.

16.  Mr Tufan correctly pointed to recent  authority,  including  Singh  and
    Khalid, which emphasises  that  a  freestanding  Article  8  assessment
    outside the rules is not a step to be taken routinely or in every case.
     Compelling circumstances are required to be shown.  Even  if  such  an
    assessment is required, the rules retain their importance when weighing
    the competing interests, because the extent of a failure to  meet  them
    informs the assessment  of  the  weight  to  be  given  to  the  public
    interest.

17.  With great respect to the judge,  and  accepting  that  the  particular
    guidance given in Agyarko was not available at the  time  the  decision
    was made, there is no reflection of this approach in the decision.

18.  The judge carefully summarised the two cases, in paragraphs  12(a)  and
    25 for example.  Consideration of  what  the  judge  described  as  the
    applicable law was largely focussed on EB (Kosovo) [2008] UKHL  41  and
    Chikwamba and the decision shows that the judge  disengaged  altogether
    from the rules, perhaps because of the respondent's failure to meet the
    relevant requirements.  In weighing the competing  interests,  he  gave
    very substantial weight to the prospect of delay, should the respondent
    make an entry clearance application from abroad.  However, the decision
    contains no findings regarding  compelling  circumstances  and  nothing
    explaining why an Article 8 assessment outside the rules was, in  fact,
    required.  I do not accept Mr Davison's submission that the summary  of
    the parties' cases earlier in the decision is sufficient to  show  that
    the Article 8 assessment outside the rules was properly  justified  and
    adequately reasoned.

19.  Moreover, the decision contains nothing  at  all  in  relation  to  the
    public interest considerations contained in section 117B  of  the  2002
    Act.  Regard must be had to them when  assessing  whether  interference
    with a person's right  to  respect  for  private  and  family  life  is
    justified under Article 8(2).  The decision contains no  assessment  of
    the relevant factors bearing on the respondent's case,  as  tending  to
    strengthen or weaken it.

20.  So far as Agyarko is concerned, although the judge could not have  been
    aware  of  it,  the  guidance  given  in  that   case   is   important,
    notwithstanding the fact that the Secretary of State did not  expressly
    consider whether or not there were insurmountable obstacles  to  family
    life  continuing  abroad.   What  Agyarko  shows  is  that  the   broad
    principles set out in Chikwamba require refinement in the light of  the
    very substantial changes to the rules introduced in July 2012 and  July
    2014.  At paragraph 31 of the  judgment,  for  example,  the  Court  of
    Appeal held  that  it  would  be  necessary  to  establish  exceptional
    circumstances in any case involving  "precarious  family  life",  where
    Chikwamba is relied upon  as  showing  that  leave  should  be  granted
    outside the rules, even though it could not be  said  that  there  were
    insurmountable obstacles to family  life  continuing  abroad.   In  the
    light of the limited leave the respondent's wife  had  when  the  entry
    clearance application was made and at the date of hearing,  and  taking
    into account the respondent's  poor  immigration  history,  this  is  a
    "precarious family life" case.   So  far  as  the  judge's  finding  at
    paragraph 44 of the decision is  concerned,  there  was  no  supporting
    evidence showing that the period of separation  might  be  as  long  as
    successive periods of several months.

21.  The net result  is  that  there  was  no  certain  foundation  for  the
    conclusion  that  the  respondent's   removal   would   amount   to   a
    disproportionate response.

22.  The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside  and  will  be
    remade.  In a discussion regarding the appropriate  venue,  Mr  Davison
    said that the family now live in the far south west and so the decision
    should be remade in the First-tier Tribunal  at  Newport,  the  closest
    hearing centre.  The  respondent's  wife's  indefinite  leave  and  the
    application for British citizenship made on behalf  of  their  daughter
    were new factors.  The  adverse  decision  was  largely  based  on  the
    absence of status on her part and  insurmountable  obstacles  were  not
    expressly raised and so the decision letter might  need  updating.   Mr
    Tufan said that the decision should be remade in  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    There was no apparent need to revisit the decision letter.

23.  Having given the matter careful thought, I conclude that  the  decision
    should be  remade  at  the  Newport  hearing  centre,  with  up-to-date
    evidence being available to the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and shall be remade  in
the First-tier Tribunal, at  Newport,  by  a  judge  other  than  First-tier
tribunal Judge Fowell.

Anonymity

There has been no application for anonymity and I make no direction on  this
occasion.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal having been  set  aside,  whether  a
fee award should made or not will be considered by the  First-tier  Tribunal
when the decision is remade.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell
