
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/33481/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London                  |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 12 June 2014                               |On 3 July 2014               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                AZIM UL AZAM
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Burrett instructed by Nasim & Co Solicitors
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This determination refers to parties as they  were  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

2. The appellant,  a  national  of  Pakistan,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
  Tribunal against the decision of the respondent to refuse his application
  for leave to remain on the basis of his long residence in the UK.  First-
  tier Tribunal Judge Chowdhury allowed the appeal to the extent  that  the
  decision is not in accordance with the law. The Secretary  of  State  now
  appeals with permission to this Tribunal.

3. The background to this appeal is not in dispute.  The  appellant  entered
  the UK on 23 May 2001 as a student and was granted subsequent  extensions
  of leave to remain as a student until 31 July 2009. He applied before the
  expiry of his leave and was subsequently granted two periods of leave  to
  remain as a Tier  4  general  migrant  valid  until  30  July  2012.  The
  appellant subsequently lodged this application for  indefinite  leave  to
  remain on the basis of long residence. The date on which this application
  was lodged is dealt with below. In the reasons for refusal letter dated 8
  July 2013 the respondent said that she accepted that  the  appellant  had
  lawful leave from his arrival on 23 May 2001 until 23 July 2012.  However
  the appellant was without lawful leave from  31  July  2012  onwards.  In
  these circumstances the Secretary of State said that  the  appellant  was
  unable to meet the requirements of the Immigration  Rules  in  particular
  paragraph  276B  (i)  (a)  because  he  had  not  demonstrated  10  years
  continuous lawful residence and 276B  (v)  because  his  application  was
  lodged 2 months after his leave expired.  The  Secretary  of  State  then
  considered the application under paragraph 276ADE and  decided  that  the
  appellant had not established that he qualified for leave  to  remain  on
  the basis of his private life in the UK.

4. Paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules provides as follows;

      276B. The requirements to be met by an applicant for indefinite  leave
      to remain on the ground of long residence in the  United  Kingdom  are
      that:

           (i) (a) he has had at least 10 years continuous lawful residence
           in the United Kingdom.

           (ii) having regard to the public interest there are  no  reasons
           why it would be undesirable for him to be given indefinite leave
           to remain on the ground of long residence, taking  into  account
           his:

                 (a) age; and

                 (b) strength of connections in the United Kingdom; and

                 (c)  personal  history,   including   character,   conduct,
                 associations and employment record; and

                 (d) domestic circumstances; and

                 (e) compassionate circumstances; and

                 (f) any representations received on  the  person's  behalf;
                 and

           (iii) the applicant does not fall for refusal under the  general
           grounds for refusal.

           (iv) the applicant has demonstrated sufficient knowledge of  the
           English language and sufficient  knowledge  about  life  in  the
           United Kingdom, in accordance with Appendix KoLL.

           (v) the applicant must not be in the UK in breach of immigration
           laws except that any period of overstaying for a  period  of  28
           days or  less  will  be  disregarded,  as  will  any  period  of
           overstaying between periods of entry clearance, leave  to  enter
           or leave  to  remain  of  up  to  28  days  and  any  period  of
           overstaying pending the determination  of  an  application  made
           within that 28 day period.




5. The Secretary of State therefore identified two reasons for refusing  the
  application, paragraph 276B (i) (a) and 276B (v). The First-tier Tribunal
  Judge allowed the appeal on three grounds. The Judge  decided  [20]  that
  the Secretary of State was wrong to conclude that the appellant  had  not
  accumulated 10 years lawful residence as required by paragraph  276B  (i)
  (a) because of the delay in making his application when he  clearly  had.
  That part of the Judge's decision is not challenged  in  the  grounds  of
  appeal.

6. The Judge further decided that the Secretary of  State  did  not  act  in
  accordance with the law in purporting to  refuse  the  application  under
  276B (v) when that provision  was  not  in  force  at  the  date  of  the
  appellant's application [21].

7. The date of the appellant's application  is  relevant  because  specified
  amendments to the Immigration Rules came into force  on  1  October  2012
  through the Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules HC194. Paragraph 86
  of HC194 which took effect on 1 October 2012 inserted paragraph 276B (v).
  However under 'Implementation' there is the following provision;

      "With the exception of paragraphs  ...the  changes  set  out  in  this
      Statement shall take effect on 9 July 2012. Paragraphs ... 86... shall
      take effect on 1 October 2012.


      However, if an application for entry clearance, leave to remain or
      indefinite leave to remain has been made before 9 July 2012 and the
      application has not been decided, it will be decided in accordance
      with the rules in force on 8 July 2012."



8. At the hearing in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  it  appears  to  have  been
  accepted by the Presenting Officer  that  the  application  was  received
  before 1 October 2012  and  this  is  the  basis  on  which  the  hearing
  proceeded. Mr Burrett submitted before  me  that  there  was  a  recorded
  delivery slip dated 28 September 2012 and deemed service was 2 days after
  posting which was 30  September  2012.  Mr  Whitwell  accepted  that  the
  Presenting Officer at the First-tier Tribunal hearing may  have  conceded
  that the application was received before 1 October 2012.

9. The Judge, having found that the application was made  before  1  October
  2012, went on to hold that the Secretary of State's decision was  not  in
  accordance with the law as paragraph 276B (v) was not  in  force  at  the
  date of the application. However Mr Whitwell  submitted  that  the  Judge
  erred  in  light  of  the  transitional  provisions  set   out   in   the
  'Implementation'  section.  Mr  Burrett  accepted  that  because  of  the
  transitional provisions paragraph 276B (v) was in force  in  relation  to
  this application.

10. I am satisfied that the Judge erred in deciding that paragraph 276B  (v)
  did not apply to this application. The transitional provisions mean  that
  paragraph 276B (v0 does apply to applications made after 9 July 2012.

11. The third ground on which the Judge allowed  the  appeal  was  that  the
  Secretary of State  did  not  have  regard  to  the  guidance  issued  to
  caseworkers in relation to considering applications submitted  more  than
  28  days  after  the  expiry  of  leave  to   remain.   The   appellant's
  representative in the First-tier Tribunal submitted a copy  of  the  case
  worker guidance on long residence. It applies to out of time applications
  made on or after 9 July 2012 and states; 'when refusing an application on
  the grounds that it was made by an applicant who has overstayed  by  more
  than 28 days you must consider any evidence of exceptional  circumstances
  which prevented the applicant from applying within the first 28  days  of
  overstaying'. The representatives  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing
  submitted that the reason for the delay in  making  the  application  was
  that the appellant's mother had died. It was  also  submitted  that  this
  explanation was consistent in light of the appellant's  history  over  10
  years of having always made applications on time.

12.  Before  me  Mr  Whitwell  submitted  that  there  was  no  evidence  of
  exceptional circumstances and that the appellant's claim that his  mother
  died was not sufficiently exceptional  to  come  within  the  policy.  Mr
  Burrett submitted that, as the Secretary of State had not  exercised  her
  discretion the decision was not in accordance with the law.

13. I am satisfied that the  Secretary  of  State  has  not  considered  her
  policy in this case to determine whether there is evidence of exceptional
  circumstances which prevented the appellant from applying  for  leave  to
  remain within the first 28 days of overstaying.

14. The Judge allowed the  appeal  for  three  reasons.  The  first  is  not
  challenged. The second I have found to be an error and the third  I  have
  found to have been a proper reason. Despite allowing the appeal under the
  Immigration Rules the Judge allowed the appeal only to  the  extent  that
  the Secretary of State's decision is not in accordance with the  law.  It
  is not clear why she did so. In any event that would be the proper course
  of action in the event that the appeal is allowed on the basis  that  the
  Secretary of State has not exercised  her  policy  in  relation  to  late
  applications. In these circumstances the outcome  is  the  same  as  that
  decided by the Judge. For that reason, even though  the  Judge  erred  in
  deciding that paragraph 276B (v) was not in force  at  the  date  of  the
  appellant's application, the error is not material.



Conclusion:

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on point of law.

The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  shall  stand  in  that  the
appeal is allowed to the extent that  the  appellant's  application  remains
outstanding  before  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  exercise  of   her
discretion in accordance with her policy.




Signed
                       Date: 1 July 2014



A Grimes


Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal









