
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/33926/2015
      IA/33930/2015
                                                               IA/33933/2015
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Manchester Piccadilly    Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On                   14th                   September                   2017
                On 19th September 2017

Before:
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY
Between:
                                  MRS O.F.
                                 MISS O.J.F.
                               MASTER F.N.O.F.
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                        Claimants in the First-tier Tribunal
                                     And
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                             Appellant in the Upper Tribunal
Representation:
For the Claimants: Mrs O.F. (in person)
For the Secretary of  State:  Mr  McVeety  (Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Cohen promulgated on  the  5th  January  2017,  in
      which he allowed the Claimants' appeals under  the  Immigration  Rules
      and on Human Rights grounds.

   2. Within the Grounds of  Appeal  it  is  argued  that  in  allowing  the
      Claimants' appeals under Article 8 the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  has
      misdirected himself in law by  not  properly  considering  the  public
      interest factors when looking at  Section  117B  of  the  Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  It is argued that the Judge found at
      [11] the First Claimant did not meet the suitability  requirements  of
      the Immigration Rules,  yet  found  favourably  when  considering  the
      public interest at [21,] without referring to  the  issues  raised  at
      [11].  It is said the Judge  noted  the  documentation  regarding  the
      First Claimant's criminal history, but it is said  that  at  [21]  the
      Judge only considered the public interest factors  in  favour  of  the
      Claimants.  It was further argued that the Judge had stated  that  the
      Claimants had no links to Nigeria, but that the  Presenting  Officer's
      notes said that the First  Claimant  had  a  mother  and  siblings  in
      Nigeria and that the Judge had therefore made an error in  what  links
      and support there was available to  the  Claimants  in  Nigeria  which
      should have been included in the proportionality assessment.

   3. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Saffer
      on the 13th July 2017, who found that it was arguable that Section 117
      of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  may  have  been
      misapplied and that all the grounds were arguable.

   4. It was on that basis the case came before me in the Upper Tribunal.

   5. In making his oral submissions, I  asked  Mr  McVeety  to  slowly  and
      clearly explain what his submissions were, in order that Mrs O.F., who
      was unrepresented, could understand the  submissions  being  made.   A
      full note of  his  submissions  are  recorded  within  the  record  of
      proceedings.   However,  in  summary,  he  submitted  that  the  First
      Claimant had a history of serious immigration offences  including  use
      of false  passports,  utilising  false  passports  and  having  worked
      illegally and the Judge accepted that there were serious  breaches  by
      her such that she could not meet the suitability requirements  of  the
      Immigration Rules. But he submitted that when considering  whether  or
      not it was unreasonable to expect the Second and  Third  Claimants  to
      leave the UK, that the Judge failed  to  take  account  of  the  wider
      public interest under Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and
      Asylum Act 2002, as he argued the Judge was required to do,  following
      the Court of Appeal case of MA (Pakistan) and Others v  The  Secretary
      of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 705.

   6. He further argued that the Home Office Presenting Officer's  note  was
      that the First Claimant still had family in  Nigeria  in  terms  of  a
      mother, 2 sisters and a brother and that the Judge was therefore wrong
      to find that the Second and Third Claimants had no links with  Nigeria
      at [12] and that they had no connections with Nigeria at [21].

   7. Mrs O.F. in reply, said that she had got a mother,  2  sisters  and  a
      brother in Nigeria, but her mother was aged 85 and her sister was aged
      65 and her brother was aged 42 or 41.  She  argued  that  all  of  the
      children are in the UK and they do not have any  siblings  in  Nigeria
      and they have never lived there.  She said that she had a  14-year-old
      child who was very upset about the appeal hearing and had run  out  to
      school that morning, and one child who was very asthmatic.  I  pointed
      out to Mrs O.F. that my job initially was simply to determine  whether
      or not the First-tier Tribunal Judge made a material error of law, and
      that I was not at that stage, seeking to re-make any findings of fact,
      and invited her to make any submissions in terms  of  the  submissions
      made regarding whether or not the Judge should have taken  account  of
      the wider public interest when considering whether it  was  reasonable
      to expect the Second and Third Claimants to leave the UK.  She did not
      wish to address me on that point.

   8. I reserved my decision.

   My Findings on Error of Law and Materiality

   9.  At  [6]  of  his  decision,  Judge  Cohen  noted  that  amongst   the
      documentation submitted in support of the appeal was a criminal record
      check in respect of the First Claimant indicating that  she  had  been
      convicted of shoplifting and credit card fraud offences  in  1996  and
      2000.  He further went on to find at [11] that the First Claimant  had
      adopted assumed identities in  the  UK,  been  convicted  of  criminal
      offences, albeit not for 16  years,  and  worked  illegally  and  that
      therefore she did not meet the eligibility criteria of the Immigration
      Rules. Therefore he found that her appeal under the Immigration  Rules
      could not succeed.

  10. However, when  considering  the  position  of  the  Second  and  Third
      Claimants at [12], the Judge stated "I find that Section 117B  of  the
      Immigration Rules applies.  I find that it was unreasonable to  expect
      the Second and Third Appellants to leave the UK and there is no public
      interest in their  removal.   I  note  that  the  Secretary  of  State
      conceded that the Appellant's pre-action protocol application  on  the
      basis that there were children involved and  it  is  the  Respondent's
      policy guidance to give a right of appeal in those  circumstances.   I
      find the Respondent has failed to apply her own policy.  I  allow  the
      appeals of the Second and Third Appellants on Human Rights grounds  as
      incorporated into the Immigration Rules".

  11. However, the Court of Appeal in the case of MA (Pakistan) and Others v
      The Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705,
      made it clear that although when  looking  at  what  is  in  the  best
      interests of the children, that is concern simply  with  the  children
      themselves, when the Tribunal goes on to consider Section 117B(6)  and
      whether or not it is reasonable to expect a child  to  leave  the  UK,
      that the wider public interest has to  be  considered,  and  that  the
      Tribunal cannot simply look at the child in isolation, but also has to
      take into account the conduct and immigration history of  the  parents
      as part of an overall analysis of the public  interest.   Regrettably,
      it is clear that Judge Cohen has failed to follow the Court of  Appeal
      authority in that regard, when  considering  whether  or  not  it  was
      reasonable to expect the Second and Third Claimants to  leave  the  UK
      and in finding that there was no public interest in their removal.  He
      has not taken account of the immigration history and  conduct  of  the
      First Claimant, when considering whether it is  reasonable  to  expect
      the Second and Third Claimants to leave the UK and has thereby  failed
      to take account of the wider public interest required to be taken into
      account when considering Section 117B(6).  This is clearly an error of
      law.  Further, I cannot say that the decision would  necessarily  have
      been the same, had the Judge  properly  taken  account  of  the  wider
      public interest under Section 117B(6).  I therefore do find that  this
      error is material.

  12. Further, at [12] the  Judge  did  state  that  the  Second  and  Third
      Claimants had no links with Nigeria and  at  [21]  I  found  that  the
      children did not have connections with Nigeria.  However,  it  appears
      in that regard, the Judge has not taken account of the evidence before
      him, that the First Claimant appeared to have a mother, 2 sisters  and
      a brother in Nigeria,  such  that  although  the  children  had  never
      seemingly lived in Nigeria, the fact that they had family there, was a
      link with Nigeria.  The Judge  did  not  adequately  and  sufficiently
      explain why having family in Nigeria would not amount to  a  link  and
      that also is a factor which should have been taken into account by the
      Judge when considering reasonableness under Section 117B(6).

  13. I therefore do find that the decision  of  Judge  Cohen  does  contain
      material errors of law and I set aside that decision.  Given that  the
      decision will have to be re-made in its entirety, and  the  extent  of
      the fact finding that is therefore required, I  do  find  that  it  is
      appropriate to remit the case back to the First-tier Tribunal to be re-
      heard before any  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  other  than  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Cohen.

Notice of Decision

   1) The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Cohen does contain  material
      errors of law and is set aside in its entirety.
   2) The appeal is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for  re-hearing
      before any First-tier Tribunal Judge other  than  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Cohen.
   3) As the case does involve children, I do make an  anonymity  Order.   I
      direct that the Claimants are entitled to  anonymity.   No  record  or
      transcript or summary of this case should identify  the  Claimants  or
      any members of their  family  either  directly  or  indirectly.   This
      direction applies both to the Claimants and to the Secretary of State.
       Any failure to comply with this direction can  lead  to  contempt  of
      Court proceedings.
Signed
[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty     Dated 14th September 2017
