

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33986/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 3rd January 2018                    |On 05th January 2018                |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                          LOVONA OBUMNEKE OKOROAMA
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:     Ms K Reid instructed by AR Ralph solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS




   1. Ms Okoroama's application for a permanent residence card  was  refused
      by the respondent for reasons set out in a  decision  dated  13th  May
      2014. Her appeal against that decision  was  dismissed  by  First-tier
      Tribunal judge Munonyedi under the 2006 EEA regulations but allowed on
      human rights grounds, by consent, to the extent that it  was  remitted
      to the secretary of State for consideration of her human rights claim.
      A minute by the presenting officer who appeared before the  First-tier
      Tribunal states that although the decision by the judge in  connection
      with the permanent residence card was correct,  because  the  decision
      was a removal decision, her human rights should have been considered.




   2. An application for a permanent residence card on the basis of retained
      rights of residence  was  refused  on  22nd  October  2015.  A  letter
      accompanying that decision headed "Reasons for Refusal" refers to  the
      remittal  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  considers  whether   the
      application raises any exceptional circumstances which might warrant a
      grant of leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules consistent with
      the right to respect for family and private life. The  SSHD  concluded
      there were no such reasons and informed Ms Okoroama that if she wished
      to pursue an application for leave to remain on Article 8 grounds then
      she should make a paid application in accordance with the  Immigration
      Rules. It is difficult to reconcile this with the disclosed minute.


   3. Ms Okoroama exercised her right of appeal against this  refusal  of  a
      permanent residence card and included in her grounds  of  appeal  that
      the SSHD had failed to consider Ms Okoroama's rights under  Article  8
      and thus the decision was not in accordance with the law.


   4. The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Ghaffar on 4th  April
      2017; the SSHD was not represented. Counsel for Ms Okoroama  submitted
      before Judge Ghaffar that the concession  before  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Munonyedi amounted to an acceptance of a s120 notice having been
      served and therefore the respondent was obliged to consider  the  case
      under the Immigration Rules as  well  as  outside  the  Rules.   Judge
      Ghaffar found that service of a s120 notice  could  be  inferred,  the
      parties had agreed that the human rights aspect of the claim would  be
      considered and there is in any event a decision to remove.


   5. The SSHD sought, and was granted, permission to appeal on the  grounds
      that following the amendment to the 2006  EEA  Regulations,  the  only
      ground of appeal available  to  Ms  Okoroama  was  that  the  decision
      breaches her rights under the EU Treaties but that in  any  event  the
      SSHD had considered her Article 8 rights and that the  fact  that  she
      did not consider it explicitly under the Rules  does  not  render  the
      decision unlawful given she had not paid the relevant fee or made  the
      relevant application[1]. Judge Ghaffar did not make a decision on  the
      refusal of the  residence  card  and  there  was  no  application  for
      permission to appeal by Ms Okoroama, it being accepted, it seems, that
      the decision by Judge Munonyedi stood in that regard.


   6. Ms Willocks- Briscoe submitted that Judge Ghaffar had failed  to  make
      any human rights findings or to consider the evidence relied  upon  in
      Ms Okoroama's  human  rights  claim;  Ms  Reid  did  not  dissent.  Ms
      Okoroama's appeal was not  only  against  the  decision  to  refuse  a
      permanent residence card  based  upon  retained  rights  of  residence
      (which played little part in the instant proceedings) but was  against
      the human rights claim made pursuant to the s120 notice. Judge Ghaffar
      failed to  make  any  findings  on  the  human  rights  claim;  it  is
      inadequate to allow an appeal merely because of a failure by the  SSHD
      to engage with evidence.


   7. There is a material error of  law  by  Judge  Ghaffar  who  failed  to
      address the appeal before him and I  set  aside  the  decision  to  be
      remade. Given the complete lack of any findings by  Judge  Ghaffar  on
      the human rights claim, I remit the appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal
      for full rehearing on the human rights claim. Although  the  mechanism
      by which the appeal came before the First-tier  Tribunal  was  through
      the refusal of the permanent residence  card,  that  decision  is  not
      challenged. The challenge is to the human rights appeal  decision  and
      it is that which is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing.


   8. Although not explored at the hearing before me there are  some  issues
      that the First-tier Tribunal may already be aware  of  but  which  may
      bear repeating:


   a. The reference to decisions not being in accordance with the  law  does
      found a right of appeal;
   b. Ms Okoroama has not, so far as I can see from the  papers  before  me,
      been served with a  removal  decision.  Even  if  she  had  a  removal
      decision, that does not found an appeal; it is the refusal of a  human
      rights claim that founds an appeal.


          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

     I set aside the decision and remit it to the First-tier Tribunal to  be
remade.

                                    Date 3rd January 2018
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
-----------------------
[1] See also Ahsan [2017] EWCA Civ 2009 at [14]

