
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/33477/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly       |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 9 April 2015                      |On 22 April 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between

                                 ALI ARSHAD
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L Barton instructed by Sabz Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Horvath promulgated on 31 October 2014  which  dismissed
    the Appellant's appeal against a refusal of leave to remain as a Tier 4
    Student and make directions for his removal under  section  47  of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 on all grounds .

Background

 3. The Appellant was born on  25  November  1984  and  is  a  national  of
    Pakistan.

 4. On 14 October 2013 the Appellant applied for leave to remain as a  Tier
    4 (General) Student Migrant under the Points Based System.

 5. On 12 August 2014  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
    application by  reference  to  paragraph  245ZX(c)  with  reference  to
    paragraph  116(c)  of  Appendix  A  and  paragraph  245ZX(d)   of   the
    Immigration Rules. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons:

    (a) The Appellant could not be awarded the 30 points  claimed  for  his
    Confirmation of Acceptance  of  Studies  (CAS)  because  the  reference
    number submitted with the application was withdrawn by the Sponsor.

    (b) As the Appellant did not have a valid CAS he could not  be  awarded
    the points claimed for maintenance.

The Judge's Decision

 6. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal on the basis that  he
    had a valid CAs at the time of his application but  it  became  invalid
    when the college license was suspended and that  he  should  have  been
    given the time to obtain a new CAS. The Appellant elected to  have  the
    appeal dealt with on the papers.

 7. First-tier Tribunal Judge Horvath ("the Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal
    against the Respondent's decision. The Judge found :

      a) The Appellant  submitted  a  CAS  with  his  application  that  was
         assigned on 12 October 2013 and valid until 13 April 2014.

      b) At the date of the decision the CAS had already expired and was not
         renewed.

      c) The reason it had not been renewed was 'probably because, as stated
         by the appellant, the college sponsor's licence had been  suspended
         by the Home Office.'

      d) The Appellant therefore did not have a valid CAS and  the  decision
         to refuse the application was correct.

      e) No points were awarded for maintenance because  the  Appellant  did
         not have a valid CAS.

      f) The Appellant was  entitled  to  seek  an  alternative  college  to
         continue with his studies and make a fresh application to the  Home
         Office within 60 days. There is no evidence that he  did  so  after
         finding out that the licence had been suspended.

      g) In the absence of a valid CAS he could not be  awarded  the  points
         for maintenance.

      h) The Appellant did not meet  the  requirements  of  Appendix  FM  or
         Paragraph 276 ADE.

      i) There was no merit in the Appellant's claim that his  rights  under
         Article 8 were engaged.

 8. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing that :

      a) The Appellant had paid the fees and produced a  valid  CAS  at  the
         time of the application.

      b) The Respondent took 10 months to make a decision.

      c) When the Respondent found that the CAS was  no  longer  valid  they
         should have allowed the Appellant 60 days to find a new college.

      d) The findings under Article 8 were irrational.

 9. On 12 December 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge White gave permission  to
    appeal stating that there was no merit in the challenge to the  Article
    8 findings but it was arguable that the Judge had erred by  failing  to
    have sufficient regard for the guidelines given in Patel (revocation of
    sponsor licence - fairness) [2011] UKUT to  the  effect  that  where  a
    sponsor licence had been revoked by the Secretary of  State  during  an
    application for variation of leave and the applicant is both unaware of
    the revocation and not party to any reason why  the  licence  has  been
    revoked, the Secretary of State should afford an applicant a reasonable
    opportunity to vary an application by identifying a new sponsor  before
    the application was determined.

10. At the hearing I heard submissions from Ms  Barton  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant that:

      a) The Respondent did not look at the Appellant's application  for  10
         months.

      b) At the time of the application the CAS was  valid  but  it  expired
         during the 10 months that  passed  before  the  Respondent  made  a
         decision.

      c) The Appellant was unaware  that  the  CAS  had  been  withdrawn  or
         suspended so there was an arguable case for allowing him 60 days to
         find a new CAS.

11. On behalf of the Respondent  Mr Harrison submitted that :

      a) He relied on the Rule 24 notice.

      b) The basis on which the refusal letter was written was that the  CAS
         was withdrawn by the Sponsor.

      c) The Appellant suggests that  the  colleges  licence  was  suspended
         which caused the CAS to be invalid but he produced no  evidence  to
         that effect.



Finding on Material Error

12. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made no material errors of law.

13. The Appellant made an application dated 14 October 2013  for  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 4 student submitting a CAS in respect of a  course  at
    Milburn College of Professional Studies valid from 12 October  2013  to
    13 April 2014.

14. The refusal letter which was dated 12  August  2014  stated  explicitly
    that the CAS in question was withdrawn by the Sponsor and therefore the
    points claimed for a  valid  CAS  and  for  maintenance  could  not  be
    awarded.

15. The Appellant elected to have the  appeal  dealt  with  on  the  papers
    claiming that the college licence was suspended by the  Respondent  and
    although not explicit presumably was suggesting that this  led  to  his
    CAS being invalid. The Appellant chose not  to  attend  court  to  give
    evidence challenging the  Respondent's  case  that  the  CAS  had  been
    withdrawn by the College rather than simply  lapsing  or  indeed  being
    invalidated by having its licence suspended.  He  was  also  given  the
    opportunity to make written submissions to the court  but  produced  no
    documentary evidence that the college had its licence suspended and  no
    documentary evidence to counter the Respondent's case that the  college
    had withdrawn his CAS.

16.  While  the  Judge  was  slightly  confused  in  his  approach  to  the
    possibility of the Appellant being given 60 days to find a new  sponsor
    in paragraph 15 apparently suggesting that this could  be  given  after
    the decision was made rather than before there was no  evidence  before
    the Judge that this was such a case in any event and indeed  there  was
    no  concession  by  the  Respondent  that  this  was  the   case:   the
    Respondent's position was that the CAS was withdrawn.

17. I am satisfied therefore that the Judge was entitled to  conclude  that
    the Appellant could not be awarded the points claimed for a  valid  CAS
    or maintenance. This appeal is not the opportunity for the Appellant to
    argue the case and adduce the evidence that he should have done  before
    the First-tier tribunal. I am  satisfied  that  on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence before the Judge there was no basis for concluding that  there
    had been any procedural unfairness in how the  Appellant's  application
    had been dealt with.

CONCLUSION

18. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established and  that
    the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

19. The appeal is dismissed.


Signed      Date 20/4/2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
