
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                    Appeal
Number: IA/33035/2013

                                                           IA/33043/2013

                                                           IA/33049/2013

                                                           IA/33055/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London                  |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 15 May 2014                                |On 03 June 2014              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    B A N
                                    M A N
                                   M F-A N
                                   M F-A N
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER IN FORCE)
                                                                 Respondents
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms A Walker, instructed by Raj Law Solicitors
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
1. This determination refers to the parties as they were in  the  First-tier
  Tribunal.

2. The appellants, nationals of Mauritius, are a family who appealed to  the
 First-tier Tribunal against the decisions of the  Secretary  of  State  to
 refuse to vary their leave to remain and to remove them from the  UK.  The
 respondent refused the applications under Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE
 of the Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules, HC 395 (the  Immigration
 Rules). First-tier Tribunal Judge Trevaskis allowed the  appeals  and  the
 Secretary of State now appeals with permission to this Tribunal.

3. The background to these appeals  is  that  the  appellants,  parents  and
 their two sons, entered the UK as visitors on 24 April 2005. At that stage
 the two sons were aged 9 and 3 years old. On 5  February  2008  the  first
 appellant (the mother) was granted leave to remain as a student  until  31
 October 2010 with her husband and two sons as her dependants. She  applied
 for further leave to remain as  a  student  and,  following  a  successful
 appeal to the First-tier Tribunal, leave to remain  was  granted  until  4
 June 2013. In May 2012 the first appellant applied for leave to remain  in
 the UK on human rights grounds on the basis of  her  and  her  dependants'
 family  and  private  life.  The  Secretary  of  State  considered   these
 applications under Appendix FM and paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration
 Rules and decided that the appellants did not meet the requirements of the
 Immigration Rules.

Error of Law

4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge found that the appellants did not meet  the
 requirements of Appendix FM. However he found that the first appellant and
 her husband (the adult  appellants)  met  the  requirements  of  paragraph
 276ADE (vi) as, although they have not lived in the UK for  20  years,  he
 found that they had 'no ties', including social, cultural or family,  with
 Mauritius [31].

5. In relation to the two children the Judge found that that  they  met  the
 requirements of paragraph 276ADE (iv) as they  were  both  under  18,  had
 lived in the UK for a continuous period of at least  seven  years  and  it
 would not be reasonable to expect them  to  leave  the  UK  because  their
 parents meet the requirements for leave based on private life and  because
 they  have  spent  their  formative  years  in  the  UK  where  they  have
 established roots in the community, excelled in their education  and  lost
 what little connection they had with Mauritius [32].

6. In relation to the adults' ties with Mauritius the Judge had  before  him
 statements from the adults.  The  first  appellant  said  in  her  witness
 statement that her parents died before she came to the  UK  and  that  her
 older brother died since she came. She said that  she  is  concerned  that
 they would be financially crippled without support. The Judge records that
 she said in her  oral  evidence  that  she  has  no  living  relatives  in
 Mauritius. In his witness statement the first  appellant's  husband  said;
 'Whilst we have some family in Mauritius, our lives  are  now  here'.  The
 Judge noted that both parents  gave  oral  evidence  through  a  Mauritian
 Creole interpreter. The copy passports in  the  respondent's  bundle  show
 that the family travelled to Mauritius in December 2008 and that the first
 appellant's husband also travelled to Mauritius in April 2008.

7. Ms Walker submitted that the reasons given by the Judge at  paragraph  31
 in relation to the adult appellants are sufficient.

8. The Judge failed to consider the  evidence  before  him  that  the  adult
 appellants speak the language of Mauritius. He failed to consider that the
 couple spent the  majority  of  their  lives  in  Mauritius  -  the  first
 appellant was born in 1975 and her husband in 1965 and they  had  been  in
 Mauritius until 2005, 30 and 40 years  respectively,  compared  to  the  9
 years they have spent in the UK. He failed to consider  that  the  husband
 has some family in Mauritius. He failed to consider that  the  family  had
 been in Mauritius together in 2008 and the  father  had  been  earlier  in
 2008. On the basis of this evidence I am satisfied that the Judge  clearly
 erred in finding that the adult appellants have no ties in Mauritius. This
 finding is wholly unsupported by the evidence. This is a material error as
 it is the sole basis for the Judge's conclusion that the adult  appellants
 qualify for leave to remain in the UK on the basis of their private life.

9. Ms Walker submitted that, even if the  Judge  erred  any  error  was  not
 material as the decision in relation to the children contains no error  as
 other weighty factors have been considered. In her skeleton  argument  she
 submitted that just one of the reasons given by the Judge in  relation  to
 his assessment of the children's  private  life  relates  to  the  parents
 qualifying under the Immigration Rules.

10. However in setting out his reasons at paragraph 32 the Judge  took  into
 account the fact that the children's parents  meet  the  requirements  for
 leave to remain based on private life and that  the  children  'have  lost
 what little connection they had with Mauritius'. This clearly  relates  to
 the Judge's findings in relation to the parents and therefore two  of  the
 Judge's reasons relate to the parents and their connections to  Mauritius.
 I cannot therefore accept the submission that the findings in relation  to
 the children can stand alone.  I cannot be satisfied that the Judge  would
 have reached the same conclusion in relation to the children if he had not
 erred in relation to his assessment of the evidence  in  relation  to  the
 parents.

11. The application for further leave in this case was  made  in  May  2012,
 prior to the coming into effect of Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE of the
 Immigration Rules on 9 July 2012. Ms Walker submitted that the decision of
 the Court of Appeal in Edgehill & Anor v SSHD [2014] EWCA  Civ  402  means
 that the Secretary of State and then the Judge should have considered this
 case under Article 8 of the ECHR and not under Appendix FM  and  paragraph
 276ADE. However she submitted that  any  error  on  the  Judge's  part  in
 considering the appeal under the new Immigration Rules was not material. I
 do not agree that that it is inevitable that the Judge would have  reached
 the same decision had the appeal been considered only under Article 8.

12. In light of these material errors I set aside the decision of the First-
 tier Tribunal in its entirety.  I indicated that I would proceed to remake
 the decision and the parties made  submissions.  I  reserved  my  decision
 which I now give with reasons.

Re-making the decision

13. The application for leave to remain in this case was made in  May  2012,
 before the current Immigration Rules in relation to Appendix FM came  into
 effect on 9 July 2012. In her decision dated 22 July 2013 the Secretary of
 State considered the application in accordance  with  the  new  Rules  and
 decided that the appellants did not meet the requirements of the new Rules
 and that there were no exceptional circumstances to warrant  consideration
 outside the requirements of the Rules and therefore so did not carry out a
 further assessment under Article 8 of the ECHR.

14. Ms Walker relied on the Court of  Appeal's   decision  in  Edgehill  and
 submitted that as this application was made prior to the new Rules  coming
 into effect the appeal should be considered under Article 8 only  and  not
 under Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE.

15. This was an application for Discretionary Leave to remain  made  in  May
 2012. HC194 which introduced the changes brought into  effect  on  9  July
 2012 states in the preamble entitled 'Implementation';

  "However, if an application for  entry  clearance,  leave  to  remain  or
    indefinite leave to remain has been made before  9  July  2012  and  the
    application has not been decided, it will be decided in accordance  with
    the rules in force on 8 July 2012."

16. In Edgehill Jackson LJ considered this matter as follows;

      "32.  The  Immigration  Rules  need  to  be  understood  not  only  by
      specialist immigration counsel, but also by ordinary people  who  read
      the rules and try to abide by them. I do not think  that  Mr  Bourne's
      interpretation  of  the  transitional  provisions  accords  with   the
      interpretation which any ordinary reader would  place  upon  them.  To
      adopt the language of Lord Brown in Mahad, "the natural and  ordinary
      meaning of the words, recognising that  they  are  statements  of  the
      Secretary of State's administrative policy," is that the Secretary  of
      State will not place reliance on  the  new  rules  when  dealing  with
      applications made before 9th July 2012.



      33.   Accordingly, my answer to the question posed in this part of the
      judgment is no. That answer is subject to one important qualification.
      A mere passing reference to the 20 years requirement in the new  rules
      will not have the effect of  invalidating  the  Secretary  of  State's
      decision. The decision only becomes unlawful  if  the  decision  maker
      relies upon rule 276ADE (iii) as a consideration materially  affecting
      the decision.

      ...

      41.     Major changes to the Immigration Rules came into force on  9th
      July 2012. The transitional provisions stated that the new rules would
      not apply to applications for leave to remain before that date.

      ..."

17. I note that the transitional provisions set out  in  the  Rules  do  not
 appear to apply to this case as the application for leave  to  remain  was
 made outside the Rules and not under the old Part  8  of  the  Immigration
 Rules. I accept Ms Walker's submission  that  the  preamble  to  HC194  as
 interpreted by the Court of Appeal means that this application should have
 been considered under Article 8. In remaking  this  decision  I  therefore
 consider the appeal under Article 8.

18. In considering Article 8 I follow the five stage  approach  set  out  by
 Lord Bingham in R v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  ex  parte
 Razgar [2004] UKHL 27. The appellants enjoy family life  together  in  the
 UK. However they will be returned to Mauritius  together  and  there  will
 therefore be no interference with that family life. Mr Nath accepted  that
 the appellants have established private lives in the UK. I am satisfied on
 the basis of the  connections  the  adults  have  made  through  work  and
 friendships and the children  through  school  and  friendships  that  the
 appellants have established private lives in  the  UK.  The  decisions  to
 remove the appellants will interfere with their private  lives  and  I  am
 satisfied that such interference may potentially engage the  operation  of
 Article 8 and would be in accordance with the law.

19. The next issue to consider is whether the interference is necessary  and
 proportionate. I firstly consider the  best  interests  of  the  children.
 Whilst the elder son is now 18, I acknowledge that he is a young adult who
 still lives with and is dependant on his parents. The  older  of  the  two
 sons was born on 18 November 1995 and is now aged 18, the second  son  was
 born on 4 December 2001 and is  now  aged  12.  They  entered  the  UK  as
 visitors when they were aged 9 and 3. I understand that the two sons  live
 with their parents. The eldest son is a young adult  and  his  brother  is
 still a child. It must be in the best interests  of  the  younger  son  to
 remain with his parents. It is probably  in  the  best  interests  of  the
 eldest son to be with his parents too. However it is of course open to the
 eldest son to apply for leave to enter or remain in the UK  as  a  student
 should he wish to continue his education in the UK  as  indicated  in  his
 witness statement.

20. In her witness statement the first appellant says that her  sons  cannot
 speak Creole or French. However the First-tier Tribunal Judge  noted  that
 the mother said in oral evidence that at  home  the  family  speak  mostly
 Creole and some English. Also, the eldest son lived in Mauritius until  he
 was 9 years old and I do not accept that he cannot speak either language.

21. In both of their statements the sons said that they would not  have  any
 friends if they returned to Mauritius now. However I note that  the  older
 son attended primary school in Mauritius. Both children adapted to life in
 the UK and there is no  reason  why  they  could  not  adapt  to  life  in
 Mauritius.

22. Ms Walker submitted in  the  skeleton  argument  that  the  respondent's
 previous policy in  relation  to  children's  residence  for  seven  years
 continued to hold significant weight in an Article 8 assessment  prior  to
 the implementation  of  Appendix  FM.   She  referred  to  EM  and  Others
 (Returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2011] UKUT 98 (IAC) where the Upper Tribunal said
 [308];

      "(viii) In the absence of any other policy guidance from the Secretary
      of State, it remains legitimate for Immigration Judges  to  give  some
      regard to the previous policy that seven years residence  by  a  child
      under 18 would afford a basis for regularising  the  position  of  the
      child and parent in the absence of conduct reasons to the contrary, in
      making a judicial assessment of whether removal  is  proportionate  to
      the legitimate aim having regard to the best interests of the child."

23. Ms Walker relied on the decision of the Upper Tribunal  in  Azimi-Moayed
 and others (decisions affecting  children;  onward  appeals)  [2013]  UKUT
 00197 (IAC) and submitted that it would be disproportionate to disrupt the
 lives of the children in the UK in the absence of compelling reason to the
 contrary.

24. The period of seven years is not prescriptive and I  take  into  account
 all of the evidence before  me  in  this  case.  I  take  account  of  the
 children's length of residence in the UK. I acknowledge that they have now
 been in the UK for nine years. I acknowledge that the children  have  made
 excellent progress in school and in  their  extra  curricular  activities.
 They have obviously adapted well to their life in the UK.

25. However I must also take account of  the  circumstances  of  their  stay
 here. They entered as visitors and were subsequently given leave to remain
 as the dependant of their mother when she began to study in the UK. As she
 acknowledges in her witness statement the family were never  guaranteed  a
 right to live in the  UK  indefinitely.  In  fact  the  first  appellant's
 College closed and she found it difficult to find a new  College  and  was
 unable to complete her studies. This was some time  before  she  made  her
 application for leave to remain in May 2012. The first appellant  has  not
 been studying in the UK for at least two years. The elder child is now  18
 years old. He was 9 when he came to the UK and had by then spent  a  large
 part of his childhood in Mauritius. I acknowledge that the  younger  child
 has spent a large part of his childhood in the UK however he has been with
 his family throughout this period. They will be a key support to him  upon
 his return to Mauritius. There is nothing in the evidence to indicate that
 the two sons will be at a disadvantage in terms of  their  education  upon
 their return to Mauritius.

26. I acknowledge that the first  appellant  and  her  husband  have  worked
 within the terms of their conditions of stay whilst in the UK. This  shows
 that they would not in fact be dependant  on  family  members  upon  their
 return to Mauritius but should instead be able to use their education  and
 work experience in the retail and service industry gained  in  the  UK  to
 secure employment and support themselves there.

27. The first appellant's husband has some family members in Mauritius.  The
 family returned there in 2008. The parents  speak  Creole  and  speak  the
 language at home. The parents  had  no  expectation  that  they  would  be
 allowed to remain  in  the  UK  indefinitely.  I  accept  that  they  have
 previously had leave to remain  and  appear  to  have  complied  with  the
 conditions of that leave. However I also note that the  first  appellant's
 College closed and she was unable to enrol in another College and she  had
 therefore not studied in the UK for at least two years.

28. In all the circumstances I am satisfied that the decision to refuse  the
 applications is proportionate to the respondent's legitimate  aim  of  the
 maintenance of a fair system of immigration control for the prevention  of
 disorder or crime or to secure the economic well-being of the country.


Conclusions:

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set the decision aside and remake it by dismissing the appeal.


Signed
                       Date: 2 June 2014


A Grimes

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal




Anonymity


The First-tier Tribunal made an order  pursuant  to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008).




Signed
                                   Date:  2 June 2014

A Grimes

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


































