
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/33922/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 23rd June 2014                             |On 23rd July 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                        Ms Estera Grazyna Szczawinska
                        (Anonymity Direction Not Made)


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Poland and born on 3rd  July  1983.   She
    made an application dated 12th August 2013 for a certification  of  her
    permanent right to reside in the United Kingdom. This  application  was
    refused  on  4th  September  2013  because,  it  was  asserted  by  the
    respondent, that she needed to satisfy Regulation 2(4) and 5 (6) of the
    Accession (Immigration and Worker Registration)  Regulations  2004  and
    Regulation 15 of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.  She must show
    a complete period of 12 months legal employment with an  employer  that
    is registered with the Worker Registration Scheme and  this  12  months
    must constitute the first of the five years  required  for  a  document
    certifying permanent residence.  She had been  employed  since  January
    2008 in the UK and had submitted pay slips and P60s for  2008  to  2012
    for the employment with  Hill  House  Junior  School  with  the  Worker
    Registration Scheme. She had failed to  register  her  employment  with
    Hill House Junior School with the Worker Registration Scheme.

 2. Her appeal was dismissed by First Tier Tribunal Judge Phillips, QC.  He
    recorded at [8] of his determination

    'At Section 7.2 of the application, the appellant states, @please  find
    letter with additional information attached.  It  explains  why  I  was
    excluded from WRS registration'.  No letter is attached however to  the
    copy of the application that has been provided  in  the  papers  before
    me'.

 3. The judge continued

    'In her notice of appeal  the appellant has, stated at Section 8,  that
    she had not registered her employment with the WRS when  she  commenced
    employment because her partner was self employed  at the time, and that
    she was a family member of an EEA national and therefore  was  excluded
    from registration'.

 4. However he found  she  had  made  no  reference  to  her  partner  save
    'obliquely at section 9.12 and at section 11 where she has  ticked  the
    unmarried partner's box and has not claimed to be the family member  of
    an EEA national.  No such evidence has  been  supplied  in  the  papers
    before me.  At section  3B  of  the  appeal  form,  the  Appellant  has
    indicated that further documents may be supplied.  There  is,  however,
    no documentation in the papers before me that  might  substantiate  the
    appellant's claims to have been a family member of an EEA national'.

 5. The appellant made an application for permission to appeal and repeated
    that in accordance with Section 2(6)(b) of  the  Accession  Regulations
    she was excluded from registration because she was a family  member  of
    Radoslaw Galer, an EEA national, who was legally working in the UK.  He
    was excluded as he was self employed until April 2011.  She now applied
    not as a family member but as a worker.

 6.  Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Hollinworth on the basis that the judge was not in  possession  of  all
    the papers relevant to the case.  The judge  referred  at  [8]  of  his
    determination to Section 7.2 to  papers  not  being  attached.  It  was
    arguable that the judge was not in possession of all the documentation.



 7. At the hearing before me the appellant stated that she had forwarded  a
    copy of the letter explaining why she did  not  need  to  register  her
    employment  with  the  WRS.   This  letter  was  entitled   'additional
    information' and explained much  as  the  judge  had  recorded  in  his
    determination why she was excluded from the WRS.

 8. Unfortunately in the letter which the appellant states she sent to  the
    Home Office there  is  reference  to  the  SA302  Self  Assessment  Tax
    Calculation from HMRC for her partner. The  matter  was  determined  by
    Judge Phillips on the papers on 17th December 2013 but not  promulgated
    until 21st March 2014.  Nonetheless the letter from  HMRC  relating  to
    documentation in relation to Mr Galer was not  dated  until  after  the
    promulgation of the decision and evidently obtained in response to that
    decision.

 9. As the judge stated, to demonstrate that she was a worker she needed to
    show that she was working in accordance with  the  regulations  at  the
    start of her employment.  She claims at that time that she was  working
    as a family member.  If so, she would be  dependent  on  Mr  Galer  her
    former partner demonstrating that he was a qualified person further  to
    Regulation 6 of the EEA Regulations (and working in compliance with the
    Accession Regulations).  The judge identified this  point  at  [10]  by
    referring to documentation which might substantiate her claim  to  have
    been a family member of an EEA national.  Clearly  the  judge  means  a
    family member of an EEA national at the relevant time.    As he  states
    at [10] of his determination, the   judge  was  not  satisfied  on  the
    documentation before him that  she  was  a  family  member  of  an  EEA
    national at the relevant time and he stated 'there is no  documentation
    in the papers before me that might substantiate the appellant's  claims
    to have been a family member of an EEA  national'.  This  documentation
    was not before the judge and the missing document was  her  explanation
    as to why she might qualify not evidence.

10. I do not accept that the letter the appellant indicated was before  the
    Home Office had indeed been sent to the Tribunal as it was undated, she
    could  not  provide  proof  of  posting  and  the  letter  referred  to
    information  which  was  only  obtained  after  the  determination  was
    promulgated.  The letter referred to at 7.2 of the application  merely,
    as  she  stated,  explained  why  she  was  excluded  from  WRS.   This
    information was before the judge because it was repeated in the  appeal
    notice.  I do not find that the judge therefore made an error  in  this
    regard. The application form did refer to a self assessment and a birth
    certificate but all the financial  documentation  in  relation  to  the
    former  partner  and  presented  by  the  appellant  post   dated   the
    determination  and  was  received  on  24th  May  2014.   The  National
    Insurance Contribution letter was dated 19th  April  2014,  once  again
    after the determination was promulgated.

11. The burden of proof is on the appellant and the notice to the appellant
    from the Tribunal makes it clear  that  it  is  for  the  appellant  to
    provide documentation to the Tribunal.  It is  not  for  the  judge  to
    guess at the documentation that may be supplied.

12. It is open to the appellant to renew her application with the  relevant
    documentation to the Secretary of State to demonstrate she was a family
    member at the relevant time and that her ex partner was a qualified EEA
    national at the time.

13. In the circumstances I am not persuaded that the judge made an error of
    law and his determination shall stand.

14. The appeal is dismissed.

Signed                                             Date  23rd June 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
