
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33863/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 13 November 2017                        |On 27 November 2017             |
|                                           |                                |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE hOME dEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                 UMESH BABU
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant

Representation:

For the Secretary of State:     Ms K Pal, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent/ Claimant:   Mr R Chohan, Counsel instructed by SZ
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals from  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge V James sitting at Birmingham  on  16  February  2017),
    allowing on human rights grounds (Article 8 ECHR) the claimant's appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State to revoke his ILR on the
    grounds that he had used deception to obtain his  grant  of  ILR  on  9
    October 2014 and/or that  he  had  not  lawfully  accrued  five  years'
    residence as a Tier 2 migrant so as to qualify for  ILR,  claims  which
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge found that the  Secretary  of  State  had
    failed to prove.  The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  anonymity
    direction, and I do not consider that such a direction is required  for
    these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

Relevant Background

 2. The claimant is a national of India, whose date of  birth  is  2  April
    1978.  He first came to the United Kingdom as  a  Tier  2  migrant  (or
    equivalent thereof) in 2004, and  was  given  leave  to  enter  for  12
    months.  He was granted an extension of leave  in  this  capacity,  but
    left the UK in around 2006.  He returned as a Tier 2 migrant  in  2009,
    after spending a year in Australia.  He was then given a succession  of
    extensions of leave to remain.

 3. Relevant to this appeal is some of evidence given by  Rebecca  Collings
    of the Home Office in her 'generic' witness statement of 23 June  2014,
    which  is  routinely  deployed  in  ETS  cases.   She   explains   that
    demonstrating language ability is a requirement for those seeking entry
    clearance or leave to remain under inter alia  Tier  2.   The  language
    testing policy started to be introduced in 2008,  in  recognition  that
    the ability to speak good English was a clear indication of success for
    people coming to work here.  Between 2008 and 2010, it was added to the
    requirements of all the routes to which it currently applies, including
    Tier 2.  Applicants could take a test at one of 19 providers identified
    by the Home Office which offered English Language testing equivalent to
    a recognised European  standard.   The  recognised  list  of  providers
    included Educational Testing Services (ETS).

 4. She explains that tests are and were available to be taken at different
    levels, depending on the immigration application type and  the  ability
    of the test-taker.  Her table, which is at paragraph 11 of her  witness
    statement, shows that the level  of  ability  required  for  a  Tier  2
    (General) migrant was and is CEFR B1 or above, whereas  for  a  Tier  1
    (General) migrant, it was and is CEFR C1 or above.

 5. On 28 March 2012, the claimant applied for further leave to remain as a
    Tier  2  (General)  migrant.   As  evidence  of  his  English  Language
    proficiency, he relied upon a TOEIC certificate from ETS  showing  that
    he had undertaken a speaking and writing test at  the  New  College  of
    Finance on 28 March 2012, and had achieved a speaking score of 180, and
    a writing score of 150.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal Judge found  that  the  claimant  was  given  a
    succession of extensions "including an application  made  on  28  March
    2013 [sic] which was granted."  The Judge further found that  later  in
    2013 the claimant applied for indefinite leave to remain, having  spent
    5 years as a Tier 2 migrant in the UK, and  that  the  application  was
    granted on 9 October 2014.

 7. On 24 September 2015, the Secretary  of  State  gave  her  reasons  for
    deciding to revoke the claimant's ILR.  His scores from the test  taken
    on 28 March 2012 at the New College of Finance had now  been  cancelled
    by ETS.  On the basis of information provided by ETS, the Secretary  of
    State was satisfied that his certificate was fraudulently obtained  and
    that he had used deception in his application of 28 March  2012  (sic).
    He had not  lawfully  gained  further  limited  leave  to  remain,  and
    therefore he had failed to accrue five years  of  lawful  residence  to
    qualify for the grant of ILR on 9 October 2014.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 8. At the hearing before Judge Jones, the Presenting Officer relied  inter
    alia on a supplementary bundle of documents which  included  an  expert
    report from Professor French, and a  Project  Facade  Criminal  Enquiry
    report into abuse of TOEIC at New College of Finance.

 9. The claimant relied  inter  alia  on  a  letter  and  certificate  from
    Elizabeth College dated 4 November  2013.   This  showed  that  he  had
    achieved Level CEFR B1 in  speaking,  writing,  reading  and  listening
    units in a test undertaken on 30  October  2013.   In  an  accompanying
    letter,  the  Chief  Administrator  of  the  College  said   that   the
    qualifications obtained by the claimant at Elizabeth College followed a
    course which was 60 hours in duration, with an attendance of 3 days per
    week.

10. In her subsequent decision, the Judge concluded at paragraph [26]  that
    the  claimant  had  provided  an  innocent  explanation  and  that  the
    respondent had not discharged the legal of burden of  showing  that  he
    employed deception in his ETS test.  Part of  her  reasoning  for  this
    conclusion us to be found in paragraph  [24].   Although  the  claimant
    gave evidence through an interpreter, she observed that he would  often
    begin to  answer  the  question  before  the  interpreter  had  had  an
    opportunity to translate it, and  he  sometimes  used  English  in  his
    answers: "It was clear he understood English well."   The  Judge  noted
    that since 2012 the claimant had taken  two  further  English  Language
    tests, "passing them with high scores".  As the  Trinity  College  test
    was taken over three years after the ETS test in question,  she  placed
    little weight on it: "I do however attach some weight to the test  with
    Elizabeth College, taken in October 2013, the validity of which has not
    been challenged."

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

11. On  18  September  2017,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Gleeson  granted  the
    Secretary of State permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  for  the
    following reasons:

         The Secretary of State relies on  MA  (Nigeria)  -v-  Secretary  of
         State for the Home Department (ETS - TOEIC testing) [2016] UKUT 450
         (IAC) at 57, where the Tribunal held that there may be many reasons
         for cheating, not all  of  which  are  related  to  the  claimant's
         English Language capability  on  the  date  of  the  test.   It  is
         arguable that evidence of the English Language  ability  18  months
         later is not probative either of English Language  ability  on  the
         day, or of not having cheated.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

12. At the hearing to determine whether an error of law was  made  out,  Ms
    Pal  developed  the  case  that  Upper  Tribunal  Judge   Gleeson   had
    specifically identified as being arguable.   However,  having  reviewed
    the evidence that was before the First-tier  Tribunal,  and  the  other
    reasons given by the Judge for allowing the appeal, I was not persuaded
    that an error of law was made out.  My detailed reasons for so  finding
    are set out below.

Reasons for Finding No Error of Law

13. The way the case is put in the renewed application  for  permission  to
    appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  (Judge  Scott  Baker  having  initially
    refused permission) is that "it was not open" to Judge Jones  to  place
    weight on the fact that the claimant had  passed  an  English  Language
    test some 18 months after the date of the ETS test.

14. The first reason given for asserting that the  Judge  should  not  have
    placed any weight on the later test is that it  could  not  demonstrate
    the claimant's English Language capability at the date of the ETS test.

15. I accept that the result of the later test could not  in  itself  prove
    that the claimant had a level of proficiency in speaking at Level B1 at
    the time when he purportedly sat for  the  ETS  test.   However,  Judge
    Jones did not give decisive weight to the result  of  the  later  test.
    She merely gave "some  weight"  to  the  later  test  result.   If  the
    claimant had achieved a worse result 18 months  later,  despite  having
    continued to operate in an English-speaking environment for  a  further
    18 months -  and  despite  having  been  given  60  hours'  tuition  in
    preparation for the later test - this would have  seriously  undermined
    his credibility with regard to his assertion that he genuinely obtained
    a speaking score of 180 in his ETS test in 2012.  Conversely, the  fact
    that he had obtained "high scores" (a finding not challenged  as  being
    unsustainable) in the test taken 18 months later was reasonably treated
    by the Judge as being more consistent with him telling the truth  about
    genuinely sitting for  the  ETS  test,  than  it  was  with  him  being
    dishonest.

16. The second reason given as to why it was not open  to  Judge  Jones  to
    place weight on the fact  that  the  claimant  had  passed  an  English
    Language test 18 months after the date of the TOEIC test is that,  even
    if the later test showed that his English was adequate,  this  did  not
    prove that he did not cheat in the ETS test.  Thus,  it  is  said,  the
    Judge failed to have regard to MA (Nigeria) which demonstrated that  an
    applicant might choose to cheat  for  reasons  other  than  that  their
    English Language ability was not to the required standard.

17. In MA (Nigeria), the Upper Tribunal ("UT") found that the claimant  had
    not  provided  an  innocent  explanation,  and  that  his  case  was  a
    fabrication in all material respects: see paragraph [55].  At paragraph
    [57], the UT acknowledged the suggestion  that  MA  had  no  reason  to
    engage in the deception which they had found proven.  However, this had
    not deflected them in any way from reaching  their  main  findings  and
    conclusions: "We are not required to make the further  finding  of  why
    the appellant engaged in deception and to this we add that  this  issue
    was not explored during the  hearing.   We  resist  any  temptation  to
    speculate about this discreet matter."

18. The UT found against MA because he did not give a credible  account  of
    actually sitting the disputed test.  In contrast, Judge James found  at
    paragraph [25] that this claimant had given  a  credible  and  detailed
    account of (a) how he had booked the test, (b) his journey to the  test
    centre and (c) what happened when he got there.  MA  is  authority  for
    the proposition that it is not necessary for the  respondent  to  prove
    motive in order to make out a case of deception.  It is  not  authority
    for the proposition that, when  evaluating  whether  an  appellant  has
    provided an innocent explanation, the Tribunal is debarred from  taking
    into account the fact that there was no apparent need for the appellant
    to employ a proxy test-taker.

19. It is apparent from the Judge's line of reasoning that  the  evaluation
    of whether the claimant had provided an innocent  explanation  for  his
    2012 test results being declared invalid by ETS was not confined to the
    test result of 2013 and to him giving a credible and  detailed  account
    of sitting for the ETS test.  The Judge also accepted his evidence that
    for a number of years he had  been  working  in  international  elitist
    sport where the language of communication  was  English;  that  he  was
    working in this industry and speaking English in India before coming to
    the UK, and that while in the UK and in Australia he had  continued  to
    work in the same field, speaking English.  The Judge found the claimant
    to be a truthful witness,  whose  evidence  was  consistent  in  cross-
    examination, and who was at no time evasive.

20. In conclusion, bearing in mind that the error of  law  challenge  is  a
    very narrow one and other aspects of  the  Judge's  reasoning  are  not
    challenged as being legally erroneous, I consider that  the  Judge  has
    given adequate reasons for finding in the claimant's favour on the core
    issue, which was whether he had used deception to  obtain  a  grant  of
    further leave to remain as a Tier 2 migrant, and therefore  whether  in
    due course he had obtained indefinite leave to remain on  a  fraudulent
    basis.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  this  appeal  on  human
rights grounds did  not  contain  an  error  of  law,  and  accordingly  the
decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

I make no anonymity direction.


Signed                              Date  24 November 2017


Judge Monson

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


