

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/33403/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 10 August 2017                             |On 14 August 2017            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?



                                   Between

                       babatunde oluwabamigbe adetuyi
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr P Corben of Counsel, instructed by St Valchikwe
Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant challenges the determination of  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Plumptre  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the  respondent's
         refusal on 6 August 2014  to  grant  further  leave  to  remain  on
         article  8  grounds.  The  appeal  was  dismissed  by  way   of   a
         determination promulgated on 10 January 2017 following a hearing at
         Hatton Cross on 3 January 2017  at  which  the  appellant  and  his
         representatives declined to participate.


      2. The appellant is a Nigerian national born on 22 November  1966  who
         last entered the UK on a false passport in March 2006 but  obtained
         discretionary leave in July  2009  because  he  married  a  British
         national of Nigerian origin in a customary ceremony.  An  extension
         of his leave was granted in May 2011 until  26  May  2016  but  his
         application for further leave was refused  because  the  respondent
         was not satisfied that there was evidence to show the  relationship
         was subsisting or that the appellant's presence  was  conducive  to
         the public good because he had multiple unspent convictions.


         Procedural Background


      3. There is a long and unsatisfactory history  to  these  proceedings.
         Following the refusal of his application, the appellant  lodged  an
         appeal and that was heard by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Owens  at
         Hatton Cross on 7 September 2015 and dismissed under the rules  and
         on article 8 grounds on 29 September  2015.  At  that  hearing  the
         appellant claimed that he had experienced problems in  Nigeria  but
         confirmed he was not pursuing a protection claim.



      4. The appellant challenged the decision on the basis  the  judge  had
         made no adverse credibility findings with respect to  the  problems
         he claimed to have experienced in Nigeria, that those problems were
         relevant to the obstacles he would face if he had  to  re-integrate
         into Nigerian society and that the  judge  confused  them  with  an
         asylum claim. It is also argued that the judge failed  to  consider
         the submission that the appellant would face  significant  harm  on
         return. Permission to appeal was  refused  by  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Ford on 28 April 2016 but renewed to the Upper Tribunal where
         it was additionally argued that the appeal had been presented under
         articles 2, 3 and humanitarian  protection  grounds  and  that  the
         appeal in that respect had not  been  properly  considered.  It  is
         maintained that Judges Owen and Ford had been  biased  against  the
         appellant because he had not claimed asylum. It was further  argued
         that the proportionality assessment was flawed (although no further
         clarification is provided). On 25 May 2016,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
         Reeds granted permission to appeal on the basis  that  Judge  Owens
         had failed to make findings on the claim of serious harm  and  that
         her observation that the representative did  not  make  submissions
         that the appellant would be at risk of serious harm on  return  was
         arguably inconsistent with the appellant's evidence that  he  would
         be at risk.



      5. The matter then came before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Shaerf  at
         Field House on 4 July 2016. Having heard submissions, Judge  Shaerf
         agreed with the appellant's representative that the  appellant  had
         indeed raised article 2 and 3 issues in his evidence  and  that  no
         findings on these matters had been made by the judge. He found that
         to be an error of law. He concluded, however,  that  there  was  no
         reason to disturb the findings on article 8. He allowed the  appeal
         to the extent that it contained an error of law such that  elements
         of the appellant's claim under articles 2  and  3  remained  to  be
         decided. His determination was promulgated on 12 July 2016.



      6. The appellant then filed an application for permission to appeal to
         the Court of Appeal on 18 July 2016.  There  appear  to  have  been
         problems with the fax machine at Field House during this period and
         the application was not processed. On request from the Tribunal  on
         22 September 2016, the application was re-served  on  26  September
         and on 3 October 2016 the Upper Tribunal  acknowledged  receipt  of
         the application with the confirmation: "You will be notified of the
         results  in  writing".   To  date,  no  decision  has  been   made.
         Meanwhile, it appears that the file was transferred to Hatton Cross
         on 16 July 2016 following Judge Shaerf's decision. On 18 July 2016,
         a notice of hearing was issued by the First-tier  Tribunal  listing
         the appeal for a hearing on 3 January 2017.



      7. On 13 September  2016  appellant's  representatives  contacted  the
         Upper Tribunal to enquire about the progress of the application for
         permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal. No  reply  appears  to
         have been issued.



      8. On 3 October 2016, the First-tier  Tribunal  issued  directions  in
         support of the appeal hearing on 3 January 2017.



      9. On 11 November 2016, the representatives contacted  the  First-tier
         Tribunal  requesting  that  the  hearing  be  vacated   until   the
         permission application was decided by the Court of Appeal (sic). On
         16 November 2017, the application for an adjournment  was  refused.
         It was pointed out that there was no evidence that  an  application
         had been made and  that  the  Upper  Tribunal  had  to  decide  the
         application before it proceeded to the Court of Appeal.



     10. On  18  November  2016,  the  representatives  clarified  that  the
         application for permission to appeal was before the Upper  Tribunal
         and repeated the request that the hearing  be  vacated  until  that
         application  was  decided.  A  copy   of   the   Upper   Tribunal's
         acknowledgment of receipt of  the  application  for  permission  to
         appeal was attached as evidence that an application had been  made.
         On 7 December  2016,  the  adjournment  request  was  refused.  The
         appellant was informed that as his  application  had  been  pending
         since October, he "should hear shortly". He was directed to  notify
         the Tribunal of the position no later than 20 December 2016.



     11. On 16 December 2016, the representatives contacted  the  First-tier
         Tribunal again. They maintained that even  if  the  Upper  Tribunal
         refused permission to appeal, a further application would  be  made
         direct to the Court of Appeal and  so  the  process  would  not  be
         completed by 3 January 2017. The request  for  an  adjournment  was
         repeated. On 20 December 2016, the First-tier Tribunal refused  the
         adjournment on the basis that the appellant had not asked the Upper
         Tribunal to "expedite their onward appeal".



     12. On 3 January 2017,  the  appellant's  representative  attended  the
         hearing  and  renewed  the  application  for  an  adjournment.  The
         respondent was unrepresented. The  matter  came  before  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Plumptre who refused the adjournment  on  the  basis
         that she was obliged  to  follow  the  instructions  of  the  Upper
         Tribunal  as  regards  the  remittal.   The   appellant   and   his
         representative then refused  to  participate  in  the  proceedings.
         Judge Plumptre proceeded in their absence and dismissed the  appeal
         under articles 2 and 3 on 10 January 2017.



     13. On  19  January  2017,  the  applicant  filed  an  application  for
         permission to appeal. Essentially he maintained that the First-tier
         Tribunal had no jurisdiction to hear the appeal whilst there was an
         outstanding application for permission to appeal to  the  Court  of
         Appeal before the Upper Tribunal. Permission was granted on 24 July
         2017 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Brunnen.  The  matter  then  came
         before me on 10 August 2017.



            The hearing

     14. At the hearing, I heard submissions from  the  parties.  Mr  Corben
         criticized Judge Plumptre for proceeding whilst the application for
         permission to appeal was still outstanding and submitted  that  she
         had erred in only considering  the  matter  of  delay  rather  than
         justice as an over-riding objective. He submitted that allowing her
         decision  to  stand  would  mean  that  the  appellant's  right  to
         challenge Judge Shaerf's decision would be extinguished through  no
         fault of his own. Ms Willocks-Briscoe agreed that  the  application
         appeared to be outstanding but submitted that the appellant had had
         the opportunity to present his case on articles 2  and  3  and  had
         declined to particulate in  the  proceedings.  She  was  unable  to
         comment on the procedural matter.  Mr  Corben  submitted  that  any
         delay in the proceedings was due to procedures in the Tribunal  and
         the appellant should not be deprived of his rights because of that.





     15. Conclusions



     16.  Having  heard  the  submissions  and  considered  the  documentary
         evidence  before  me,  I  am  satisfied  that  an  application  for
         permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal was made  in  a  timely
         fashion to the Upper Tribunal by the appellant and that  the  delay
         in its receipt and need for it to be re-served was due to  a  fault
         with  the  fax  machine  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  at   the   time.
         Correspondence on file from the Upper Tribunal confirms that. I  am
         also satisfied that due to what appears to be  a  most  unfortunate
         oversight by the Upper Tribunal, the application for permission  to
         appeal was not placed before a judge for consideration. It did  not
         assist matters that all the letters from the representatives asking
         for an update on the permission application were  simply  forwarded
         to the First-tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross where it seems no action
         was taken. Of course, it is unusual for an appellant  who  succeeds
         in his appeal to make  an  application  for  permission  to  appeal
         however the procedure rules allow  for  either  party  to  raise  a
         challenge and the appellant was  within  his  rights  to  make  his
         application. He is also entitled to have that  application  decided
         and it is regrettable that the paper applications for  adjournments
         were refused without  any  action  being  taken  to  chase  up  the
         permission application. I am satisfied that Judge Plumptre erred in
         law. She had no jurisdiction to proceed  with  the  appeal  hearing
         when there was an outstanding challenge before the  Upper  Tribunal
         to Judge Shaerf's decision to remit the appeal  for  re-hearing.  I
         conclude, therefore, that her decision is void.


     17. It follows that Judge's Shaerf's  decision  on  remittal  shall  be
         dependent upon the outcome of the  application  for  permission  to
         appeal to the Court of Appeal which shall now be decided.



     18. Decision


     19. The First-tier Tribunal had no jurisdiction to hear  and  determine
         the appeal. The decision is void.



     20. Anonymity



     21. No request for an anonymity order was made and I see no  reason  to
         make one.

    Signed



       Upper Tribunal Judge

       Date: 10 August 2017








