
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33396/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 29 July 2014                               |On 1st Aug 2014              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVID TAYLOR

                                   Between

                           EMMANUEL OWUSU GYAPONG
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Reinhold of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The Secretary of State is the appellant to  this  appeal  but  for  the
    sake of convenience and consistency I refer to her  as  the  respondent
    and to the original appellant as such.

2.   The appellant is a 49 year old citizen of Ghana.   In  a  determination
    promulgated on 23 May 2014 in the  First-tier  Tribunal,  Judge  Morgan
    allowed his appeal against the


     respondent's refusal to recognise the validity of his  marriage  to  Ms
    Gladys Donkor who is a Dutch national exercising treaty rights  in  the
    UK.  She is of Ghanaian  parentage  and  she  and  the  appellant  were
    married, by proxy in their absence, in Ghana on 13th July 2012.

3.   In allowing the appeal, Judge Morgan accepted that the parties were  in
    a durable relationship and were living together.   In  respect  of  the
    validity of the marriage he relied upon the Upper Tribunal decision  in
    NA Ghana [2009] UKAIT 00009.

4.   In seeking permission to appeal, the Secretary of State submitted  that
    the judge erred in failing  to  take  account  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
    decision in Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT  00024  which
    held that it is for the appellant  to  prove  that  the  issue  is  not
    whether the UK recognises the proxy marriage in Ghana but  whether  the
    Member State of the EEA spouse recognises the marriage.  Permission  to
    appeal on that ground was granted by Designated Judge  Phillips  on  16
    June 2014.

5.   Before the commencement of the appeal hearing  before  me  Ms  Reinhold
    submitted documentary evidence from the Netherlands to the effect  that
    Dutch law will recognise Ghanaian marriages by proxy provided that  all
    the  correct  formalities  have  been  applied  in  Ghana.   Mr  Deller
    considered that evidence and went on to confirm to me  that,  from  his
    own experience in previous similar cases, he was able to  concede  that
    the marriage in this case is recognised under Dutch law.

6.   The only other potential issue was the genuineness and  subsistence  of
    the marriage.  Ms Reinhold, who had appeared at the First-tier Tribunal
    hearing, told me that the genuineness  of  the  relationship  had  been
    conceded by the Presenting Officer on behalf of the respondent  at  the
    hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.  That was why  the  judge,  in  his
    determination, had been able to find, without detailed reasoning,  that
    the appellant and his wife are in a genuine  and  durable  relationship
    and that they have lived together  as  husband  and  wife  since  their
    marriage in 2012.

7.   On this basis Mr Deller was content to consent that  the  determination
    should be set aside (for failing  to  consider  Kareem)  and  that  the
    decision should be remade allowing the  appeal  on  the  basis  of  the
    additional evidence that had been submitted for the hearing before  me.
    I agreed and indicated that I would make a decision in those terms.









Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
law (in failing to refer to and take account of the decision in Kareem)  and
is accordingly set aside.  I remake the decision by allowing the  appeal  of
the appellant Emmanuel Owusu Gyapong.

No anonymity direction has been sought and none is made.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge David Taylor
1 August 2014



Fee Award

The original fee award made in the First-tier Tribunal is  set  aside  (with
the determination).  Although I have allowed this appeal I have decided  not
to make a fee award in favour of the appellant because the  evidence  as  to
Dutch law, which should have been put before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  was
not submitted until the hearing before me.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge David Taylor
1 August 2014

