
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33453/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |      Decision & Reasons         |
|                                             |Promulgated                      |
|On 30th November 2015                        |      On 20th January 2016       |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI

                                   Between

                            MUHAMMAD NAQASH ASIF
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Malhotra, Counsel; instructed by Renaissance
                  Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms L Ong, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. For ease of  comprehension,  the  parties  are  referred  to  by  their
    appellate status and positions before the First-tier Tribunal.




 2. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Miles allowing the Appellant's appeal against
    the Secretary of State's refusal of his application for  further  leave
    as a Tier 4  student  on  the  basis  that  the  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law.

 3.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated  its  decision   allowing   the
    Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision on 15 April 2015.

 4.  The  Respondent  appealed  against  that  decision  and  was   granted
    permission to appeal by Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb. The sole basis upon
    which permission was granted may be summarised as follows:

      i) It is arguable that the  judge  erred  in  reaching  a  finding  of
         unfairness given that the appellant had not submitted a  valid  CAS
         when  the  sponsor's  licence  was  revoked,  as  it  is  not   the
         Respondent's action which led to the appellant being unable to meet
         the Rules.




 5. I was not provided a Rule  24  response  from  the  Appellant  but  was
    addressed by his Counsel by way of oral submissions. It is of note that
    the Respondent chose not to be represented at the  hearing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, but was represented at the hearing before me.



    No Error of Law

 6. I do not find that there was an error of law in the decision such that
    it should be set aside. My reasons for so finding are as follows.




 7. At the start of the hearing, Ms Malhotra produced a copy of the letter
    of 11 June 2014 from the Respondent's contact centre to the Appellant,
    which informed him that he should make his request for a "60-day
    letter" via email. It is not in dispute that this letter was sent and
    that the Appellant followed this advice the very next day, on 12 June
    2014.



 8. Having seen the letter before the hearing began, Ms Ong pragmatically
    acknowledged that the letter from the UKVI contact centre left her in
    some difficulty because it stated that the Appellant needed to send a
    request for the 60 day letter, which led to him sending that request
    via email that would then allow him to enrol with a college. Ms Ong
    acknowledged that this letter was sent to UKVI although she suggested
    the caseworker probably would not have had it. However, she also
    acknowledged that as the email from the Appellant was sent to UKVI as
    he was advised to do by the contact centre, it gave the Appellant an
    expectation that he should receive a 60 day letter and an opportunity
    to find another college.



 9. For the Appellant, Ms Malhotra agreed with Ms Ong's submission that
    there was an expectation on the part of the Appellant and further
    submitted that this appeal was not exactly like Patel (revocation of
    sponsor licence - fairness) India [2011] UKUT 211 (IAC) as stated by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb in granting permission. This is because
    Judge Miles considered the sequence of events in correct detail, and it
    is the Appellant's engagement with the Respondent's advice in obtaining
    the 60 day letter that gave rise to unfairness, not the revocation of
    the college's sponsor licence.



10. In my view, the parties are right to suggest that the Appellant was
    given an expectation by the UKVI contact centre that he would be given
    a 60 day letter which would then allow him to enrol with a college.
    This advice was acted upon, the request was made, but no reply was
    forthcoming till date. That was an action which the judge was entitled
    to classify as unfair. The suggestion that this appeal should fail for
    lack of a CAS letter ignores fact that the appeal succeeded to the
    extent that the decision was not in accordance with the law, which is a
    question of common law and public law fairness, that requires
    resolution regardless of whether the Rules were satisfied or not. Ms
    Malhotra is quite right, that fairness depends on the particular
    context of the scenario in question, and here the judge considered that
    context and decided that the Appellant was treated unfairly which was a
    decision the judge was clearly entitled to reach (see the second
    headnote in Thakur (PBS decision - common law fairness) Bangladesh
    [2011] UKUT 00151 (IAC), for example).



11. Furthermore, in relation to the basis upon which permission was
    granted, it is noteworthy that the appeal was only allowed to the
    extent of procedural unfairness in the decision reached, not on the
    basis that the Rules were satisfied.


12. In conclusion, the judge was entitled to reach the findings that were
    made due to the above-mentioned situation that left the Appellant with
    an expectation of receiving a 60 day letter which was not forthcoming
    and resulted in unfairness.




13. Therefore, it remains for the Respondent to act upon the Appellant's
    request for a 60 day letter as she gave him an expectation he would
    receive, and to issue a new decision in due course, the previous
    decision not being in accordance with the law.




14. Consequently, given my findings above, the grounds  do  not  reveal  an
    error of law such that the decision should be set aside.



    Decision

15. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.



16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is affirmed.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini

