
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/33817/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 2 November 2016                   |On 3 November 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                             ARslan Javed iqbal
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant is a national of Pakistan born on 6 October 1988.  He
         entered the UK as a Tier 4 Migrant in December 2012.  A  subsequent
         application for further leave made on 27 May 2014 was refused on 13
         August 2014 under paragraph 245ZX(c) and (d)  because  he  did  not
         have a CAS assigned to him and consequently his ability to meet the
         maintenance requirements could not be assessed.
      2. The appeal against the refusal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal
         Judge McIntosh at Taylor House on 6 March 2015 and applications for
         permission to appeal were  refused  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Shimmin and Upper Tribunal Judge Freeman on 25 June and  25  August
         2015. The applicant then filed a judicial review claim and that was
         granted by  Mr  Justice  Gilbart  on  9  March  2016.  In  granting
         permission Gilbart, J. made comments about the poor quality of  the
         determination both with regard to the grammatical and typographical
         errors  and  with  the  inconsistency  in  the  judge's  reasoning.
         Permission to appeal was then granted by the Upper Tribunal  on  28
         September 2016.

      3. The appellant's  case,  simply  put,  is  that  when  he  made  his
         application on 28 May 2014, he did so  without  submitting  a  CAS.
         That is accepted. He argues, however, that  he  mistakenly  thought
         his old CAS would have continued to apply to his current course and
         also, more importantly, that he was prevented from taking the IELTS
         test required to  obtain  a  CAS  because  his  passport  had  been
         submitted to the respondent  with  his  application  and  had  been
         retained despite two requests in July  2015  for  its  return.   He
         argues that the only barrier to the obtaining  of  a  CAS  was  the
         respondent's failure to return his passport and that  the  decision
         was, therefore, unfair. He argued that the respondent  should  have
         exercised discretion in his favour.

      4. There was no appearance by the appellant or anyone on his behalf at
         the hearing of his appeal before me on  2  November  2016.  In  the
         absence of any message and, having satisfied myself that the notice
         of hearing was served both on the appellant and his representatives
         and that neither notice had been returned undelivered, I  proceeded
         at 11.30 a.m. to hear submissions from Ms Ahmad.

      5. Ms Ahmad referred me to four judgments:  Shaikh  [2014]  EWHC  2586
         (Admin), Marghia (procedural unfairness) [2014] UKUT  00366  (IAC),
         EK (Ivory Coast) [2014] EWCA Civ 1517 and Patel and  others  [2012]
         EWCA Civ 741. She pointed out that whilst the appellant had  relied
         upon Shaikh in his grounds, that  decision  was  made  on  its  own
         particular  facts  (as  is  confirmed  at  paragraph  35)  and  the
         circumstances differed significantly to the appellant's case.   She
         submitted that the court had found in Marghia that the exercise  of
         residual discretion was a matter for the Secretary of State. In EK,
         the court had found that where an application was  made  under  the
         points based system, either an appellant met  the  requirements  or
         did not. There was no obligation on  the  respondent  to  give  the
         appellant opportunities to meet  the  requirements  of  the  rules.
         Patel addressed the issue of article 8 made  by  students.  A  near
         miss under the rules could not provide substance to a human  rights
         case otherwise lacking in merit and article 8  was  concerned  with
         private or family life and not education as  such  (paragraphs  56-
         57).


      6. Ms Ahmad submitted that the judge had provided  clear  reasons  for
         why he concluded that there had been no unfairness. There  were  no
         material errors of law  in  his  determination  and  it  should  be
         upheld.

      7. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my determination  which
         I now give.

                   Findings and conclusions

      8. The appellant does not dispute the fact that he had no CAS when  he
         made his application for further leave  in  May  2014.  There  can,
         therefore, be no dispute that he does not meet the requirements  of
         the Immigration Rules and the judge's conclusions were  correct  in
         that respect.

      9. The only issue that remains is whether the judge erred  in  finding
         that the respondent acted fairly in making her decision and whether
         there was an error in his failure to consider article 8.  Before  I
         proceed to whether the judge made material errors  of  law,  it  is
         helpful to set out the background and chronology to this case.

     10. Contrary to what is argued  at  paragraph  6  of  the  grounds  for
         permission to appeal (which are very poorly prepared),  the  First-
         tier Tribunal  Judge  did  not  accept  that  the  actions  of  the
         respondent  prevented  the   appellant   from   taking   an   IELTS
         examination. That is a complete misreading of paragraph 22  of  the
         determination.

     11. By the appellant's own evidence, he was told by  his  college  (the
         London College  of  Accountancy)  that  he  needed  a  fresh  IELTS
         certificate when he approached them for a CAS. Although he does not
         specify in his February 2015 witness statement when that  occurred,
         he does confirm that it was before  he  made  his  application  for
         further leave (on 24 February 2014), before the expiry of his leave
         (on 27 February 2014), before he started to approach other  Tier  4
         sponsors and before he was issued a conditional offer  letter  from
         Queensbury College dated 3 January 2014. His accountancy course had
         ended on 27 December 2013.

     12. The judge's record of  proceedings  records  that  the  appellant's
         evidence was that he received this information  in  February  2014,
         some two weeks before his leave was due to expire.  That  does  not
         sit well with the documentary evidence.  The  appellant  must  have
         known  well  before  3  January  2014  that  he  required  a  fresh
         certificate as it was on that date that he obtained  a  conditional
         offer letter from a new Tier 4 sponsor. Given that his  course  had
         ended on 27 December 2013, it is safe to presume that he would have
         sought to make enquiries about a further course before  that  date.
         Further, the passport copy shows that the appellant's leave expired
         on 27 February 2014, so his assertion on his application form on 27
         May 2014, that he had PBS leave at the time, is incorrect.

     13. The appellant sought an extension of his leave on 24 February  2014
         but his application was  rejected  as  invalid  on  30  April  2014
         because he did not enrol his biometric  information.  He  does  not
         explain why. Nor does he explain why he waiting almost a  month  to
         re-submit his application on 27 May  2014.  When  he  did  so,  his
         passport was already  with  the  respondent  as  evidenced  by  his
         application form (on p. 4). Both the February and May  applications
         were to follow a  new  course  with  a  new  sponsor  -  Queensbury
         College, from 3 March 2014 - 24 April 2015. Whereas  the  appellant
         had  previously  sought  to  remain  to  complete  his  accountancy
         qualification (although as at June 2014 he had completed only 3  of
         14 required examinations), the new course  was  for  a  diploma  in
         Strategic Management. He does not explain why he chose  to  abandon
         his accountancy studies. In his application  for  leave,  reference
         was made to an English language test certificate issued on  5  June
         2014. However,  this  has  not  been  produced  and  indeed  it  is
         difficult to see how, in May 2014, he could have in his  possession
         a test certificate for 5 June 2014. The only certificate on file is
         an IELTS certificate dated  21  June  2012  taken  at  the  British
         Council in Lahore, Pakistan.

     14. It was not until 8 July 2014 that the  appellant's  representatives
         made the first request for the return of the appellant's  passport,
         three days after the appellant booked his language test. The second
         request was made on 18 July 2014, the day before he was due to take
         the test.

     15.  The  judge's  determination  does,  indeed,  contain   unfortunate
         typographical errors as identified by Mr Justice Gilbart. There are
         also factual errors. The judge  wrongly  found  that  the  date  of
         expiry of the appellant's leave was 31 May 2014; no  doubt  arising
         from the respondent's appeal papers which give that date.  He  also
         wrongly concluded that the appellant had his passport at  the  time
         his May application was made, when the evidence clearly showed that
         he had already submitted it to the  respondent  with  his  February
         application. Notwithstanding those errors,  having  carefully  read
         the determination as a whole and having considered the evidence  at
         length despite the absence of the appellant,  I  am  not  satisfied
         that they are such as to vitiate the decision.

     16. The judge considered  the  submissions  made  on  the  respondent's
         residual discretion and properly found that  the  judgments  relied
         upon by the appellant all related to cases where individuals  found
         themselves in difficult positions  due  to  their  colleges  losing
         their licences. The position here is very different. The  appellant
         had his passport until 27 February 2014 when he submitted  it  with
         his first (invalid) application. He provides no explanation  as  to
         why he did not seek to take the  language  test  before  then.  His
         booking form shows that tests can be taken at short notice  so  the
         long delay between December 2013 when he would have  discovered  he
         needed to take the test, and  July  2014  when  he  booked  it,  is
         unexplained.  The  appellant  has  brought  his  difficulties  upon
         himself. The respondent has not caused them.

     17. The appellant failed to request the return of his passport until  8
         July 2014, over 4 months after his leave had expired.  Even  if  he
         had received it and taken the test, it would not have advanced  his
         position.

     18. The respondent does indeed have discretion to grant  leave  outside
         the rules but whether or not she chooses to exercise it is a matter
         for her (Marghia op cit). She cannot be accused of  unfairness  for
         failing to exercise it, particularly in  these  circumstances,  and
         the judge cannot be criticized for failing to find that  she  acted
         unfairly.

     19. On the matter of article 8, I cannot see the basis  on  which  this
         argument is advanced. The grounds of appeal refer  to  breaches  of
         article 8 but nowhere does the appellant seek to set out the  basis
         of any private/family life claim. In as much as his private life is
         associated with studies, that does not assist.  It  is  established
         authority that article 8 is not generally concerned with a wish  to
         study and in any event the appellant does not seek to complete  the
         studies on which he embarked; his last  course  was  for  something
         completely different. A student who seeks to rely on article  8  to
         bypass his inability to meet the  requirements  of  the  rules  has
         virtually no chance of success. The judgments relied on by Ms Ahmad
         reinforce that position.

     20. It follows therefore that although it would have  been  far  better
         had the judge's determination not  contained  the  unfortunate  and
         regrettable errors that have been pointed out, on the facts of this
         case no other outcome would have been possible.

     21. Decision

     22. The determination does not contain any errors of law such that  the
         decision should be set aside.

     23. The decision is upheld. The appeal is dismissed.

    Signed





       Upper Tribunal Judge

       Date: 3 November 2016
