
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33299/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 January 2015                            |On 30 January 2015            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                            Mr Hasan Onur Yilmaz
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim, Counsel instructed by Oakfield
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                     Delivered orally on 20 January 2015

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Turkey born on 15 September 1988.   On  3
    August 2012 he was granted leave to  enter  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    business visitor such leave being conferred until 3 February 2013.   On
    31 January 2013 the appellant applied for leave to remain  pursuant  to
    the provisions of paragraph 21 of HC 510 in order to establish  himself
    in business as a painter and decorator.

 2. To set the backdrop  to  this  appeal,  it  is  settled  law  that  the
    Immigration Rules which came into force in 1972, i.e.  HC  509  and  HC
    510, are the Rules which ought to be applied to Turkish  nationals  who
    have made applications of this sort as  of  a  consequence  of  Article
    41(1) of  the  Additional  Protocol  to  the  EEC  Turkish  Association
    Agreement - otherwise known as the standstill clause.

 3. Paragraph 21 of HC 510  sets  out  the  requirements  relevant  to  the
    instant, and states as follows:

         "Businessmen and Self-employed Persons

         People admitted as visitors  may  apply  for  the  consent  of  the
         Secretary of State to their establishing themselves  here  for  the
         purpose of setting up in business, whether on their own account  or
         as partners in a new or existing business.  Any such application is
         to be considered on its merits.  Permission will depend on a number
         of factors, including evidence that the applicant will be  devoting
         assets of his own to the business proportional to his  interest  in
         it, that he will be able to bear his share of any  liabilities  the
         business may incur and that  his  share  of  its  profits  will  be
         sufficient to support him and any dependants.  The applicant's part
         in the business must not amount to  disguised  employment,  and  it
         must be clear that he will not  have  to  supplement  his  business
         activities by employment for  which  a  work  permit  is  required.
         Where the applicant intends to join an existing  business,  audited
         accounts should be produced to establish  its  financial  position,
         together with a written statement of the terms on which  he  is  to
         enter into it; evidence should be sought that he will  be  actively
         concerned with its running and that there is a genuine need for his
         services and investment.  Where  the  application  is  granted  the
         applicant's stay may be extended for  a  period  of  up  to  twelve
         months, on a condition restricting his freedom to take  employment.
         A person admitted as a businessman in the  first  instance  may  be
         granted an appropriate extension of stay if the conditions set  out
         above are still satisfied at the end of the period for which he was
         admitted initially."

 4. By a Reasons for Refusal Letter dated 5  July  2013  the  Secretary  of
    State refused the appellant's application - concluding that he had  not
    demonstrated that (i) he  genuinely  wished  to  establish  himself  in
    business as proposed (ii) he would be bringing into the  country  money
    of his own to establish such business or (iii)  the  business  that  he
    claimed he was intending to establish was not a viable one.

Error of Law

 5. Mr Yilmaz appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against the Secretary  of
    State's decision and that appeal was heard by Judge  Vaudin  d'Imecourt
    on 23 December 2014. In paragraphs 24 and 25 of his  determination  the
    judge sets out the core of his reasoning in the following terms:

         "24. ... The appellant has failed to corroborate by  evidence  that
             he is bringing into the United Kingdom money  of  his  own  to
             invest in his claimed business, but given the effort that  the
             appellant has put into establishing the  business  by  way  of
             adverts and setting up a limited company in his name and given
             that I found him to be a credible witness, I  am  prepared  to
             accept his word that the money is his own.

         25.  Having said this and having heard the appellant give  evidence
             and having looked at all the other evidence available in  this
             case including evidence that he would have  clients  available
             to him should he be granted permission I  was  satisfied  that
             the prospect of setting up a successful business as a  painter
             and decorator within the Turkish community alone in London was
             probably available to the appellant and that he  could  run  a
             credible business.  He has done more than most  people  do  in
             these cases and has provided evidence that he has an insurance
             cover for his business; he has provided evidence that  he  has
             set up a limited company; he has also provided  evidence  that
             he  intends  to  obtain  a  driving  licence.   He  has,  more
             importantly, provided evidence that there are companies within
             the Turkish community who would be prepared to employ him on a
             sub-contractual basis after they had tried him out unpaid.   I
             am satisfied that this  would  not  be  disguised  employment.
             Nevertheless, although I find that the  appellant's  estimated
             income for his first year in business is a figure that is  not
             supported  by  cogent  evidence,  I  was  satisfied  that  the
             appellant would  nevertheless  probably  be  able  to  support
             himself from his first year's income."

 6. If one pauses here, the  overriding  impression  one  gets  from  these
    passages is that the appellant meets the requirements of  paragraph  21
    of HC 510.  However, despite the fact that  no  further  rationale  was
    provided by the judge in this regard, he concluded in  paragraph  29(1)
    of the determination, that "the appeal under the Immigration  Rules  is
    dismissed".

 7. Mr Avery submitted that such conclusion was sustainable  because  on  a
    proper analysis of paragraphs 24 and 25 the judge  had  concluded  that
    the appellant had not demonstrated that the business he proposed to run
    was one that would be viable.

 8. Even if this is the correct interpretation of the judge's rationale for
    dismissing the appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules, which in
    my conclusion it plainly is not, then it  is  certainly  not  something
    that can be easily found from a reading of paragraphs  24  and  25,  or
    indeed elsewhere in the determination.

 9. On my reading of paragraph 25 the judge, having  found  both  that  the
    appellant could run "a credible business" and that he would be able  to
    support himself from his first year's income is,  in  fact,  concluding
    that the business that the appellant proposes to run  is  one  that  is
    viable.

10. There is simply nothing in the judge's reasoning which allows a  reader
    of the determination to understand why, having made  findings  of  fact
    favourable to the appellant, he then  went  on  to  conclude  that  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules had not been  met.  I  find  this
    failure of reasoning to amount to an error of  law  that  requires  the
    First-tier Tribunal's determination to be set aside and I do just that.

11. Before moving on I also pass comment on paragraphs 26  and  27  of  the
    determination.  In paragraph 26 the judge  cites  from  an  Immigration
    Directorate  Instruction  that  relates  to  applications   for   entry
    clearance and leave to enter.  As a consequence of the  terms  of  this
    Instruction the judge concludes that the matter should be referred back
    to the Secretary of State to reconsider.  I  cannot  discern  what  the
    judge's underlying rationale was for considering the cited paragraph of
    the Immigration Directorate Instructions to be of any relevance to this
    appeal. It  plainly  is  not.  The  appellant  was  neither  making  an
    application for entry clearance nor one for leave to enter. The  making
    of either of these applications is a prerequisite to the application of
    the cited paragraph from the IDIs.  The appellant's application was for
    an extension of stay or, to put it another way, for leave to remain. He
    already had leave to enter.

12. The judge's reliance on the Immigration Directorate Instructions in  my
    conclusion also amounts to an error  of  law,  although  not  one  that
    operates in the appellant's favour.

Re-making of decision

13. Both parties agreed that it would be appropriate for me to  remake  the
    decision on appeal for myself on the basis of the findings set  out  in
    paragraphs 24 and 25 of the First-tier Tribunal's determination.

14. On the basis of such findings it is palpably clear that  the  appellant
    meets  all  of  the  requirements  of  paragraph  21  of  HC  510  and,
    consequently, I must allow his appeal on the basis that  the  Secretary
    of State's decision was not in accordance with the Immigration Rules.

Notice of Decision

For the reasons set out above:

      i) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside;
     ii) Upon remaking the decision  on  appeal  for  myself,  I  allow  the
         appellant's appeal on the  basis  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
         decision was not in accordance with the Immigration Rules contained
         in HC 510

No anonymity direction is made.

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  fee  award
in the sum of any fee  which  has  been  paid  or  may  be  payable  by  the
appellant.

Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 22 January 2015
