
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33995/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 26 November 2015                  |On 14 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  D. o. o.
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Savage, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms U Miszkiel, Counsel instructed by Kulendran
Immigration


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal brought by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department in relation to a decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Ian
    Howard which was promulgated on 28 May 2015.

2.   The respondent to the appeal, D. O. O., was born in June 1995 and is  a
    citizen of Nigeria. I shall however refer to her in  this  decision  as
    the applicant  to  avoid  confusion.   She,  together  with  her  minor
    brother, have a long immigration history which I need not go  into  for
    these purposes.  Suffice it to say that an  application  for  leave  to
    remain was made on 20 February 2009. That was refused and on  12  April
    2011 all appeal  rights  had  been  exhausted.  On  16  August  2011  a
    reconsideration request was made and between then and June 2014 further
    material  was  put  forward.   The  application  was  considered  under
    Appendix FM paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules  and  also  under
    Articles 3 and 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

3.   An appeal was lodged by the appellant on  28  August  2014.   It  would
    appear that the appeal  related  to  a  single  decision  letter  which
    embraced both the applicant and her younger brother and certainly  when
    the matter was before the Judge, it was approached with the concurrence
    of both the Secretary of State and those acting for  the  applicant  on
    the basis that the determination of the  applicant's  appeal  would  be
    dispositive also of the brother's situation. A point which arose during
    the course of argument today is that that  technically  no  appeal  was
    lodged by the brother and therefore the determination by  Judge  Howard
    and any ruling I make today will be  ineffective  in  relation  to  the
    brother. I consider that my  approach  today  is  to  regard  both  the
    applicant and her dependent brother as standing  or  falling  together.
    Any disposal today of this appeal should inevitably have an  impact  on
    the position of the dependent brother.

4.   When Judge Howard looked at the matter  he  was  required  to  go  into
    considerable detail of the history of immigration  status  and  of  two
    earlier decisions by Judge Mailer and Judge Webb in the course of which
    it would appear that negative findings had  been  made  on  credibility
    issues.  In this case Judge Howard had the advantage of a report from a
    clinical psychologist, Dr Julia Heller, dated 11 November 2014,  and  I
    too have had the advantage of reading that document in full.  It  deals
    with psychiatric history and it is not necessary for  the  purposes  of
    this decision for me to rehearse its content. It is also  fair  to  say
    (and it is accepted) that having regard to the relative  youth  of  the
    applicant and her brother, the judge was entitled  to  look  afresh  at
    issues of credibility and was not bound by the observations of  earlier
    judges who had looked at evidence given by these individuals when  they
    were not as old as they are now.

5.   The judge proceeded  to  dispose  of  the  matter,  adopting  the  five
    question approach commended by the House of  Lords  in  the  well-known
    authority of R v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  ex  parte
    Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.  In approaching the case as the judge  addressed
    the first question, whether the proposed removal  would  amount  to  an
    interference with the exercise of the private or  family  life  of  the
    applicant and her dependent brother.

6.   At paragraph 26, the judge said this:
         "The decision of the respondent is to remove the appellant and  her
         brother from the UK.  They live with their aunt and  have  done  so
         now since 2010.  Also living with them is their sister  E.   Unlike
         their aunt, E. has no status in the United Kingdom.  Their aunt has
         effectively brought the children up for the last  five  years.   To
         describe what they have as anything less than a family  life  would
         be to fail to understand the opinion of  Baroness  Hale  in  Beoku-
         Betts.  The removal of the appellant and her brother  would  be  an
         interference with the family life they have established with  their
         aunt."

7.   I am told, and the Secretary of State accepts,  that  the  2010  figure
    ought properly to read 2008 and that  the  period  during  which  these
    children have been with their aunt should be recorded as seven and  not
    five years.

8.   This was a case where in effect the aunt was the  de  facto  parent  of
    the applicant and her brother.  The judge makes an express  finding  to
    the effect that the children were brought up by her. To my mind this is
    a sufficient finding of fact to justify the conclusion that there would
    be an interference with family life notwithstanding that we are dealing
    with two adults: aunt and niece.  There needs to be more than  ordinary
    love and affection but in my opinion and on  a  clear  reading  of  the
    earlier decision the judge came to the view that there was genuine day-
    to-day parenting by the aunt of both niece and  nephew.  The  criticism
    made in the grounds of appeal and pursued in oral  argument  before  me
    that there was insufficient evidence of a family life is, to  my  mind,
    based upon a misreading of what was said shortly  but  clearly  by  the
    judge in his determination.

9.   The second matter, pursued with skill  and  economy  by  Ms  Savage  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State relates to an  inadequacy,  so  it  is
    said, on the judge's part in dealing with the question  of  whether  it
    would be appropriate for the applicant and her brother to  be  returned
    to Nigeria. Again, this point seems to be based upon  a  misreading  of
    what the judge himself said in his evaluation  of  question  2  of  the
    Razgar questions, by reference to Dr Heller's report.

10.  The judge at paragraph 26 said the following:
         "The appellant is found by Dr Heller to be  suffering  from  severe
         clinical depression.  This condition would, in the opinion  of  the
         doctor, significantly deteriorate if she were removed.
         Insofar as M. is concerned the doctor opines that he  is  suffering
         from two psychologically  diagnosable  conditions,  childhood-onset
         fluency disorder and non-rapid eye movement sleep arousal disorder.
          He is not clinically depressed.  She does however conclude that to
         remove him to Nigeria would prove a severe psychological trauma and
         would definitely  predispose  him  to  further  significant  mental
         illness.
         Given that both these sets of circumstances are managed within  the
         family  environment  they  both  inhabit  without   the   risk   of
         deteriorations of which the doctor speaks there  is  certainly  the
         potential to engage Article 8."  [Emphasis added].

11.   It  is  apparent  from  this  paragraph  that  the  judge   gave   due
    consideration to whether it would be appropriate for the applicant  and
    her brother to be returned to Nigeria and that there was a proper basis
    of medical evidence which indicated that it would be disadvantageous to
    varying degrees for both the applicant and her brother to be returned.

12.  Dealing then  with  the  other  issues  which  are  raised  by  way  of
    criticism of the judge's decision, they seem  to  me  individually  and
    cumulatively to amount to no more than a complaint  as  to  the  weight
    given to various features and as is well-known issues of weight  to  be
    ascribed to different elements of the evidence are  matters  which  are
    properly within the discretion of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  and
    should not be interfered with by the Upper Tribunal.

13.  The more significant suggestion that there  may  be  an  error  of  law
    relates to the fact that in applying the statutory  presumptions  under
    Section 117B of the Immigration Act, the judge in this instance gave no
    or no sufficient regard to the period when the applicant's  immigration
    status was either unlawful or precarious.  It is said that she  was  an
    overstayer and therefore could not acquire Article 8 private and family
    life rights during the period when her residence was indeed precarious.

14.  I accept that in a very  lengthy  paragraph  of  the  decision,  namely
    paragraph 26, the judge's reasoning may not be as explicit  as  ideally
    should be the case.  The judge deals  with  matters  under  subheadings
    concerning each of the five Razgar questions but  he  also  recites  in
    full the statutory tests to  be  applied  under  Section  117B.   As  a
    counsel of perfection it would have been better had he dealt  in  terms
    with the period when the applicant's immigration status was  precarious
    and it is unfortunate that such a sentence is absent from  the  overall
    decision.

15.  However, I need to look at the totality of  the  decision  and,  having
    regard to the great care which the judge took over a factually  complex
    case with a long immigration history and the  fact  that  he  took  the
    trouble to set out the statutory test to be applied,  it  seems  to  me
    that  he  must  have  weighed  this  consideration  in  coming  to  the
    conclusion which he did.

16.  If I am wrong on that and it could be said to have  been  an  error  of
    law not to deal with it expressly, looking at all of the evidence,  all
    of the judge's findings and the overall trajectory of his  conclusions,
    I do not consider that the absence of an express sentence dealing  with
    Section 117B had any material effect on the outcome of this  particular
    appeal, and in  those  circumstances  I  would  similarly  reject  this
    criticism.

17.  I therefore come to the conclusion that although permission  to  appeal
    was granted on a number of limbs, not all of which were advanced by the
    Secretary of State in the grounds of  appeal,  those  matters,  whether
    singly or collectively do not amount to an  error  of  law.   Both  the
    balancing exercise which needs to be conducted under Article 8 and  the
    question of  proportionality  are  inevitably  complex  but  I  do  not
    consider that any criticism can legitimately  be  made,  save  for  the
    small omission which I do not regard as material.

18.  I look to the penultimate  section  within  paragraph  26  and  to  the
    judge's conclusion:
         "For all the reasons I have found to be  reliable  in  Dr  Heller's
         reports the family life  in  the  UK  is  not  one  that  could  be
         replicated  with  their  mother  in   Nigeria.    The   anticipated
         deterioration in both their mental health is only the  first  of  a
         number of barriers to this and these barriers are significant."

    Although the judge does not at that point repeat  what  those  barriers
    are and how significant they might be it is implicit from the foregoing
    paragraphs  of  the  decision  that  he  has  properly  exercised   his
    discretion.

19.  The conclusion comes in paragraph 27 and reads as follows:
         "So it is that when I add  all  the  matters  relied  upon  by  the
         appellant and about which I am satisfied against the matters relied
         upon by the  respondent  as  making  these  removals  (and  thereby
         interferences) necessary I am not satisfied the decisions to remove
         are proportionate."

    To my mind that is  a  soundly  based  conclusion.   It  is  adequately
    explained and there can be no fault with the reasoning.

20.  It therefore follows that this appeal must be dismissed.   I  make  one
    final observation arising out of that last paragraph, namely  that  the
    expression 'removals' is put in the plural and  'decisions  to  remove'
    are similarly put in the plural.  It seems clear to me that the  appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal and the Secretary of State's appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal today must clearly relate both to  the  named  applicant
    and to her younger brother, who is her dependant. It further  seems  to
    me that  the  Secretary  of  State  has  acquiesced  in  this  approach
    throughout the currency of these proceedings both before the First-tier
    Tribunal and before me. The view I take, and I make it clear  now  lest
    there be argument at a later stage, is that the decision made by  Judge
    Howard and affirmed today by me is as relevant to, and dispositive  of,
    the interests of her younger sibling M. as they are in relation to  the
    applicant.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Mark Hill     Date 11 December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Mark Hill     Date 11 December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC

