






Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
IA/33087/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |  Decision Promulgated            |
|On 16 June 2017                          |  On 20 June 2017                 |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL

                                   Between

|       |THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT        |             |
|       |                                                      |Appellant    |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|                                                                            |
|       |           KULJEET SINGH DHAMI                        |             |
|       |(ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)                            |             |
|       |                                                      |Respondent   |


Representation:

For the Appellant:       Ms C Turnbull of Counsel, instructed by Alpha
                    Business & Legal Consultants
For the Respondent:   Mr. P. Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


Introduction and background facts


 1. The Secretary of State has been granted permission  to  appeal  against
    the decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Manyarara  who,
    following a hearing on 24 October 2016, allowed the appeal of Mr  Dhami
    (hereafter the "claimant") against a decision of the Secretary of State
    of 2 October 2015  refusing  his  application  of  16  April  2014  for
    indefinite leave to remain as a spouse of Mrs. Gurjeet Kaur, a  British
    citizen (hereafter the "sponsor").

 2. In brief,  the  judge  found  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  not
    discharged the burden upon her to show that the claimant had  practised
    deception and she therefore found against the Secretary of  State,  and
    for the claimant, in relation to the refusal under para 322(2)  of  the
    Statement of Changes in the Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended)  (the
    "Rules"). The judge also considered Article 8  under  Appendix  FM  and
    para 276ADE as well as outside the  Rules  and  decided  to  allow  the
    Article 8 claim outside the Rules.

 3. There are two matters to which I should draw attention at  the  outset.
    Firstly, the Secretary of State was  not  represented  at  the  hearing
    before the judge. Secondly, Ms Turnbull and Mr Duffy agreed  before  me
    that the claimant's application of 16 April 2014 for  indefinite  leave
    to remain as a  spouse  fell  to  be  treated  under  the  transitional
    provisions and therefore para 287 of the Rules  applies  to  his  case.
    This means that if (as the judge found) the claimant succeeded  on  the
    para 322(2) issue, his appeal should have been allowed under  para  287
    of the Rules. There was no need for the judge to consider  Appendix  FM
    or EX.1 of Appendix FM or the Article 8 claim outside the Rules.

 4. It is therefore not clear why (in the "Notice of decision" part on  the
    final page of her decision) the judge dismissed the  claimant's  appeal
    under the Rules notwithstanding that she found that  the  Secretary  of
    State had not discharged the burden upon  her  to  establish  that  the
    claimant had practised deception. Nor is it clear  why  she  considered
    Article 8 under Appendix FM, EX.1 and Article 8 outside the Rules.

 5.  The  Secretary  of  State's  reasons  for  refusing  the   applicant's
    application maybe summarised as follows:

    i)      The Secretary of  State  took  the  view  that  the  claimant's
        presence in the United Kingdom was not conducive to the public good
        because she considered that, in support of his application of 2 May
        2012 for leave to remain as a spouse,  he  had  submitted  a  false
        certificate from Electronic Testing System ("ETS") in  relation  to
        his Test of English for International Communication ("TOEIC") taken
        on 17 April 2012 at Synergy Business College  of  London.  ETS  had
        cancelled the claimant's scores from the test. His  test  had  been
        categorised by ETS as invalid. The  Secretary  of  State  therefore
        refused the application for leave to remain under para  322(2)  and
        para 289 of the Rules with reference to para 287(v).

    ii)     As the claimant did not satisfy the requirements of  para  287,
        the Secretary of State refused the application for leave under  the
        Rules and proceeded to consider the application under  Appendix  FM
        and outside the Rules on the basis of Article 8.

    iii)    The application under Appendix FM was  refused  on  the  ground
        that the claimant did not meet the  suitability  requirement  under
        para S-LTR.1.6 because it was considered that his presence  in  the
        UK was not conducive to the public good.  The  Secretary  of  State
        considered that the  claimant  did  not  meet  the  requirement  in
        EX.1(b) because she concluded that  there  were  no  insurmountable
        obstacles to claimant and the sponsor enjoying their family life in
        India.  In relation to  para  276ADE(1),  the  Secretary  of  State
        considered that para 276ADE(1)(iii)-(v) did not apply and that  the
        claimant did not satisfy para 276ADE(1)(vi) because she  considered
        that there were no very significant obstacles to his  reintegration
        in India. She did not consider that the  claimant  had  raised  any
        grounds which were significant enough to warrant the grant of leave
        outside the Rules on the basis of Article 8.

 6. In relation to the refusal under para 322(2) of the  Rules,  the  judge
    had before her the witness statements of  Rebecca  Collings  and  Peter
    Millington. Their witness statements have been used in many similar ETS
    cases. The judge also had a witness  statement  from  Lesley  Singh,  a
    Senior Home Office case worker (para 41 of the judge's  decision).  The
    evidence submitted with the witness statement from Mr Singh showed that
    the claimant's  test  was  categorised  as  invalid  (para  43  of  the
    decision).  The Secretary of State also produced an  ETS  TOEIC  Centre
    Look up Tool (para 41 of the decision). On the basis of this  evidence,
    the judge found that the Secretary of State had discharged the  initial
    evidential burden and she considered that the burden therefore  shifted
    to the claimant to provide a plausible explanation whereupon the burden
    would shift back to the Secretary of State  to  discharge  the  overall
    legal burden upon her to establish deception. The judge  then  referred
    to the Court of Appeal's judgment in SSHD v Shehzad & Chowdhury  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 615 before turning to the claimant's evidence before her which
    she dealt with at paras 46-50  in the following terms:

            "46. I  have  derived  considerable  benefit  from  hearing  the
             [claimant] giving evidence before me in support of his  appeal.
             The [claimant] was able to give his evidence  in  English.  The
             [claimant]  gave   evidence   relating   to   his   educational
             achievements and his additional English language test  results.
             I have seen the [claimant]'s pass notification in  relation  to
             the Life in the UK test. The test was taken by  the  [claimant]
             on 8 October 2013.

            47.  Prior to his arrival in the  UK,  the  [claimant]  took  an
             English language test despite not being required to  do  so.  I
             find considerable force in the submission that  the  [claimant]
             would not therefore have had the need to take a further English
             language test by proxy in light of his achievement prior to his
             arrival in the United Kingdom.

            48.  I have further had the benefit of seeing  the  [claimant's]
             ESOL certificate dated 20 February 2014. This  shows  that  the
             [claimant] was awarded Grade 5 in spoke English. The result  is
             the equivalent of B.1.1 of the Common European  Framework.  The
             [claimant] further attended an interview at the request of  the
             [Secretary of State] and the interview record  is  included  in
             the [Secretary of State]'s bundle. Having had  the  benefit  of
             reading the interview record, I find that  the  [claimant]  has
             been consistent about where, when and how he took  the  English
             language test that has been  impugned  in  the  decision  under
             appeal.

            49.  One of the landmark  features  in  [SM  and  Qadir  v  SSHD
             [2016] UKUT 229 (IAC)]  was that the appellants  gave  evidence
             and were  cross-examined  on  the  contents  of  their  witness
             statements. I find that the [claimant] in this appeal has  been
             proficient in the English language for some considerable time.

            50.  Having considered all of the evidence cumulatively, I  find
             that the [claimant] has discharged the evidential  burden  that
             shifted to him and I hold that the legal burden  has  therefore
             not been discharged by the [Secretary of State] in relation  to
             the use of deception."

 7. It is therefore clear that  the  judge  found  that  the  claimant  had
    discharged the evidential burden that she considered had passed to  him
    because (in essence) she considered that the evidence  showed  that  he
    had been proficient in the English language for some considerable time.



 8. In her grounds, the Secretary of State relied upon MA (Nigeria)  [2016]
    UKUT 450 where at para  57,  the  Upper  Tribunal  said  that,  in  the
    abstract, there is a range of reasons why persons proficient in English
    may engage in  TOEIC  fraud  which  include,  inexhaustively,  lack  of
    confidence, fear of failure, lack of time and commitment  and  contempt
    for the  immigration  system;  that  these  reasons  could  conceivably
    overlap in individual  cases;  and  that  there  was  scope  for  other
    explanations for deceitful conduct in this  sphere.  The  Secretary  of
    State contended that the judge had therefore erred in relying upon  the
    claimant's ability in the English language; that she had failed to give
    adequate reasons for finding that a person  who  speaks  English  would
    have no reason to secure a test certificate by deception; and that none
    of the evidence that the claimant had given was detailed or specific to
    the test.

 9. In view of the decision of the  Upper  Tribunal  in  MA  (Nigeria),  Ms
    Turnbull accepted that the judge had  erred  in  law  in  reaching  her
    finding that the claimant had not practised  deception,  in  that,  she
    relied upon his English language ability and  gave  inadequate  reasons
    for concluding that the claimant's evidence was such as to overcome the
    Secretary of State's evidence in  discharging  the  initial  evidential
    burden upon her.  Ms Turnbull therefore accepted  that  the  judge  had
    materially erred in law in resolving the issue under para 322(2) in the
    claimant's favour and that the judge's  decision  on  the  para  322(2)
    issue must therefore be set aside.

10. However, Ms Turnbull submitted that the judge's error in  reaching  her
    finding under para 322(2) was not relevant to her finding  in  relation
    to  the claimant's Article 8 claim outside the Rules, that the decision
    was disproportionate.

11. Given Ms Turnbull's acceptance that the judge had materially  erred  in
    law in reaching her conclusion on the para 322(2) issue, the sole issue
    before me is whether the error in finding that the Secretary  of  State
    had not discharged the overall legal burden upon her to establish  that
    the claimant had practised deception in relation to the test  taken  on
    17 April 2012 was material to  her  assessment  of  proportionality  in
    relation to the Article 8 claim outside the Rules.

12. It is therefore necessary to summarise the judge's reasons for allowing
    the appeal outside the Rules. Her reasons may be summarised as follows:

    i)      The judge began by stating at para 52 that it  was  appropriate
        to first consider the claimant's Article 8 claim with reference  to
        the Rules. She found that there were no insurmountable obstacles to
        family life being enjoyed in India and therefore that the  claimant
        did not satisfy EX.1.(b) of Appendix FM (para 69). She  found  that
        the claimant satisfied the remaining  requirements  (paras  53-60),
        including the suitability requirement in S-LTR.1.6 given  that  the
        allegation of deception had not been established (para 60).

    ii)     At para 70, the judge said  she  therefore  considered  whether
        there were any circumstances which  warrant  consideration  of  the
        appeal outside the Rules  because  the  absence  of  insurmountable
        obstacles  to  relocation  outside  the  United  Kingdom  was   not
        determinative of all issues before  her.  At  para  71,  the  judge
        reminded herself that the claimant had to show that the test to  be
        applied for the grant of leave on the basis of  Article  8  outside
        the Rules was that of "compelling circumstances". She said that she
        had considered the claimant's circumstances "through  the  lens  of
        the Rules".

    iii)    Having reminded herself of  relevant  principles  from  decided
        cases (paras 72-79), the judge said, at para 80:


                 "80   ... I further find that it would not  be  reasonable
                 to expect the [claimant] to leave  the  United  Kingdom  to
                 make an entry clearance application. It is clear  that,  on
                 the facts  that  have  been  accepted  in  this  case,  the
                 requirement that the [claimant] seeks entry clearance is  a
                 procedural one. The [claimant]  has  already  been  granted
                 leave to remain by the [Secretary of State on the basis  of
                 his family life with the sponsor".


                 (My emphasis)

    iv)     The judge then said, at paras 82-83:


                 "82.  Whilst a married couple does not have the  right  to
                 choose where to continue family life, in  relation  to  the
                 [claimant's] current ties to the  United  Kingdom  and  any
                 expectation that he would  be  allowed  to  remain  in  the
                 United  Kingdom,  I  find  that  any  suggestion  that  the
                 [claimant] who was granted leave to remain on the basis  of
                 his family life with the sponsor, would  not  have  cut  or
                 loosened his  ties  to  his  country  of  origin  would  be
                 unsupported by any evidence. I find that the [claimant] was
                 entitled to apply for ILR (as he  did)  having  been  given
                 leave for a probationary  period.  Therefore,  despite  the
                 fact that the  [claimant]  may  have  family  remaining  in
                 India, his ties are now to the  United  Kingdom  where  his
                 wife is.


                 83.   By analogy, a person granted leave to  remain  as  a
                 student or worker is very clearly someone who  is  admitted
                 on a limited basis. Once a spouse is acknowledged  however,
                 the presumption that the state would facilitate  settlement
                 if the marriage subsists. It is plain to see that a student
                 or a worker cannot have no reasonable expectation of having
                 a future or permanent home in the United  Kingdom.  I  find
                 that the same cannot be said of a spouse of a person who is
                 settled in the United Kingdom, whatever the status  of  the
                 previous leave granted as long as the grant of leave was on
                 the basis of the relationship.  The  [Secretary  of  State]
                 accepted the marriage in this case and  this  is  therefore
                 not a case were the presumption at the  outset  would  have
                 been that the [claimant] would leave  the  United  Kingdom,
                 unless the marriage broke down."


            (My emphasis)

    v)      At paras 91 and 93-94, the judge said:


                 "91.  Having  considered  the  [claimant's]  circumstances
                 through the lens of the Rules, I  find  that  there  is  an
                 existing gap in the  Rules  and  the  part  played  by  the
                 [Secretary of  State's]  discretion  is  greater  when  the
                 circumstances of  this  case  are  considered  against  the
                 background of the [claimant's] initial grant  of  leave  to
                 remain as a spouse. I find that there  is  disproportionate
                 interference with family life on the facts of this case.


                 93.   Whilst I have  considered  the  public  interest  in
                 immigration control, the sponsor is  a  qualifying  partner
                 under [section] 117D [of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
                 Asylum Act 2002].  The  [claimant]  was  granted  leave  to
                 remain in recognition of the relationship in this case. The
                 claimant has been able to give his evidence in English  and
                 there has been no recourse to public funds in this case.  I
                 bear in mind  following  the  cases  of  Forman  (ss.117A-C
                 considerations)  v  Secretary  of  State   for   the   Home
                 Department [2015] UKUT 00412 (IAC) and Bossade [[2015] UKUT
                 00415 (IAC)] that these are not the only considerations.


                 94.   I  find  that  the  interference  in  this  case  is
                 disproportionate to the legitimate aim."


                 (My emphasis)

13. Ms Turnbull accepted that, in assessing the Article 8 claim outside the
    Rules, the judge must have taken into  account  her  finding  that  the
    claimant satisfied  the  suitability  requirement  under  Appendix  FM.
    However, she submitted that  this  was  not  material  to  the  judge's
    balancing exercise in relation to proportionality.

14. I pressed Ms Turnbull for her reasons for saying that the judge's error
    in relation to the para 322 (2) issue was not material to her  decision
    on the Article 8 claim outside the Rules. Ms  Turnbull  submitted  that
    the judge considered the claimant's circumstances through the  lens  of
    the Rules. She considered that the requirement for the claimant to make
    an entry clearance application was a procedural one in this  case.  She
    took into account that the claimant satisfied all of  the  requirements
    of the Rules except for the deception issue. She found that  there  was
    family life between the claimant and the sponsor. She  found  that  the
    decision interferes with family life.

15. I again asked Ms Turnbull to explain why  she  said  that  the  judge's
    error in relation to the  deception  issue  was  not  material  to  the
    judge's assessment of proportionality outside the  Rules.  Ms  Turnbull
    said she had nothing further to add.

16. I have to say that I simply cannot accept Ms Turnbull's submission that
    the judge's error in relation to the para 322(2) issue was not material
    to her assessment of the Article 8 claim outside  the  Rules,  for  the
    following reasons:

    i)      I do not accept Ms Turnbull's submission that  the  judge  took
        into account that the claimant satisfied all of the requirements of
        the Rules except for the deception issue.  It  is  clear  that,  in
        assessing the Article 8 claim outside  the  Rules,  she  took  into
        account  her  earlier  finding  that  the  claimant  satisfied  the
        suitability requirement. This is the  only  basis  upon  which  she
        could have found (at para 80) that the requirement for the claimant
        to return to India to make an entry  clearance  application  was  a
        procedural one.  The  only  requirement  that  she  considered  the
        claimant did not satisfy under the Rules was the  requirement  that
        there be insurmountable obstacles to family life being continued in
        India. This much is clear from para 70 of her decision.

    ii)     It is clear from the text I have emboldened above in the quotes
        from paras 80, 82, 83, 91 and 93 that the judge relied heavily upon
        her finding that the claimant had  received  an  initial  grant  of
        leave to remain as a spouse.  However,  that  application  was  the
        application made on 2 May 2012 in which the claimant used the TOEIC
        certificate from ETS that resulted from the test taken on 17  April
        2012. If,  therefore,  the  claimant  had  practised  deception  in
        relation to the test of 17 April 2012, it follows that he practised
        deception in obtaining his initial grant of leave as a  spouse,  in
        which event the initial grant of leave as spouse was not  a  factor
        in his favour but a weighty factor against him. There is nothing in
        the judge's reasoning that acknowledges this fact.

    iii)    To the contrary, the words "whatever the status of the previous
        leave granted as long as the grant of leave was on the basis of the
        relationship" in para 83 suggest that she considered that, even  if
        the initial grant to leave as a spouse was obtained by the use of a
        fraudulently obtained TOEIC certificate from ETS, the use  of  such
        fraud was irrelevant  to balancing exercise outside the  Rules  and
        that the mere fact that the Secretary of State had granted  limited
        leave to remain as a spouse went in the claimant's favour  even  if
        the status of such leave was called into question by reason of  any
        deception practised in obtaining the leave. If  this  is  what  she
        meant by the words "whatever  the  status  of  the  previous  leave
        granted" at para 83, her reasoning was perverse or  irrational.  It
        is perverse logic or irrational to say, when deception is  alleged,
        that the fact that such deception has led to the grant of leave  is
        irrelevant in the balancing exercise.

    iv)     I shall deal with the  judge's  reasoning  at  para  90  before
        returning to para 80. It is clear from  the  judge's  reasoning  at
        paras 74-79, that the "gap" referred to at para 91 of her  decision
        concerned the possibility of the claimant making an entry clearance
        application. In this respect, the  judge  concluded,  at  para  80,
        that: "It was clear, on the facts that have been accepted  in  this
        case, the requirement that the [claimant] seeks entry clearance  is
        a procedural one". It is not clear whether the judge was  referring
        to facts accepted by the Secretary of State or facts  as  found  by
        her. If the former, she was incorrect because there is no basis for
        saying that the Secretary of State had accepted facts such that the
        only issue remaining was whether the claimant had  entry  clearance
        for indefinite leave to remain as a spouse. She must therefore have
        been referring to facts as found by her. It must  therefore  follow
        that, in finding that any requirement for the claimant to  make  an
        entry clearance application was a procedural one, she  was  relying
        upon her finding that the claimant did not fall for  refusal  under
        the general grounds for refusal on the ground that he had practised
        deception.

            Accordingly, for the reasons given at  ii)  and  this  sub-para
        iv), if the judge erred in reaching her finding  on  the  deception
        issue (as Ms Turnbull accepted), there is nothing in para 80 of the
        judge's decision that can survive that error.

    v)      What remains of para 82  of  the  judge's  decision  (once  one
        strips away the text I have emboldened above)  cannot  survive  the
        error in relation to the para 322(2) issue.  Firstly,  because  the
        judge continued to rely upon the fact that the  claimant  had  been
        granted initial leave as a spouse in the remainder of her reasoning
        in para 82. Secondly, in any  event,  because  the  judge  did  not
        explain why she  considered  that  someone  who  had  been  granted
        probationary leave  as  a  spouse  cannot  be  considered  to  have
        continued to maintain their ties to their country of origin  whilst
        forging new ties to United Kingdom. Maintaining one ties with one's
        country of origin and forging new ties to the  United  Kingdom  are
        not mutually exclusive, as the judge appears to have considered.

    vi)     It is self-evident that the judge's reasoning in  para  83  was
        dependent upon her reasoning that the claimant had been granted  an
        initial grant of leave as a spouse. Given that that  initial  grant
        of leave was obtained by the use of the TOEIC Certificate from  ETS
        to which the deception allegation relates, there is nothing in para
        83 that can survive the para 322(2) error.

    vii)    The only matters referred to at para 93 (leaving aside the fact
        that the judge took into account the  grant  of  initial  leave  to
        remain as a spouse to the  claimant,  which  I  have  dealt  above)
        concern the fact that the claimant was able to give his evidence in
        English and that there had been no recourse of public funds in this
        case.  However,  the  ability  to  speak  English   and   financial
        independence are neutral factors (AM (s.117B)  Malawi  [2015]  UKUT
        0260 (IAC) and Rhuppiah v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 803).

17. Accordingly, I have concluded that the judge's error  (accepted  by  Ms
    Turnbull) in finding, in relation to the para 322(2)  issue,  that  the
    Secretary of State had not discharged the overall burden  upon  her  to
    show that the claimant had practised  deception  was  material  to  her
    decision to allow the appeal outside the Rules on the basis of  Article
    8.

18. I therefore set aside the decision of Judge Manyarara in its  entirety.
    None of her findings stand.

19. In the majority of cases, the Upper Tribunal  when  setting  aside  the
    decision  will  be  able  to  re-make  the  relevant  decision  itself.
    However, the Practice Statement for the Immigration and Asylum  Chamber
    of the Upper Tribunal at  para  7.2  recognises  that  it  may  not  be
    possible for the Upper Tribunal to proceed to re-make the decision when
    it is satisfied that:

         "(a)     the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before
             the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity
             for that party's case to be put to and considered by the First-
             tier Tribunal; or

         (b)      the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-
             made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-
             tier Tribunal."

20. In my judgement, this case  falls  within  para  7.2(b).  In  addition,
    having regard to the Court of Appeal's judgment in JD (Congo) &  Others
    [2012] EWCA Civ 327, I am of the view that a remittal to the First-tier
    Tribunal for a re-hearing on the merits on  all  issues  is  the  right
    course of action. Ms Turnbull and Mr Duffy agreed that, if I found that
    the judge had materially erred in law in reaching her decision to allow
    the appeal on human rights grounds with reference  to  Article  8,  the
    appropriate course of action would be to remit  this  case  for  a  re-
    hearing on the merits on all issues by another judge. This  is  because
    none of the findings of Judge Manyarara stand.

21. It is necessary for me to make the following points in relation to  the
    next hearing:

    i)     Although the decision letter refers to para 322(2) of the Rules,
        Mr Duffy informed me that the appropriate provision in the Rules is
        para 322(5). However, it is not  entirely  clear  to  me  why  para
        322(5) applies instead of para 322(2). Ms Turnbull did not comment,
        one way or the other, whether para 322(5) as opposed to para 322(2)
        is applicable. The claimant should attend the next hearing ready to
        deal with both. However, it will be necessary for the judge dealing
        with the appeal on the next occasion to obtain  clarification  from
        the Secretary of  State's  representative  whether  she  wishes  to
        proceed under para 322(2) or para 322(5).

    ii)    If the judge hearing the appeal on the next  occasion  concludes
        that the Secretary of State has not discharged  the  overall  legal
        burden upon her to show that the claimant  had  submitted  a  TOEIC
        certificate that had been fraudulently obtained in his  application
        of 2 May 2012 for leave to remain as  a  spouse,  then  the  appeal
        should be allowed under para 287 of the Rules. There  would  be  no
        need for  judge to consider Appendix  FM  or  EX.1.  or  Article  8
        outside the Rules.

    iii)   If the judge hearing the appeal on the next  occasion  concludes
        that the Secretary of State has discharged the overall legal burden
        upon  her  to  show  that  the  claimant  had  submitted  a   TOEIC
        certificate that had been fraudulently obtained in his  application
        of 2 May 2012 for leave to remain as a spouse, it follows that  the
        claimant cannot satisfy the requirements of para 287 of the  Rules,
        nor can he satisfy the  suitability  requirement  in  Appendix  FM,
        EX.1. or para 276ADE of the  Rules.   In  that  event,  the  appeal
        should be dismissed under the Rules and the judge should proceed to
        consider the  Article  8  claim  outside  the  Rules,  taking  into
        account, in the balancing exercise, the finding in relation to  the
        deception allegation and the fact that the  claimant  cannot  as  a
        consequence satisfy the requirements of para 287  or  Appendix  FM,
        EX.1. or para 276ADE.

    Ms Turnbull and Mr Duffy agreed with ii) and iii) above.

Decision

The decision of Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Manyarara  involved  the
making of errors on points of law such that the decision of  the  First-tier
Tribunal is set aside in its entirety.

This case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for that  Tribunal  to  re-
make the decision on the appeal of Mr Dhami on the merits on all  issues  by
a judge other than Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Manyarara.





[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill                                     Date: 20  June
    2017
