
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)        Appeal number: IA/33657/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On October 12, 2015                  |On October 13, 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                      mr dharamseelan moonsamy rangayah
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant   In person
Respondent  Mr Harrison (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of South Africa.  The  background  to  this
    case is he made an application on June 18, 2014 for  an  EEA  permanent
    residence card as confirmation of his right to  reside  in  the  United
    Kingdom  pursuant  to  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006.  The
    respondent refused his application on August 12, 2014 because  she  was
    not satisfied he satisfied Regulation 15(1)(b) of the 2006 Regulations.



 2. The  appellant  appealed  this  refusal  under  section  82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and Regulation 26  of  the
    2006 Regulations. The  matter  came  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Pickup on November 15, 2014 as a paper case and in a  decision
    promulgated on November 17, 2014 he dismissed the appellant's appeal.

 3. The appellant applied  for  permission  to  appeal  on  March  9,  2015
    submitting the Tribunal had erred. Permission to appeal was granted  by
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Page on April 23, 2015  on  the  basis
    that it was arguable the Tribunal had failed to make clear findings.

 4. The respondent submitted a Rule 24 response dated May  8,  2015  but  I
    attach no weight to this document as the author of the letter  had  not
    seen the Tribunal's decision.

 5. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity  direction  and
    pursuant to Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I see no reason to make an order now.

    ERROR OF LAW SUBMISSIONS

 6. The appellant, who appeared in person, submitted the Tribunal had  made
    two errors regarding firstly, the EEA national's country of origin  and
    secondly, had confused his wife and daughter in paragraph [16]  of  its
    decision. Moreover, the appellant submitted the Tribunal's approach  to
    the EEA national's employment fell into  error  because  evidence  that
    demonstrated she had worked continuously had been submitted.

 7. The appellant stated that his current application followed on  from  an
    earlier application and in his current application he had addressed the
    issues raised in the first refusal letter. Whilst he accepted  his  ex-
    wife had not worked all of the time he maintained there was  plenty  of
    evidence to support his claim she had worked sufficiently to  meet  the
    requirements of a "worker".

 8. Mr Harrison opposed the application.  He noted the Tribunal dealt  with
    this appeal on the papers and had acknowledged:

      a. The appellant had submitted additional documents that had not  been
         included with  his  first  application  and  that  these  documents
         included a schedule he had prepared detailing the nature of the EEA
         national's business and details of the website  to  show  proof  of
         advertising.

      b. The nature of the EEA national's business meant she was reliant  on
         client demand and could not show a constant cash flow.

    Mr  Harrison  submitted  the  Tribunal  had  set  out  other   relevant
    information about the appellant and  at  paragraphs  [16]  to  [17]  it
    considered the evidence and rejected it. These findings  were  open  to
    the Tribunal and the appellant's submissions amounted to  nothing  more
    than a mere disagreement.

 9. I reserved my decision on both issues.

    DISCUSSION

10. Permission to appeal was given in this  matter  because  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Page was of the opinion that  clearer  findings  on
    the evidence would have informed the appellant exactly why he had  lost
    his appeal.

11. I indicated to Harrison and the  appellant  that  in  order  to  assess
    whether there had been an error in law it would be necessary for me  to
    review the evidence that had been submitted.

12. The appellant raised possible  errors  in  the  recording  of  evidence
    contained in paragraph [16] of the decision. Mr Harrison accepted  that
    the Tribunal had incorrectly referred to the EEA  sponsor  as  being  a
    Latvian national whereas, of course, she was  from  Lithuania  and  had
    mistakenly referred to his daughter as his ex-wife. I  pointed  out  to
    the appellant that whilst these were errors they were not  material  to
    the matter in hand and consequently could not amount  to  an  error  in
    law.

13. The appellant had not requested an oral hearing before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and has asked for his appeal to be dealt with on  the  papers.
    It is clear from the Tribunal's decision that Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Pickup was aware of the background including the  reasons  why
    the application had been refused in the first place. The  Tribunal  had
    regard to invoices and bank statements as well as a schedule  that  had
    been prepared by the appellant. The Tribunal's role is to  assess  that
    evidence having regard not only to the evidence submitted but also  the
    respondent's response contained in the refusal letter.

14. At paragraph [15] of its decision the Tribunal  noted  the  appellant's
    current personal situation and at paragraph [16] the Tribunal  went  on
    to consider the documents. The handwritten  receipts,  whilst  covering
    odd dates over several years, did not demonstrate the EEA national  was
    exercising treaty rights as a self-employed fashion designer and artist
    continuously for five years.

15. The Tribunal was entitled to assess the quality of  that  evidence  and
    apply the principles set out in Tanveer Ahmed * [2002] UKAIT 00439  and
    the finding made in paragraph [16] about  those  receipts  was  clearly
    open to the Tribunal. This was not a decision where  the  Tribunal  had
    failed to consider the evidence but the challenge is that the  Tribunal
    reached a perverse decision.

16. All the findings made by the Tribunal were clearly open to  it  and  it
    cannot  be  said  that  these  findings  were  perverse.  The  Tribunal
    considered all of the documentary evidence and whilst  accepting  there
    were times when she was employed,  the  Tribunal  ultimately  concluded
    that she had failed to demonstrate a continuous  period  of  five-years
    employment which is what the appellant had  to  demonstrate  to  obtain
    permanent residence under Regulation 15 of the 2006 Regulations.

17. Accordingly, I am satisfied that the  reasons  given  by  the  Tribunal
    where open to it.  There  may  well  be  other  avenues  open  to  this
    appellant as he disclosed at the hearing the level of financial support
    and involvement he now had with his children coupled with the fact that
    he and the EEA national were now divorced. These avenues may  give  the
    appellant some hope of succeeding with a future application but that is
    a matter for a different day.

    DECISION

18. There was no material  error.   I  uphold  the  original  decision  and
    dismiss this appeal.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award as the appeal has been dismissed.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

