
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33027/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11 July 2014                               |On 24 September 2014         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                                    Mr AA

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Toal, Counsel instructed by Wilson Solicitors
LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Turkey,  born  on  1  January  1964.   He
    appeals with leave against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Kaler dismissing his appeal against the decision of the respondent made
    on 22 July 2013 to revoke his indefinite leave to remain under  Section
    76(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  There is no
    intention to deport at present as  removal  directions  have  not  been
    issued.   The  appellant  has  been  given  a  grant  of  six   months'
    discretionary leave in recognition of the fact  that  the  Home  Office
    cannot deport him  at  present  because  there  are  ECHR  barriers  to
    removal.

2.   The grounds upon which permission to appeal  was  granted  argued  that
    the decision under appeal cannot be in accordance with the  Immigration
    Rules as there is no paragraph of the Immigration Rules touching on the
    point and that the basis of decision to revoke leave under  Section  76
    of the 2002 Act should be set out in the Immigration Rules per Alvi; in
    the absence of criteria in the Immigration Rules, the decision was  not
    in accordance with  the  law.   It  was  also  argued  that  there  was
    inadequate reasoning on whether in the particular the circumstances  of
    his case, the appellant's deportation would be conducive to the  public
    good (a pre-requisite to the application of  Section  76)  and  finally
    that the judge should have exercised a discretion herself  rather  than
    review the decision of the respondent.

3.   Counsel said he was not pursuing  the  argument  in  the  grounds  that
    deportation was not conducive to public good.

4.   His two main arguments were:

    (1)  the  Tribunal  was  wrong  in  its  approach  as  to  whether  the
         immigration decision was in accordance with the Immigration  Rules;
         and


    (2)  the Tribunal did not deal with the issue as to whether "discretion
         should have been exercised differently".

5.   I set out the  relevant  paragraphs  of  the  determination  where  the
    Tribunal dealt with these two issues.

         "The decision is not in accordance with the Immigration Rules


         16.  The Appellant's representative relied on the case of R (on the
             application of Alvi) (Respondent) v Secretary of State for the
             Home Department (Appellant) [2012] UKSC 33.  The Secretary  of
             State could not rely on his powers under any  policy  guidance
             unless measures had been laid before parliament.   There  were
             no Immigration Rules that made provision as  to  the  practice
             which should be followed in exercising the powers conferred by
             section 76.  Policy  guidance  had  been  laid  down  and  2.7
             provided how that power under section 76 should be exercised.


         17.  The Respondent's representative stated that the  decision  was
             in accordance with the Immigration Rules  and  the  law.   The
             power to revoke was laid in statute.  What the Appellant   was
             seeking to argue was the removal  was  disproportionate  under
             Article 8 but there was no intention to deport.
         18.  The Appellant's representative is seeking to extend  that  was
             said in Alvi.  In this case, the [sic] rejected the submission
             that it was open to the Secretary to control immigration in  a
             way not covered by the Immigration Rules at common  law  under
             the Royal Prerogative.  They said that everything which is  in
             the nature of a rule as to the practice to be followed in  the
             administration of the 1971 Act must be laid before Parliament.
              Resort to the technique of referring to outside documents, is
             not in itself objectionable, but  it  is  if  it  enables  the
             Secretary of State to avoid her statutory  obligation  to  lay
             any changes to the rules before Parliament.   In  such  cases,
             the Occupation Codes contained general guidance  for  sponsors
             and caseworkers, but they also contained detailed information,
             the application of which determined whether an applicant  will
             qualify for entry or leave to remain.  That does not apply  in
             this case.  The legislation itself gives the power  to  revoke
             if certain circumstances apply.


         19.  I do not find that the Secretary of State  acted  outside  the
             scope of the Immigration  Rules.   The  power  to  revoke  the
             Appellant's indefinite leave to remain  arises  from  statute.
             The guidance is not detailed or prescriptive  in  nature.   It
             does not specify any condition that  must  be  met  before  an
             Appellant can qualify for retaining his  right  to  indefinite
             leave to remain.

         Discretion should have been exercised differently


         22.  The Appellant's representative argues that the Tribunal should
             itself decide whether deportation is conducive to  the  public
             good.  He argues that it is not.  Even if it were found to  be
             conducive, discretion should have been exercised  differently.
             The Secretary of State had given undue weight to the  fact  of
             the Appellant's conviction and the gravity of the offence  and
             insufficient weight to the  substantial  contribution  he  had
             made to the public good by giving evidence.  His  actions  had
             placed him and his family in danger.  They had been unable  to
             live a free and normal life and  could  not  maintain  contact
             with their family and associates.  They had been uprooted from
             their home area.  The Court of  Appeal  had  stated  that  the
             Appellant gave crucial information against  one  of  the  most
             significant international criminals in the drug world as  well
             as another person involved in human trafficking.  The decision
             sent the wrong message to those who were considering assisting
             the authorities in the same way as they would be placing their
             status in the UK at risk.


         23.  The  Secretary  of  State  is  not  intending  to  deport  the
             Appellant; he is seeking to revoke  his  indefinite  leave  to
             remain.  I am therefore  not  considering  an  appeal  against
             deportation but against a revocation of the  indefinite  leave
             to remain.


         24.  Nevertheless, I do find that the Appellant's deportation would
             be conducive to the public good.  I have  taken  into  account
             the guidance in  numerous  cases,  including  EO  (Deportation
             Appeals: scope and process)  Turkey  [2007]  UKAIT  00062,  RU
             (Bangladesh) [2011] EWCA Civ 651,  and  Masih  (deportation  -
             public interest  -  basic  principles)  Pakistan  [2012]  UKUT
             00046.  That the Appellant is liable to deportation is not  in
             issue.


         25.  4.4  states  that  exceptional  compelling  and  compassionate
             circumstances must be considered.  The Respondent did consider
             these.  Whilst  the  Appellant's  partner  has  mental  health
             issues, these are not serious.  The Appellant has made a  good
             recovery from his heart attack.  The family has had to  adjust
             to having to live under police protection,  which  must  cause
             them anxiety.  Added to that  is  the  matter  of  uncertainty
             about the Appellant's immigration status.  The Respondent gave
             due consideration to all the matters raised by  the  Appellant
             before deciding to revoke indefinite  leave  to  remain.   The
             exercise of any discretion he  had  was  made  after  all  the
             circumstances that had been placed before him  were  duly  and
             properly considered.


         26.  The Appellant must take responsibility for the serious  crimes
             he  committed  and  the  gravity  of  those  offences  is  not
             nullified by his giving evidence against those further up  the
             ladder.  These were extremely serious offences,  as  reflected
             in the sentence.  The Court of Appeal  reduced  his  sentence,
             thereby acknowledging the substantial  contribution  he  made,
             but it was still a term of 10 years, a relatively long period.
               The  Appellant  must  also  take  responsibility   for   the
             consequences of his decision to give  evidence.   One  of  the
             consequences was that his sentence was cut by six years.   The
             other consequence was that he would have to live  a  different
             sort of life to reduce the risk of harm  to  himself  and  his
             family.  The decision to revoke his indefinite leave to remain
             makes no difference to that.  The Appellant has no  reason  to
             expect  that  the  Secretary  of  State  will  give  him   any
             additional benefit over and above that of a reduction  in  his
             sentence.


         27.  I have considered the period of discretionary leave granted by
             the Secretary of State to the Appellant.   The  guidance  sets
             out the period for duration of such  grants  under  Chapter  4
             headed Duration of grants of Discretionary Leave.  The  normal
             period is one of three years.  The guidance  says  that  There
             will also be some cases where the factors meriting a grant  of
             DL are expected  to  be  sufficiently  short  lived  that  the
             question arises whether to grant a short period of leave or to
             refuse the application outright whilst giving  an  undertaking
             not to remove the individual or expect them  to  return  until
             the circumstances preventing their return have changed.   Such
             cases could arise at the decision-making stage or following an
             appeal.  That applied in this case and so  the  Appellant  was
             given leave for six months.


         28.  Having considered carefully all the  facts  and  arguments,  I
             find that in the particular circumstances of  this  case  that
             the decision is in accordance with the law  and  the  relevant
             Immigration Rules.  The  Secretary  of  State  has  considered
             exercising her discretion and has determined that the decision
             is proportionate.  I agree.  There was  no  Article  8  appeal
             before me."

6.   With regard to his first argument as in paragraph 4(1) above,  Mr  Toal
    submitted that Section 76 of the 2002 Act, which allows  the  Secretary
    of State to revoke an appellant's indefinite leave to remain, does  not
    have Immigration Rules which set out how the Secretary of  State  would
    exercise that power.  If there are no Immigration  Rules,  then  it  is
    important for the decision to be in accordance with the Rules, and  the
    judge should have allowed the appeal.

7.   He relied on Section 84(1) of the 2002 Act which says  that  An  appeal
    under section 82(1) against an immigration decision must be brought  on
    one or more of the following grounds - (a) that the decision is not  in
    accordance with immigration rules".

     He also relied on Section 86(3)  of  the  same  Act  which  says  "[the
    Tribunal] must allow the appeal insofar as [it] that -  (a) a  decision
    against which the appeal is brought or is treated as being brought  was
    not in accordance with the law (including  Immigration  Rules)...   Mr.
    Toal  submitted  that  this  must  be  contrasted  with  the  statutory
    provisions which they replaced in Section 19(1)(a)  of  the  1971  Act,
    which states that "an adjudicator ... (a) shall allow the appeal if  he
    considers that the decision or  action  against  which  the  appeal  is
    brought was not in accordance with the law  or  any  Immigration  Rules
    applicable to the case.

8.    Mr  Toal  also  relied  on  Schedule  4,  paragraph  21(1)(a)  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 which states "an Adjudicator must allow
    an appeal if he considers that the decision or action against which the
    appeal is brought was not in accordance with the law or any Immigration
    Rules applicable to the  case."   He  submitted  that  in  the  current
    version, which is Sections 84 and 86 of the 2002 Act, reference to  the
    words "rules applicable to the case" have been dropped.   He  submitted
    that this is a significant alternation.  The result of this means  that
    the one quality an immigration decision must possess i.e. either be  in
    accordance with the immigration rules or the law,  no  longer  applies.
    He argued that a decision taken by the Secretary of State  must  be  in
    accordance with the rules and there must be rules  describing  how  the
    Secretary of State will make any Immigration Decision. Mr. Toal  relied
    on Prajapati [1981] Imm AR 212, CA wherein it was held that if there is
    no Immigration Rules which govern the situation, it cannot be said that
    the decision of the Secretary of  State  is  one  which  was  given  in
    accordance with the Immigration Rules.    If  there  are  no  rules  in
    accordance with the immigration decision, then the decision  cannot  be
    in accordance with the Immigration Rules.   That  being  the  case  the
    appeal must be allowed.

9.   Mr. Toal relied on the decision in Lumba v SSHD [2011]  WLR  671  which
    held that immigration powers  are  exercised  through  the  Immigration
    Rules. He said this was reiterated in R(Alvi) v SSHD WLR 2235 where  it
    was held that Section 3(2) requires the  Secretary  of  State  to  "lay
    before Parliament states of the rules, or of any changes in the  rules,
    laid down by her as to  the  practice  to  be  followed,  although  the
    content of the rules is a matter for her.  Counsel submitted  that  the
    insistence of policies set out in the Immigration Rules is the means by
    which Parliament  can  exercise  a  degree  of  control  over  its  own
    policies.  As there is no Immigration  Rule  which  sets  out  how  the
    Secretary of State can exercise her power in Section 76, the judge  was
    wrong in her finding at paragraph 19.

10.  With regard to his second argument, Mr. Toal submitted that Section  76
    uses the word "may".  It states that the Secretary of State may  revoke
    a person's indefinite  leave  if  certain  conditions  apply.   Section
    86(3)(b) states that [the Tribunal] must allow an appeal if  it  thinks
    that discretion should have been exercised differently. Mr. Toal argued
    that this is what the judge should have done in this case.  She  should
    have exercised her discretion differently because  it  is  not  in  the
    public interest to revoke indefinite leave to remain  because  of  what
    the appellant had done assisting the prosecution  of  major  criminals.
    The appellant was originally sentenced to sixteen  years'  imprisonment
    for his part in a conspiracy to supply drugs as the result of assisting
    the prosecution of major criminals, his sentence  was  reduced  to  ten
    years.  Mr Toal submitted that  the  sentencing  judge's  approach  was
    because of the message he sent out  which  was  that  by  reducing  the
    sentence, it would encourage others to assist  in  the  prosecution  of
    serious criminals.  This is a clear public policy  message  which  says
    that  criminals  should  be  encouraged  to  come  out  against   other
    criminals.  It chimes with the power to deport which is the message the
    Secretary of State wishes to send  out  regarding  the  deportation  of
    criminals.  Mr.  Toal  submitted  that  by  revoking  the   appellant's
    indefinite leave to remain, the Secretary of State is sending  out  the
    wrong message because if by assisting the prosecution they  are  liable
    to be deported or have their indefinite leave taken away from them that
    would deter such a person from giving evidence against former  criminal
    associates.

11.  Mr. Toal argued that as a consequence the judge's finding at  paragraph
    26 that the appellant has no reason to expect  that  the  Secretary  of
    State will give him any additional benefit over and  above  that  of  a
    reduction in his sentence does not deal with  "discretion  should  have
    been exercised differently".  It has nothing to do with the benefit  or
    the benefit being withheld.  It does not directly answer  the  question
    whether discretion should have been exercised differently.

12.  Mr Saunders relied on the  respondent's  response  to  the  grounds  of
    appeal under Rule 24.  Responding to the last point first, Mr  Saunders
    submitted that from paragraph  22  onwards  the  judge  looked  at  the
    salient facts.  At paragraph 26 her message was that  if  an  appellant
    becomes involved in a criminal enterprise,  he  would  have  to  go  to
    prison  but  if  he  helps  in  the  prosecution  of  another  criminal
    associate, he may well be imprisoned for a lesser period.  In this case
    the appellant's sixteen year sentence was reduced by  six  years.   The
    judge's finding does not disclose an error of law.

13.  With regard to the main argument in respect of Section 76, Mr  Saunders
    submitted that Mr Toal accepts that the grounds upon which an appellant
    can appeal an immigration decision under Section  82  are  set  out  at
    Section 84. There are some grounds that concern the  Immigration  Rules
    and there are some that do not.  The power springs from, and  reflects,
    the Immigration Act.  If there are Immigration Rules  then  the  ground
    not in accordance with the Immigration Rules is  available.   If  there
    are no Immigration Rules then the other ground  is  not  in  accordance
    with the law (Section 84(1)(c)).  Section 19 of the 1971  Act  and  the
    1999 Act make available grounds which are either not in accordance with
    the law or the Immigration  Rules.   Mr  Saunders  submitted  that  the
    Secretary of State had power to make the decision and properly  decided
    it.

14.  I find that the judge's decision does not disclose an error of law  for
    the reasons I give below.

15.   I  find  that  the  respondent  exercised  her  power  to  revoke  the
    appellant's indefinite leave to remain by virtue Section 76 of the 2002
    Act.  I agree with the judge that  the  legislation  itself  gives  the
    power to revoke if certain circumstances apply.  I find  that  this  is
    because of the use of the word "may".  In my humble opinion I find that
    the discretion  is  as  described  in  subparagraphs  (1)(a)  and  (b).
    Paragraph (1)(a) states is liable to deportation, but and  subparagraph
    (b) states cannot be deported for legal reasons. I find that the use of
    the word "is" in subparagraph (a) describes the circumstances in  which
    the  respondent  may  exercise  her  power  to  revoke  an  appellant's
    indefinite leave to remain. In the appellant's case it is the fact that
    he committed  a  very  serious  offence  which  involved  international
    criminals and got a hefty sentence for his part in the  crime.    I  do
    not accept the argument put to the judge that Policy guidance had  been
    laid down and 2.7 provided how that power under section  76  should  be
    exercised.  Therefore the respondent could not rely on her powers under
    any policy guidance unless measures had been  laid  before  parliament.
    Therefore  as  there  were  no  immigration   rules   applicable,   the
    respondent's decision was not in accordance with the Immigration Rules.

16.  I have looked at paragraph 2.7 of the Policy Guidance and it  does  not
    provide guidance in the circumstances of  this  appellant's  case.   It
    provides guidance to immigration officers taking a decision in  certain
    situations.  It does not provide guidance to the Secretary of State  in
    this type of case where the Secretary of State is exercising her powers
    under statute which in this case is Section 76  of  the  2002  Act.   I
    therefore find that the conditions set out in Section 76(1) were met as
    a result of the applicant's behaviour and the Secretary  of  State  has
    the power to revoke his indefinite leave to remain.

17.  Under Section 82(1)(f) the appeal had a right  of  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision which he exercised accordingly.  Section 84 lists
    the grounds on which his appeal must (my emphasis) be brought.  In  his
    case there is no applicable immigration rule.  As submitted by Mr. Toal
    the reference to "Rules applicable to the  case  has  been  dropped  in
    Sections 84 and 86 of the 2002 Act.  As the statute is  the  source  of
    the respondent's decision, I  find  that  the  lack  of  an  applicable
    immigration rule does not make her decision erroneous.  I find that the
    case law relevant to the 1971 Act, which Mr. Toal  placed  reliance  do
    not impact on the respondent's power to  exercise  a  discretion  under
    Section 76 of the 2002 Act.

18.  The other issue is in respect of whether  the  discretion  should  have
    been exercised differently.  I accept Mr Saunders' submission that  the
    judge's finding at paragraph 26 does not disclose an error of law.  The
    appellant got his  sentence  reduced  as  a  result  of  assisting  the
    prosecution of serious criminal associates.  That was the message  that
    was being sent out by the criminal judge which was that if  you  assist
    in the prosecution of serious criminal associates, you  will  get  your
    sentence reduced.  This does not  mean  that  the  Secretary  of  State
    should give him the  additional  benefit  over  and  above  that  of  a
    reduction in his sentence.  The appellant committed a serious  criminal
    offence.  The decision to revoke his indefinite leave to  remain  makes
    no difference to the fact that  he  got  a  reduced  sentence  for  his
    assistance to the prosecution.

19.  I find that the judge's decision does not disclose  an  error  of  law.
    The judge's decision dismissing the appellant's appeal shall stand.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun
