
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/33199/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Determination Promulgated |
|On 6th October 2014                    |On 9th October 2014       |
|                                       |                          |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                                     AN
                          (Anonymity Direction Made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Jacobs, instructed by Duncan Lewis Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant's appeal against a decision of the respondent  to  remove
    her and refuse her leave to remain and protection  under  the  European
    Convention was dismissed by First Tier Tribunal Judge  Petherbridge  on
    10th May 2014.  A renewed application  for  permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Peter Lane on 14th August 2014.

 2. At the hearing before me Mr Walker conceded that had the author of  the
    rule 24 response had sight of the full  bundle  the  challenge  to  the
    application may not have been made.

 3. I find Judge Pertherbridge erred in  law  by  failing  to  address  the
    question of Article 3 in particular with reference to the suicide risk.
     The risk of suicide was raised in the grounds of appeal to  the  First
    Tier Tribunal and the skeleton argument from counsel at the hearing and
    this should have been addressed, particularly in view of  the  detailed
    expert  report  submitted  from   Dr   Wootten,   Consultant   Forensic
    Psychiatrist. The risk of suicide should also have  been  addressed  in
    the assessment of Article 8.

 4. This is a key issue within the appeal and the matter is returned to the
    First Tier Tribunal because of the nature and extent  of  the  findings
    required in the light of J v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 629 and Y & Anor (Sri
    Lanka) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 362.

 5. I set aside the determination of Judge Petherbridge  in  its  entirety.
    The matter should be returned to the First Tier Tribunal for a  hearing
    de novo. The matter is listed to be heard in the First Tier Tribunal on
    3rd March 2015.


Direction regarding anonymity - rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity because of  the  personal  and  sensitive  nature  of  the
information.  No report of these proceedings shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify him or any member of their family.  This direction applies both  to
the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply with this  direction
could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                       Date 6th October 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

Directions

The matter is listed for 3  hours  before  the  First  Tier  Tribunal.   The
appellant's representatives should serve any further evidence  at  least  14
days prior to the substantive hearing date.

The matter is listed to be heard in the First Tier  Tribunal  on  3rd  March
2015.
