
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
IA/33545/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 26th March 2018                         | On 11th April 2018              |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHALKLEY

                                   Between

                         victor salvador guallichico
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Not represented
For the Respondent:    Ms Alex Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Ecuador, born on  12th  March  1954.   He
    appealed against the decision of the respondent taken on  13th  October
    2015, in refusing his application for leave to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom on Article 8 grounds.

2.   The appellant lodged his appeal with the First Tier  Tribunal  on  26th
    October 2015, and requested that it be decided at an oral hearing.  The
    appeal was heard at Harmondsworth on 8th November 2016,  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Kainth.  The appellant did not attend the hearing before
    the judge.  The judge was satisfied that  the  appellant  was  provided
    with a notice giving a date, time and place fixed for  the  hearing  of
    the appeal by the Tribunal.  The judge confirmed that  the  address  to
    which the notice was sent, was the same  address  as  appeared  on  his
    appeal documentation and that the appellant had aware  of  the  hearing
    for some five months.  He proceeded to hear the appeal in  the  absence
    of the appellant and dismissed it, finding the appellant's removal from
    the United Kingdom to be proportionate.  Indeed, given the  weight  the
    judge was required to give to the interests of the wider public in  the
    maintenance of immigration control, it is  difficult  to  envisage  any
    judge arriving at a different conclusion.

3.   The appellant challenged that decision and First-tier Tribunal Judge  P
    J M Hollingworth  thought  that  it  was  properly  arguable  that  the
    decision to proceed with the hearing in the appellant's absence was not
    based on the "complete matrix of factors" through no fault of the judge
    and in the light of the "complete matrix of  factors"  the  proceedings
    were unfair.  It was claimed in the grounds that the appellant's Notice
    of Hearing had been sent to the wrong address, however the  address  to
    which the Notice of Hearing had been sent was the same address as given
    for the appellant's address in the notice of application for permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, namely [                     ].

4.   The matter came for hearing before me on 16th  November  last  when  Mr
    Walker appeared on behalf of the respondent.  There was  no  appearance
    by or on behalf of the appellant.  I adjourned the matter in order that
    further enquiries can be made and the appellant  was  given  notice  of
    today's hearing at the same address [              ]  by  notice  dated
    16th February, 2018.  He has not appeared, he  has  not  sought  to  be
    represented and I am given to understand that in fact  he  was  removed
    from the United Kingdom on 16th August last year.  I am satisfied  that
    the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  in  dismissing  the
    appellant's appeal does not contain any material error of law.   Notice
    of Hearing was sent to the correct address.  The Appellant has  clearly
    been removed from the jurisdiction, but he could, if he had chosen  to,
    have arranged representation.  I  uphold  the  determination  of  Judge
    Kainth.  This appeal is dismissed.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Richard Chalkley
Upper                Tribunal                 Judge                 Chalkley
                      Date: 11 April 2018
