
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA336862014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 16th May 2016                          |On 24th May 2016                  |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                               Mudassar Saeed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss G Patel, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
Appellant
For the Respondent:    Miss Johnstone, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, is a national of Pakistan born on 4th  April  1980.   No
    application was made on his behalf for any anonymity order. He appeals,
    with permission the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Shimmin)
    who in a determination promulgated on 8th December 2014  dismissed  his
    appeal against the decision of the Respondent to  refuse  to  vary  his
    leave to remain as the partner of a person present and settled  in  the
    UK, made under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules and  on  Article  8
    grounds.  The refusal was dated 18th August 2014.

 2. The  Appellant's  immigration  history  can  be  briefly  stated.   The
    Appellant made an application for a visit visa in or about  2007  which
    was refused by the Entry Clearance Officer but following  a  successful
    appeal was granted.  The Appellant, it appears, did not travel on  that
    visa.

 3. The Appellant made an application for entry clearance as a student  and
    on 20th February 2011 he entered the UK in that capacity.  However, his
    college was delisted  by  the  Home  Office  in  2011.   The  Appellant
    remained in the UK.

 4. The Appellant met his Sponsor and partner, in  July  2012  and  it  was
    asserted by them that they began cohabiting in or about October 2012.

 5. On 25th February 2014 the Appellant applied for leave to remain on  the
    basis of his family and private life in the UK.   The  application  was
    considered  under  Appendix  FM  and  paragraphs   276ADE(1)   of   the
    Immigration Rules.

 6. The application was refused and in a reasons for refusal  letter  dated
    18th August 2014, the Secretary  of  State  set  out  the  reasons  for
    reaching that decision.  In summary, it was considered that  whilst  he
    had claimed to be the partner of a person present in the UK, they  were
    not married and they had not lived together until  October  2012.   The
    decision letter went on to consider  GEN.1.2.  and  the  definition  of
    "partner" for the purposes  of  Appendix  FM  and  concluded  that  the
    evidence that had been provided demonstrated that they  had  not  lived
    together for at least two years prior to the date  of  the  application
    and thus the Appellant did not meet the definition of  "partner"  under
    the Rules.

 7. It is clear from the decision letter  that  there  had  been  no  issue
    raised as to the genuineness of the relationship.  The decision  letter
    did not consider EX.1. as the application had fallen for refusal  under
    the eligibility requirements of the Immigration  Rules.   The  decision
    also went on to consider the Appellant's private life since  his  entry
    on 20th February 2011 that reached the conclusion that he had not lived
    continuously in the UK for at least twenty years  and  therefore  could
    not meet the requirements of Rule 276ADE(1)(iii) and that he could  not
    show very significant obstacles to his integration to  Pakistan  if  he
    were required to leave the UK for the reasons set out in  the  decision
    letter.

 8.  The  decision  letter  also  considered   whether   there   were   any
    circumstances outside the Rules and in this context also considered his
    relationship with a British citizen, and gave reasons as  to  why  they
    could establish family life together out of  the  United  Kingdom.   In
    considering this, the Secretary of State took into account  Section  55
    of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 as his partner has
     children in the UK.  The decision letter concluded that there were  no
    exceptional circumstances in the Appellant's case to warrant a grant of
    leave outside the Rules and therefore refused his application.

 9. The Appellant appealed that decision and the  matter  came  before  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  on  1st  December  2014.   In   a   determination
    promulgated on 8th December 2014, the First-tier Tribunal dismissed his
    appeal under Appendix FM.  The judge reached the  conclusion  from  the
    evidence that the parties had not lived together for a  period  of  the
    two years prior to the date of the application and therefore could  not
    meet the definition of "partner" in GEN.1.2. [paragraph 22].

10.  As to the relationship, he reached the conclusion that the Sponsor and
    the Appellant were  not  living  together  [at  paragraph  28]  and  at
    paragraphs [29] to [34] on the basis of a visit visa determination from
    2007 found that the Appellant had a wife and two children  in  Pakistan
    and that undermined his claim that  they  were  living  together  in  a
    relationship akin to marriage.  Thus he found they could not  meet  the
    Immigration Rules.

11.  At paragraph [38] he  made  a  finding  that  the  Appellant  had  not
    established that he was in a relationship with  the  Sponsor  and  thus
    found no family life to consider Article 8.

12. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that decision on a number  of
    grounds (see Grounds 1 to 16 dated 26th January 2015) and on  20th  May
    2015 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman granted permission stating:-

         "The Grounds  of  Appeal  raise  arguable  errors  of  law  in  the
         determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.    There   was
         substantial evidence before the judge of the prima facie  existence
         of a relationship akin to marriage including  an  Islamic  marriage
         certificate dated 12th October 2014 and a letter  from  the  doctor
         dated 8th October 2014, which confirms that the Sponsor  is  living
         with the Appellant, which casts doubt on the safety of the  judge's
         findings at [27] and [28].  It is unclear based on the evidence put
         before the First-tier Tribunal Judge whether or  not  in  2007  the
         Appellant was married and has children in Pakistan, but in light of
         the extensive  evidence  before  the  judge  it  was  arguably  not
         properly open to him to  find  that  he  did  not  have  a  genuine
         relationship  with  his  Sponsor  at  the  date  of  the   hearing.
         Consequently, it is arguable that the judge's  Article  8  findings
         were also erroneous."

13. Thus the appeal came before the Upper Tribunal, Miss Patel relied  upon
    her grounds.  She further submitted that the judge had relied upon  the
    First-tier Tribunal decision in 2007 which was seven years  before  the
    hearing.  He had given an explanation as to how the visa form had  been
    completed and that this was a visa that he had never used.  However, he
    had applied for a Tier 4 student visa in 2011 and  there  was  no  copy
    application available at the date of the hearing  because  it  had  not
    been raised as an issue and that the Secretary  of  State  should  have
    sent all correspondence and not simply the determination from 2007.

14. She further submitted that the findings made  at  paragraphs  [27]  and
    [28] were unsustainable in the light of  the  documentary  evidence  at
    page 465 and that the judge failed also to set  out  any  reasoning  in
    relation to the oral evidence that was given concerning the nature  and
    genuineness of  the  relationship.   There  was  no  analysis  of  that
    evidence within the determination.

15. Miss Johnstone relied upon the Rule 24 response of 1st June 2015.   She
    submitted that the  judge  had  taken  into  account  the  evidence  at
    paragraph [28] and he was not  required  to  set  out  every  piece  of
    evidence in relation to the oral evidence of the  parties.   The  judge
    properly considered the determination in 2007 and was entitled to  find
    that  there  was  an  inconsistency  which  damaged  his   credibility.
    Consequently, the analysis of the First-tier Tribunal was  correct  and
    there was no family life.

16. In the event of any error of law being found,  she  made  reference  to
    further evidence that the Secretary of State would wish to produce  and
    is set out in a letter dated 18th June 2015.

17. After having heard the submissions of the parties I indicated  to  them
    that I considered that the judge had made errors of law  and  that  the
    decision therefore should be set aside and  should  be  remade  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal with none of the findings being  preserved.  I  now
    give my reasons for reaching that decision.

18. The judge was required to consider the evidence before  him  concerning
    the relationship between the Appellant  and  his  spouse;  the  parties
    having married in an Islamic marriage on 12th October 2014.

19. There was an extensive bundle of material which  on  the  face  of  the
    documents demonstrated that the  parties  were  living  together  in  a
    relationship akin to marriage.  The judge makes reference  to  this  at
    paragraphs [25] to [28], noting that  there  were  photographs  of  the
    couple together in [24], there were utility bills in their joint  names
    dated late 2013 and 2014 [25] and he noted the evidence from the GP  at
    paragraphs [26] to [28].

20. I am satisfied that the judge made a  material  mistake  of  fact  when
    considering the evidence from the GP at paragraphs [26] to  [28].   His
    conclusion at [28] that the correspondence from the  GP  is  indicative
    that the Appellant and the Sponsor  are  not  living  together  is  not
    consistent with the evidence that was before him.  Whilst he  correctly
    identified the contents of the earlier 2014 letter  at  paragraph  [26]
    and made reference to the later letter of  October  2014  at  paragraph
    [27], he ignored the contents of the  letter  in  which  the  documents
    stated that she was living with  her  partner.   The  finding  made  at
    paragraph [28] is simply unsustainable in the light of that evidence.

21. There was also documentary evidence of substance  showing  the  parties
    living together at the same address (bank  statements  in  their  joint
    names from November 2013 - throughout 2014 (page 219), joint gas  bills
    for 2013/2014, photos of the marriage (October 2014 pages 467 to 471)).



22. Whilst the documentary evidence may not demonstrate  that  the  parties
    have been living together  since  October  2012  (the  date  that  they
    referred to), there was no consideration of or any  analysis  of  their
    oral  evidence  concerning  the  length  of  their   cohabitation   and
    importantly the genuineness of their relationship  and  there  were  no
    findings or analysis of this issue made within the determination or any
    reference to it (see paragraph [19]).

23. However there was documentary evidence (and  the  oral  evidence)  that
    signified a length of relationship sufficient  to  consider  Article  8
    outside of the Rules which the judge also did not consider.

24. There is also a concern as to the procedural fairness of admitting  the
    documents set out at paragraph [17].  This had not been disclosed prior
    to the hearing.    Furthermore, the decision letter did not  raise  any
    issue that this was  not  a  genuine  relationship.   Consequently  the
    Appellant did not have  the  opportunity  to  provide  any  documentary
    rebuttal evidence and in particular, the Tier 4 application form  which
    had set out his circumstances leading to his entry clearance  in  2011.
    It appears to be common ground between the  parties  that  he  did  not
    utilise the visit visa in 2007.  Consequently, the judge's findings  at
    paragraph 32 where he found that the Appellant had brought no  evidence
    to support his argument of mistake by the agent, is not surprising when
    the issue had not been raised prior to the hearing  and  the  Appellant
    was given no opportunity to provide such documentary evidence.

25. As Miss Patel submits, even if it had been open to the  judge  to  find
    that he did have a wife and children, it  would  not  necessarily  mean
    that he did not have a genuine relationship with  his  partner  in  the
    light of the other evidence, including the Islamic  marriage  that  had
    taken place and thus that the finding made at [38] was wrong.

26. Consequently I am satisfied that the judge did make a material  mistake
    of fact when dealing with the documents, and did not give  reasons  for
    rejecting the substantial evidence before him relating to the existence
    of a genuine relationship between the parties and that this constituted
    an error of law.  Thus I  have  reached  the  conclusion  the  decision
    cannot stand and will be set aside.  Both parties agreed that it should
    be remade by the First-tier Tribunal  and  that  no  findings  of  fact
    should be preserved.  Miss Johnstone  indicated  that  there  would  be
    further evidence produced on behalf of the Secretary of  State  as  set
    out in the letter of 18th June 2015.

27.  In the circumstances I am satisfied that the appropriate course is for
    the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  set  aside  and  to
    determine the appeal with a fresh oral hearing by way of a remittal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.  Due to the nature of the error  of  law,  the
    Tribunal will be required to hear the oral evidence  of  the  Appellant
    and his partner and consider the documentation provided on  his  behalf
    and factual findings will have to be made.  The Respondent will also be
    required to produce evidence of the other applications that  were  made
    by the Appellant.

28.  Therefore, having given particular regard to the overriding  objective
    and the issues of fact that require determination, I remit  the  appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal at Manchester  in  accordance  with  Section
    12(2)(b) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act and the  Practice
    Statement (as amended).

29. The following directions are made:-

      i) The Respondent will file and serve any further documentary evidence
         relied upon including  copies  of  any  applications  made  by  the
         Appellant and documents in support.  The documents referred  to  in
         the letter of 18th June 2015 shall also be produced.

     ii) The Appellant shall file and serve any further  evidence  no  later
         than seven days before the hearing.

    iii) The matter is to be listed  at  Manchester  before  the  First-tier
         Tribunal with a time limit of two hours with an Urdu interpreter.

Notice of Decision

30. The First-tier Tribunal made an error of law and the  decision  is  set
    aside.  No findings of fact are preserved  and  the  appeal  is  to  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Manchester  in  accordance  with
    the decision set out herein.






Signed                              Date 23rd May 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
