
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/33518/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 March 2018                               |On 27 March 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                             mr kean liong leow
                        (anonymity direction not made
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Lam, Counsel instructed by Ashtons Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in this case is a citizen of Malaysia born on 20 December
    1973  who  appeals  the  decision  of  the  respondent  to  refuse  the
    appellant's application for indefinite leave to remain on  the  grounds
    of long residence.

 2. The respondent refused the appellant's application on the single ground
    that the respondent concluded that the appellant had obtained his  ESOL
    qualification by deception and was satisfied that his presence was  not
    conducive to the public good.  Therefore his  application  fell  to  be
    refused under paragraph 322(1A), 276B(iii) and (iv) of the  Immigration
    Rules.

 3. The appellant's appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  dismissed  by
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal O'Brien in a decision promulgated on 7
    June 2017 on human rights grounds.

 4. The appellant appealed with permission on the grounds that:

      1) The judge arguably made a misdirection on a material matter of law,
         as identified by R (Iran) Court of Appeal [2005], on the basis that
         at paragraphs [43] to [45] the First-tier Tribunal  concluded  that
         the respondent had not established on the balance of  probabilities
         the appellant was deceitful in the way alleged  and  therefore  the
         Tribunal erred in going on to state that the appellant  was  unable
         to adequately communicate in English in his  interview  in  January
         2014.  It was submitted that this was flawed because the  appellant
         had provided what the judge found to  be  a  plausible  explanation
         which satisfied the  plausibility  test  in  Shen  (Paper  Appeals:
         Proving Dishonesty) [2014] UKUT 236 (IAC); and SM &  Qadir  v  SSHD
         (ETS - evidence - burden of proof) [2016] UKUT 00229.

      2) It was an error for the judge  to  require  an  additional  English
         language ability over and above what the judge had accepted was not
         a dishonestly or fraudulently obtained certificate.

 5. Ms Fijiwala accepted that the  judge  was  wrong  about  the  deception
    point, having found that he was unable to conclude on  the  balance  of
    probabilities that the appellant was deceitful.

 6. In light of the judge's findings, at [45], that  deceit  had  not  been
    proved, the Tribunal made  a  material  error  of  law  in  failing  to
    consider whether, given that finding, the appellant in effect  met  the
    requirements of the Rules.  The Tribunal was correct in  its  direction
    that the only appeal was under human rights grounds.  However, the fact
    that, given the judge's findings,  that  there  was  no  deception  and
    therefore that the appellant appeared to satisfy the Immigration Rules,
    ought to have been a weighty  consideration  under  Article  8.   I  am
    satisfied that the Tribunal additionally erred in finding that it would
    have been open to the Secretary of State to refuse the  application  on
    different grounds and that it was in the public interest to do so.

 7. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of law and I
    set aside the conclusions reached whilst  preserving  the  findings  of
    fact of the First-tier Tribunal up to and including paragraph  [48]  of
    the decision and reasons.

Remaking the Decision

 8. Both parties accepted that I could remake the decision and  no  further
    evidence, oral or otherwise was to be produced.  It was  not  contended
    by Ms Fijiwala that the general grounds of refusal could be  made  out,
    given the preserved findings that deception had not been proved.

 9. It was Ms Fijiwala's submission that the fact that it was recorded that
    the appellant struggled at his interview  on  20  January  2015  was  a
    relevant factor, when considering if the appellant could meet  all  the
    requirements of the immigration rules.  Ms Fijiwala submitted that  the
    judge noted, at [43], that the appellant had difficulties with  English
    at the hearing.  Therefore it was Ms Fijiwala's submission  that  under
    Section 117B his inability to speak English was relevant and  a  factor
    in the public interest and that under paragraph 276B that she relied on
    paragraph 276B(ii)(b) strength of connections to  the  United  Kingdom,
    given his difficulties with the English language.

10. Mr Lam submitted that that was an incorrect approach particularly given
    the finding of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the  English  language
    certificate was accepted.   The  appellant  had  provided  an  adequate
    explanation for his difficulties at  the  interview.   In  his  witness
    statement the appellant had blamed the interviewer's accent and at  his
    hearing he had blamed the speed at which the questions were asked.  The
    judge noted that at [43] that at the appeal the appellant struggled  to
    understand some of the questions even when translated into Mandarin and
    that he was clearly  an  unsophisticated  individual  and  "this  might
    explain some, but not all  of  the  problems  he  faced  in  interview;
    however it also calls into question the appellant's ability effectively
    to speak English".

11. I accept in terms  of  the  appellant's  connections  to  the  UK,  the
    appellant had provided evidence of the length of his stay in the UK and
    that he had established  strong  ties  and  connection  to  the  United
    Kingdom and also that he had not lived in Malaysia for a long time.  He
    indicated  in  his  witness  statement,  which  was  not  substantively
    challenged, that he was a hard-working,  law  abiding  person  with  no
    criminal or civil liabilities against him and he was a person  of  good
    character.

12. I am not satisfied that Ms Fijiwala made out her submissions  that  the
    strength of the appellant's connections  to  the  United  Kingdom  were
    damaged by his more limited English and I must take into  account  that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge found that the  ESOL  certificate  stands
    and  that  the  appellant  was  found  to  have  provided  a  plausible
    explanation for his difficulties at interview with the respondent.   In
    addition, the First-tier Tribunal Judge found that the appellant was an
    unsophisticated individual who struggled in Mandarin as well as English
    at  the  hearing  which  provided  a  partial   explanation   for   his
    difficulties.

13. I have applied the five stage test set out in Razgar v SSHD [2004] UKHL
    27 and adopt the finding of the First-tier Tribunal that the  appellant
    has a private life in the United Kingdom and removal  would  constitute
    interference of sufficient gravity to engage Article 8.   The  decision
    is in accordance with the law and for the legitimate aim of maintenance
    of effective immigration control.  I go on to consider whether  such  a
    decision is proportionate.

14. In so  doing,  I  have  considered  Section  117  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  Act.   Maintenance  of   effective
    immigration control is in the public interest.  However, even if I were
    to give weight to the  appellant's  difficulties  with  English,  which
    arguably is in some doubt given his accepted ESOL certificate, I am not
    satisfied that this outweighs the fact that the appellant meets all the
    requirements of the relevant Immigration Rules,  paragraph  276B  which
    provides as follows:

         "276B The requirements to be met by  an  applicant  for  indefinite
         leave to remain on the ground  of  long  residence  in  the  United
         Kingdom are that:

         (i)(a)   he has had at least ten years' continuous lawful residence
             in the United Kingdom.

         (ii) Having regard to the public interest there are no reasons  why
             it would be undesirable for him to be given  indefinite  leave
             to remain on the ground of long residence, taking into account
             his:

             (a)  age;

             (b)  strength of connection with the United Kingdom;

             (c)    personal   history,   including   character,   conduct,
                  associations and employment record;

             (d)  domestic circumstances;

             (e)  compassionate circumstances; and

             (f)  any representations received on the person's behalf; and

         (iii)    the applicant does not fall for refusal under the  general
             grounds of refusal.

         (iv) The applicant has demonstrated  sufficient  knowledge  of  the
             English language and sufficient knowledge about  life  in  the
             United Kingdom, in accordance with Appendix KoLL.

         (v)  The applicant must not be in the UK in breach  of  Immigration
             Rules except that any period of overstaying for a period of 28
             days or less will  be  disregarded,  as  will  any  period  of
             overstaying between periods of entry clearance, leave to enter
             or leave to remain of  up  to  28  days,  and  any  period  of
             overstaying pending the determination of an  application  made
             within that 28 day period."

15. Although this is not an appeal under the Immigration  Rules,  I  accept
    that the appellant's ability, in my findings, to meet  the  Immigration
    Rules is a weighty factor which should be taken into account.

16. Whilst I take into consideration that little weight should be placed on
    a person's private life whilst their immigration status as  precarious,
    I take into account that he met the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and that there are no other elements in the public  interest  (it
    not being disputed that he is financially  independent).   In  applying
    the 'little weight' provision, the principle is not  a  rigid  one  and
    involves a spectrum in a fact sensitive approach (see Kaur  (children's
    best interests/public interest) [2017] UKUT 14).

17. I am satisfied therefore that the respondent's refusal in this case was
    disproportionate in all the circumstances.

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of  law  such
    as the conclusion is set aside.  I remake  the  decision  allowing  the
    appellant's appeal.

Notice of Decision

19. The appellant's appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction was sought or made.

Signed                                  Date:  23 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award application was sought or is made.


Signed                                  Date:  23 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
