
[pic]
IAC-fH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33517/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 26 February 2016                    |On 24 March 2016                    |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                RASHID MINHAS
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S. Nasim, Whitefields Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Behan  promulgated  on  21  August  2015  in  which  she
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse to grant an EEA residence card as confirmation of his  right  to
    reside in the United Kingdom under the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations
    2006.


 2. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:

    "It is arguable that the Judge has failed to apply the approach set out
    in Papajorgji  and  that  this  has  materially  affected  the  Judge's
    analysis and the outcome of the case.  The Judge has  clearly  referred
    to the stance adopted by the respondent at paragraph 2 of the decision.
     It is arguable that the weight attached to the evidence of  Mr  Khalid
    and Mr Seha would have differed."


 3. The Appellant and Sponsor attended the hearing.   I  heard  submissions
    from both representatives, following which I reserved my decision which
    I set out below with reasons.

Submissions


 4. Ms Nasim referred me to the cases of Rosa [2016] EWCA Civ 14  and  Agho
    [2015] EWCA Civ 1198.  She submitted that the judge had failed to  take
    into account the principles in Papajorgji (EEA  spouse  -  marriage  of
    convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT 00038 (IAC).


 5. In response Ms Fijiwala submitted that the judge was not considering  a
    marriage  of  convenience  but  was  considering  whether  or  not  the
    Appellant and Sponsor were in a durable relationship.  I  was  referred
    to paragraphs  [2]  and  [3]  of  the  decision.   I  was  referred  to
    paragraphs (b) and (e) of the headnote to Kareem (Proxy marriages -  EU
    law) [2014] UKUT 24 (IAC).  There was no evidence that the marriage was
    recognised.  The test in Papajorgji and Rosa related to whether or  not
    the marriage had been entered into for  immigration  purposes.   I  was
    referred to paragraph [30] of the decision where the judge set out  the
    burden of proof.  I was referred to paragraphs [24] and  [41]  of  Rosa
    which referred to the burden being on the Respondent, but this was  not
    when  the  durability  of  relationship  was  the  issue.   Whether   a
    relationship was genuine and subsisting was not relevant to a  marriage
    of convenience case, but  it  was  relevant  to  the  durability  of  a
    relationship.


 6. I was referred to paragraphs [31]  to  [33],  and  [37].   Ms  Fijiwala
    submitted that the  judge  had  been  looking  at  different  kinds  of
    relationships in the round,  as  was  shown  by  paragraph  [33].   She
    submitted that the judge had not been applying her own expectations but
    was aware that relationships took all sorts of forms.  I  was  referred
    to paragraphs [38] and [43].


 7.  She  submitted  that  the  marriage  interview  record  had  not  been
    challenged by the Appellant.  Reduced weight was attached to the visit.
     In considering the evidence before her the judge had been entitled  to
    take the visit into account but she had given it  reduced  weight.   At
    paragraph [35] she had considered the  discrepancies  at  the  marriage
    interviews.    She   had   made   findings   relating   to   additional
    discrepancies, which she found to be significant.  She did  not  accept
    how the Appellant had met the Sponsor, paragraph [36].  In summary  she
    submitted that the judge had fully considered all of the  evidence  and
    there was no error of law.


 8. In response Ms Nasim submitted that the refusal letter  referred  to  a
    marriage  of  convenience  which  is  where  the  misunderstanding  had
    originated.  She accepted that it  was  about  the  durability  of  the
    relationship but submitted that there was an overlap with the case  law
    relating to marriages of convenience.  She submitted that the judge had
    dealt more with the issue of marriage of convenience  than  durability.
    She had failed to take into account that the Appellant and Sponsor  had
    been together since 2010, a period of over five years,  as  opposed  to
    the two year period relevant for durable  relationships.   The  Sponsor
    had been present with  the  Appellant  throughout  the  course  of  the
    immigration process from the application, through  to  the  interviews,
    and now to this hearing.


 9. It was only after the visit that the issue of marriage  of  convenience
    had been raised and the judge had placed too great an emphasis  on  it.
    She had referred to the cases  relating  to  marriages  of  convenience
    because the Respondent had started off along these lines, and the judge
    had reiterated the Respondent's  stance  in  relation  to  marriage  of
    convenience.


10. The hearing had taken  place  over  two  days.   The  evidence  of  the
    landlord had been given at the adjourned hearing.   At  paragraph  [39]
    the judge found the landlord to be credible but attached no  weight  to
    his evidence.  At paragraph [37] the judge had made  her  own  comments
    about "whirlwind romances" and had used her own mindset to  judge  when
    people should move in  together,  failing  to  take  into  account  the
    evidence given by Mr. Khalid and Mr. Seha.  This failure  to  take  the
    evidence into account was a material error  of  law.   Had  she  placed
    weight on the evidence of the witnesses, the decision would  have  been
    different.


11. Too much emphasis been placed on the visit by the immigration officers.
     From pages 1 to 273 of the Appellant's bundle there  was  evidence  of
    correspondence in both of their names.  The judge placed no emphasis on
    the relevance of their cohabitation.  I was referred to paragraph  [34]
    where the judge found that they had  a  supportive  relationship.   She
    submitted these were all traits of  a  durable  relationship.   If  the
    judge had taken the evidence as a whole and not placed so much evidence
    on the Respondent's case, she would have found  that  they  were  in  a
    durable relationship.


12. Ms Fijiwala submitted that it was a balanced decision by  reference  to
    paragraph [34].   She  submitted  that  the  judge  had  not  conflated
    marriage of convenience with durable relationship.


Error of law


13. Paragraph [2] of the decision states:

    "The Respondent refused the application because she did not accept  the
    credibility of the appellant's claim.  The reasons for refusal referred
    to the appellant having entered a marriage of convenience.  In fact the
    appellant had not claimed to be legally recognised marriage rather,  he
    claims he and the sponsor have entered an Islamic marriage in  the  UK.
    At the hearing on 11th May Mr Singh said that the Respondent's position
    was that the evidence the Respondent says shows the appellant is  in  a
    marriage of convenience  equally  shows  they  are  not  in  a  genuine
    relationship and could not be said to be in a durable relationship."


14. I find this paragraph indicates that the judge was aware that  she  was
    considering the issue of durable relationship rather than  marriage  of
    convenience.  However,  I  find  that  the  judge  has  approached  the
    evidence from the standpoint of a marriage of convenience  rather  than
    from the standpoint of a durable relationship.


15. The reasons for refusal letter refers to marriage of  convenience.   It
    does not set out which parts of the interview  records  the  Respondent
    relied on when coming to the conclusion that the marriage  was  one  of
    convenience (albeit that this was not the relevant question).  There is
    no reference in  this  refusal  letter  to  any  visit  by  immigration
    officers.  In relation to other evidence, the  Respondent  states  only
    that the discrepancies at interview led her to doubt the  "validity  of
    some of your documentation", without any reference to the documentation
    itself.


16. In paragraph [35] the judge states that the Respondent's representative
    relied on the result of the visit by the immigration authorities.   The
    judge states that the weight she can give to  the  assertion  that  the
    Sponsor did not live with the Appellant,  which  was  asserted  by  the
    Respondent, could be given less weight because the Respondent  did  not
    produce any evidence from the officers involved.  However she said that
    she could give it some weight "because what is not disputed is that two
    of the appellant's co tenants said  something  to  the  effect  that  a
    female did not live in the house which is an odd thing to  say  if  the
    sponsor lived there".  She then addressed the explanations given by the
    Appellant and  also  by  the  co-tenants,  but  did  not  accept  these
    explanations.  She went on to find that the Appellant and Sponsor "gave
    some consistent answers to questions about their living arrangements at
    Clarence Street but they also gave several inconsistent answers".   She
    finds at the end of paragraph [35] that she was not satisfied that they
    had cohabited there.


17. However, while saying that she attaches little weight to  the  evidence
    of the visit, the judge has focused on this visit and taken it  as  her
    starting point.  She  rejected  the  explanations  given  by  both  the
    Appellant and the co-tenants, accepted that there were some  consistent
    answers given by the Appellant and Sponsor  and  failed  to  take  into
    account the documentary evidence.  Given that no evidence was  provided
    by the Respondent of this visit, it is unclear why she has attached any
    weight to it at all.


18. In paragraph [15] the judge states that she asked the Appellant to tell
    her about how he first met the Sponsor.  In paragraph  [36]  the  judge
    sets out her findings relating to  this  issue.   This  issue  was  not
    raised in the reasons for refusal letter.  The judge  states  that  she
    finds the claim that they met in the street  by  chance  "implausible".
    She finds that there was  one  person  who  could  have  supported  the
    account of how they met but that he was not a witness.  However it does
    not appear that this issue  had  been  raised  prior  to  the  hearing.
    Further, she states that "the evidence points firmly to  the  appellant
    and sponsor meeting by arrangement".  However she does not  state  what
    evidence this is, but makes a finding that  they  met  by  arrangement,
    which does not appear to have been put to the Appellant and Sponsor.


19. Further, I find that the judge's approach  to  the  evidence  has  been
    infected  by  her   own   expectations   of   and   attitudes   towards
    relationships.  For example in paragraph [33] she states:


    "I  am  required  to  make  and  (sic)  assessment  of  someone  else's
    relationship and this is no easy task because  relationships  take  all
    sorts of forms, some are founded on romance and someone  practicalities
    and most a combination of both."

20. In paragraph [37] she states:

    ""Whirlwind romances" are not unknown but nonetheless  12  weeks  is  a
    notably short period of time for a  relationship  to  progress  to  the
    stage where both parties  wish  to  live  together  and  there  was  no
    evidence about what it was that caused them to decide to  take  such  a
    significant step so early in their relationship."

21. I find that the judge has  come  to  her  findings  based  on  her  own
    expectations of why relationships are formed, and her own  expectations
    of the time that couples wait before they move in  together.   It  does
    not appear that the Appellant and Sponsor were asked about this  issue,
    or that it was put to them that they had taken this  "significant  step
    so early in their relationship".  I find that  this  has  affected  her
    approach to the other evidence, including that of the witnesses and the
    documentary evidence.


22. When assessing the evidence of the witnesses she states [39]:


    "They have gained the impression the appellant and sponsor are in  love
    with each other but were not able to give specific examples of what had
    caused them to reach this conclusion.  In my  judgment  they  described
    two people who appeared to get on with each other."

23. The judge found  the  witnesses  "to  be  truthful  because  they  were
    straightforward  and,  in  oral  evidence,  they  did  not  appear   to
    exaggerate the knowledge" [39].  However, having found that  they  were
    truthful, the judge then finds that they were unable to  give  specific
    examples of how they had come to the conclusion that the Appellant  and
    Sponsor were in love.  It is difficult to know what  kind  of  examples
    the judge had in  mind,  and  having  found  that  they  were  truthful
    witnesses who did not exaggerate, she has  failed  to  give  clear  and
    cogent reasons for why she did not accept their  evidence.   She  finds
    that they "described two people  who  appeared  to  get  on  with  each
    other", but this could be used to describe people who are in a  durable
    relationship.  She does not give reasons for why this detracts from the
    witnesses' evidence that the Appellent and Sponsor were in love.


24. There is no  detailed  assessment  of  the  documentary  evidence.   In
    paragraph [9] the judge refers to the documents which were  considered.
    In paragraph [34] the judge refers to the fact that "there are  matters
    capable of supporting the support (sic) the  appellant's  claim".   She
    referred to a joint bank account and evidence that they share and  have
    shared a room  in  two  houses.   Further  she  states  "They  do  know
    something of each other's backgrounds.  They have been consistent  with
    each other about many things and the number of applications  that  have
    been made  is  indicative  of  some  kind  of  commitment  between  the
    parties".  Despite this positive finding, there is no  weight  attached
    to it, and no assessment of the documents which corroborate it.


25. I find that the judge erred in failing to consider the totality of  the
    evidence.  I find that her approach to the visit, and her  expectations
    of how a relationship  is  formed  and  developed,  have  affected  her
    approach to the rest of the evidence before her.  I find that  she  has
    failed to give adequate reasons for why she did not  attach  weight  to
    the evidence of the witnesses or to  the  documentary  evidence  before
    her.  I find that this is a material error of law.


26. Paragraph  7.2  of  the  Practice  Statement  dated  10  February  2010
    contemplates that an appeal may be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal
    where the effect of the error has been to deprive a  party  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing  or  other  opportunity  for  the
    party's case to be put to and considered by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Given the nature and extent of the  fact-finding  necessary  to  enable
    this appeal to be remade, having regard to the overriding objective,  I
    find that it is appropriate  to  remit  this  case  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.


Notice of Decision


27. The decision involves the making of a material error of law and  I  set
    it aside.


28. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date 10 March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

