
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/33849/2014
     ia/34139/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |                 Decision & Reasons   |
|                                       |Promulgated                           |
|On 5 January 2016                      |                 On 20 January 2016   |
|                                       |                                      |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK

                                   Between

                   MS Airida Masteikaite (first appellant)
                   Mr Shoeb Moosa Patel (SECOND APPELLANT)
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY ODF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Brown (Counsel instructed by Farani-Javid-Taylor
Solicitors)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This matter  comes  before  me  for  an  error  of  law  hearing.   The
    appellants appeal a decision by the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  M  A
    Khan) ("FtT") promulgated on 8 July 2015 in which  their  appeals  were
    dismissed under the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds under
    the  Rules.   The  appellants  appealed  under  Section   82   of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and Regulation 26  of  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 ("EEA  Regs.")  against  a  decision
    made by the Secretary of State seeking to remove  the  first  appellant
    from the UK under Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 and
    refusing the second appellant's application for a residence card  under
    Regulation 8(5) EEA Regs based  on  his  relationship  with  the  first
    appellant.  The FtT found that  the  parties  were  not  in  a  durable
    relationship and that there was no family or private  life  established
    in the UK.  The FtT further found that the  parties  had  attempted  to
    enter into a marriage of convenience and on that basis removal  of  the
    first appellant was justified under Regulation 21B EEA Regs.

Grounds of Application

Ground 1 - Procedural Unfairness

2.   At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal the  Secretary  of  State
    failed to produce  the  records  of  interview  conducted  between  the
    parties as  regards  the  circumstances  of  their  relationship.   The
    production of  the  interview  records  was  the  subject  of  Tribunal
    directions made on 5 January 2015.  The Secretary of  State  failed  to
    comply with those directions.  It was argued  that  the  FtT  erred  in
    proceeding to hear the appeal without the evidence  of  the  record  of
    interview which was central to the issues in the appeal.  Reliance  was
    placed on Miah (interviewer's comments:  disclosure:  fairness)  [2014]
    UKUT 00515 (IAC) paragraph 22 and Papajorgji (EEA spouse - marriage  of
    convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT 00038 (IAC).

Ground 2

3.   The FtT failed  to  record  an  adjournment  application  made  by  the
    Secretary of State who applied for an adjournment in  order  to  comply
    with the directions to produce the record of interview.   The  Tribunal
    judge refused the application and thereafter  failed  to  set  out  any
    record of either the application, the response and the FtT ruling.

Ground 3

4.   The Tribunal's assessment of credibility was materially flawed as

    (a)  it was predicated on  the  unlawful  conclusion  that  there  were
         material discrepancies in the appellant's interview,


    (b)  it failed to take into account the evidence at the hearing showing
         consistencies,


    (c)  by failing to place weight on those consistent answers,


    (d)  in  concluding  that  the  independent  witnesses  undermined  the
         appellants' accounts.

Ground 4

5.   The FtT failed to address relevant documentary evidence  submitted  and
    which included bank statements, joint tax bills and supporting letters.



Permission to Appeal

6.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Pooler granted permission  to  appeal  on  14
    October 2015.  It was arguable that the judge erred in law  by  failing
    to record his decision on the adjournment request and that there  arose
    some procedural irregularity capable of making a material difference to
    the outcome or fairness of the proceedings.  First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Pooler observed however;

         "The grounds do not however, make clear  whether  Counsel  for  the
         appellant supported or opposed the adjournment; and the  appellants
         would be well  advised  to  consider  whether  evidence  should  be
         provided in the form of a statement from  Counsel.   The  remaining
         grounds are also arguable, although the outcome will depend on  the
         view which is taken in respect of the first ground."

Rule 24 Response

7.   The Secretary of State opposed the appeal.  Reference  was  made  to  a
    Presenting Officer's minute as follows:

         "The court had issued directions  in  January  2015  for  the  Home
         Office to produce the interview  record  conducted  by  Immigration
         Officers when they  apprehended  the  appellants  at  the  registry
         office on 18 August.  The directions were  not  complied  with.   A
         further request to obtain the interview was also made on Friday  26
         June however without success.  My application to adjourn  the  case
         to obtain the interview was vigorously opposed by  the  appellant's
         representative and refused by the Immigration Judge."

8.   The response submits that the FtT made a series of clear  and  reasoned
    adverse credibility findings on the  basis  of  oral  evidence  of  the
    appellants and their witnesses as recorded at paragraph 39 onwards  and
    it was wholly open to the FtT to conclude that the  appeals  should  be
    dismissed.  The Presenting Officer's minute states:

         "There were glaring inconsistencies when the appellants were  asked
         why none of their parents attended the marriage it ranged from  too
         expensive to  come,  the  parents  wanted  the  couple  to  have  a
         traditional marriage in  both  Lithuania  and  India  and  the  EEA
         national parents were too  busy.   A  Mr  Mohammed  attended  court
         claiming he lived with the couple for  three  years.   He  did  not
         provide any evidence of his immigration status or tenancy agreement
         confirming he was living at the time stated."


9.   The position taken by the Secretary of State was that it  was  open  to
    the FtT to proceed without the interview  record  particularly  as  the
    appellant opposed the application for an adjournment for  the  purposes
    of obtaining the same.




First-tier Tribunal Decision

10.  The FtT took into account submissions made by the  Secretary  of  State
    with reference to glaring  inconsistencies  in  answers  given  by  the
    appellants as shown the records of interview  of  which  excerpts  were
    included in the reasons for refusal [35] and  [46].   In  reaching  its
    decision the FtT further drew on inconsistencies in the evidence before
    the FtT and overall found the appellants  claim  to  be  in  a  genuine
    relationship to be lacking in credibility [40].  In addition  it  found
    further inconsistencies as between the evidence given by the appellants
    and that of the first appellant's mother [41].  Reference  was  however
    made to the  appellants'  claim  that  the  interviewing  officers  had
    behaved badly towards them.  The FtT further stated at [46]:

         "It is unfortunate that the court did not have sight  of  the  full
         interview that the answers provided in  the  refusal  clearly  show
         that both appellants did not provide  consistent  evidence.   These
         inconsistencies continued in their oral  evidence  at  the  hearing
         before me."

11.  The FtT concluded having regard to the balance  of  probabilities  that
    the Secretary of State established that the first  appellant  attempted
    to facilitate the second appellant's immigration status in  the  UK  by
    way of attempting to enter into a marriage of convenience.  Further the
    FtT found that the appellants were not in a  durable  relationship  and
    the second appellant failed to meet the requirements of Regulation 8(5)
    [47 - 48].

Error of Law Hearing

12.  Ms Brown relied on  the  grounds  of  application  and  on  a  skeleton
    argument prepared by Counsel for the appellants  dated  29  June  2015.
    She accepted that  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  application  for
    adjournment had been vigorously opposed on behalf  of  the  appellants.
    This was on the basis that the Secretary of State had had ample time in
    which to comply with the directions  and  to  produce  the  records  of
    interview.  Ms Brown's position was that the  FtT  ought  not  to  have
    relied on references made to inconsistencies in the  interview  in  the
    refusal letter which was unfair to the  appellants.   Furthermore,  she
    submitted that the FtT ought  to  have  allowed  the  appeal  following
    Papajorgji on the  grounds  that  the  Secretary  of  State  failed  to
    discharge the burden of  proof  as  regards  marriage  of  convenience.
    Reliance was placed on paragraphs 28-39.  Ms Brown  pursued  the  first
    ground of application as the main ground and submitted that  grounds 2,
    3 and 4 were  cumulative in effect.

13. Ms Brocklesby-Weller submitted that the appellants' grounds  were  based
    on a misconception  of  the  applications  made  and  the  reasons  for
    refusal.  The appellants  had not entered into a  marriage;  they  were
    apprehended by immigration officials at the registry office before  any
    ceremony took place, and thereafter  interviews  were  conducted.   The
    decision in respect of the first appellant, who was "the EEA national",
    was  a  removal  decision  under  Regulation  21B(2)  EEA  Regs.    The
    respondent concluded that she was a person who attempted to enter  into
    a marriage of convenience to an Indian national with the  sole  purpose
    of establishing leave to remain for him in the UK and   which  amounted
    to an abuse of her EEA rights in the UK.  The second appellant  applied
    for a residence card relying on Regulation 8(5) EEA Regulations that he
    was in a subsisting and durable relationship with an EEA  national.   A
    decision was taken to curtail his existing leave as  a  Tier  1  highly
    skilled post-study migrant under paragraph  323(1)  with  reference  to
    322(5).  The second appellant appealed under Regulation 8(5) of the EEA
    Regulations 2006.

14.  Ms Brocklesby-Weller submitted that  the  reliance  on  the  burden  of
    proof in the context of Papajorgji was misconstrued.  Whilst there  may
    have been a procedural error in the FtT's failure to record the details
    of the application for an adjournment and  to  make  reference  to  the
    contents of the record of interview, nevertheless the error  would  not
    be material in light of the FtT's clear findings of inconsistencies  in
    the oral evidence  and was entirely lacking in credibility.

Discussion and Decision

15.  I have read the Record of Proceedings made by the FtT in  which  it  is
    recorded that the application for an adjournment made by the respondent
    was  vigorously  opposed  by  the  appellants  representative.   It  is
    recorded  that  the  application  was  refused  but    the  Record   of
    Proceedings showed no reasons in support of that decision  however.  Ms
    Brown submits that the fact that the application was opposed  makes  no
    difference to the error of law argument.

16.  My preliminary view was that  the  refusal  was  premised  on  evidence
    contained in the notes of interviews which revealed inconsistencies  as
    between the appellants. It is clear from the decision and reasons  that
    the FtT did indeed refer to the inconsistencies in the extracts of  the
    notes of interview in part in reaching  its  decision  to  dismiss  the
    appeal.  I am satisfied that this is capable of amounting to  an  error
    of law given that the full record had not been before the FtT  and  the
    appellants  had  not  had  any  opportunity  to  consider   the   same.
    Thereafter there was a failure by the FtT to record in its decision the
    details of the application for an adjournment in order to produce those
    notes of interview, any response on behalf of the appellant and reasons
    for its decision.  This is  a  procedural  error  that  is  capable  of
    amounting to a material error of law.  However the pertinent  issue  in
    this matter is materiality.

17.   Before considering in detail the arguments that the FtT erred in  law,
    I have considered and I concur with the submissions made on  behalf  of
    the Secretary of State as to the correct approach to be taken  in  this
    appeal and which is having regard to the context of and  the  decisions
    made by the Respondent.    The facts  in  this  appeal  were  that  the
    appellants had attempted to get married  but  were  prevented  from  so
    doing  by  the  intervention  of  immigration  officials.  It  was  the
    respondent's case that this would have been a marriage of  convenience.
    The decisions made by the respondent were in effect a removal  decision
    under the EEA Regs and a curtailment of existing leave and refusal of a
    residence card based on evidence that the parties were not in a genuine
    relationship and had attempted to enter into a marriage of convenience.
    The second appellant applied on the grounds that he was  in  a  durable
    relationship with an EEA national under Regulation 8(5).  This was  not
    therefore an  appeal  in  respect  of  which  the  burden  was  on  the
    respondent to show a reasonable suspicion that the parties had  entered
    into a marriage of convenience which would have invoked the  principles
    in Papajorgji.  Having set out the background and decisions made I  now
    consider whether or not the error of laws were material to the outcome.

18.  The appellants argued that there was unfairness from the outset as  the
    FtT  relied on extracts of the notes of interview referred  to  in  the
    reasons for refusal, without reference to the substantive interview.  I
    am satisfied (and it has not been put to me  in  submissions)  that  no
    application or submission was made to the FtT  that  the  Secretary  of
    State failed to discharge the burden of proof as regards  the  marriage
    of convenience issue and as a result the appeal  fell  to  be  allowed.
    This accords with the respondent's decisions made and based on the fact
    that there was no marriage.  There was thus no justification for such a
    submission to be made.  The  notes  of  interview  were  not  therefore
    determinative of the appeal as there was no burden on  the  respondent.
    The appellants decided to and were called to give evidence  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal  and  in  addition  evidence  was  heard  from  two
    independent witnesses, all of which the FtT found  to  be  inconsistent
    and unreliable. I am satisfied that the FtT made abundantly clear  that
    its decision was reached having regard  to  the  many  and  significant
    inconsistencies  in  the  oral  evidence  as  between  the   appellants
    themselves  and  as  between  the  appellants  and  their   independent
    witnesses,  which  the  FtT  found  in  totality  to  be   lacking   in
    credibility.  The detailed findings as to credibility are shown at  [39
    to 42].  I do not find any errors to be material and  it  was  entirely
    open to the FtT to reach and make its decision  on  the  oral  evidence
    heard regardless of whether or not the notes of interview were referred
    to and were not produced.  I  find  no  unfairness  to  the  appellants
    procedurally or otherwise.

19.  In conclusion therefore I am satisfied that whilst  there  were  errors
    of law on the part of the First-tier Tribunal  these  errors  were  not
    material to the outcome of the decision that was  made.   The  decision
    and reasons shall stand.  The appeal is dismissed.

NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE

Signed                                  Dated 19.1.2016


GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD
The appeal is dismissed.
There is no fee award.

Signed                                  Dated 19.1.2016


GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black
