
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/33864/2015
     EA/05926/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 26th November 2018                   |On 06th February 2019               |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                                ms stella [t]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     The Appellant appears in Person
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 7th  February  1962.   On
    10th February 2015 she applied for a residence card  on  the  basis  of
    retained right of residence after divorce  from  an  EEA  citizen,  one
    [JS].  It was refused on 26th October 2015.

2.   The appellant then applied for a permanent residence card on  the  same
    basis as before.  That application was refused on 5th May 2016.

3.   In terms of the reasons for refusal in the  first  decision,  it  noted
    that the appellant's former spouse sponsored three different applicants
    all claiming to be his spouse.  These applications dated 22nd  February
    2012, 24th May 2012 and 4th February 2014.  It was  not  accepted  that
    there was a genuine and subsisting relationship with  the  EEA  sponsor
    but rather that the marriage was solely for immigration purposes.

4.   In terms of the documentation that  was  provided,  such  it  was  said
    provided little or no  evidence  of  any  joint  financial  commitments
    during  the  marriage  or  indeed   provided   credible   evidence   of
    cohabitation.

5.   The provisions relating to family and private life and Article  8  were
    also considered.

6.   In terms of the second decision, it was recounted  that  the  appellant
    was encountered in Ireland during September 2008 when she claimed  that
    her name was a Lizzy Rose Benson with a date  of  birth  of  13th  June
    1978.  Mr [EW] claimed that she was living with him and that he  was  a
    cousin.  It is only in 2008, it is said, when the  appellant  made  and
    supplied evidence of her identity and the name that she  uses  and  the
    date of birth that she claims.  For the reasons which had been advanced
    on the previous occasion, the application was refused.   The  appellant
    sought to appeal against both decisions, which appeals came before  the
    First-tier Tribunal for hearing.  The appeals were  dismissed.   For  a
    number of reasons errors of law were found  in  those  decisions  which
    were set aside to be remade.  Thus the matters came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  Freer  for  hearing  on  7  February   2018.    In   a
    determination dated 16 February 2018 the two appeals were dismissed.

7.   The appellant sought to challenge those decisions and permission to  do
    so before the Upper Tribunal was granted, primarily on the basis of the
    appellant's poor mental health and the  Judge's  potential  failure  to
    recognise her vulnerability in the course of weighing up  the  evidence
    which she gave.   It  is  also  said  that  in  certain  parts  of  the
    determination the Judge has engaged in speculation.

8.   The matter of concern was that the appellant arrived  unrepresented  at
    the hearing before me when she indicated that she had  been  unable  to
    afford the services of a legal representative.  I indicated that I  was
    prepared to adjourn  matters  in  order  for  her  to  be  represented,
    particularly given the concerns as to  her  vulnerable  position.   She
    indicated that she wished the matter to proceed.  It  is  to  be  noted
    that throughout the hearing, albeit a hearing  on  error  of  law,  the
    appellant was able to  articulate  her  concerns  and  respond  to  the
    relevant issues.  I did not detect that her ability to communicate  and
    understand the arguments raised were significantly  undermined  by  any
    mental health condition which she may or may not have.

9.   She relied upon the grounds of appeal and a statement of 18th  November
    2018.  In summary it is her case that she submitted cogent evidence  of
    cohabitation, in particular a joint HSBC bank account from 2011 to 2014
    and various payslips for herself  and  for  her  spouse  for  the  same
    period.

10.  She maintained that she had been a  victim  of  domestic  violence  and
    produced a number of medical documents and reports.

11.  She denied that she had travelled or lived in  Ireland  for  more  than
    one day of a visit and maintained her denial of using a false  identity
    of another.  Seemingly there had been a mistake in an  IS96  which  had
    been issued to her when she was returned to London.  Such a mistake was
    pointed out and corrected in her residence card of September 2010.

12.  She maintains that throughout her residence she  has  used  her  proper
    name and birth date.

13.  A number of issues fell for consideration in the course of the  appeal.
     The first and central issue was the context and circumstances  of  the
    appellant's marriage to the sponsor.  Her evidence, as set out  in  the
    determination, was that she met the sponsor at a party in 2007 and they
    married on 25th June 2009.  At the date of the marriage  the  appellant
    was unaware of the other relationships that seemingly the  sponsor  had
    with other females.  After the marriage they moved together to  Clayton
    Road and lived there for some time and had a tenancy agreement.  It was
    a studio flat run by [GL]. They then moved to Dallas Road in  2010  and
    then at another tenancy.

14.  It was when she commented upon lipstick upon his shirt  that  he  would
    beat her up, she moved out to  Friary  Road  but  was  still  going  to
    Clayton Arms.  She filed for divorce  and  suffered  further  violence.
    She moved out of Dallas Road because  of  problems  with  the  sponsor,
    which began in 2011.

15.  In the determination, the Judge highlights in  paragraphs  48  and  49,
    the nature of the respondent's evidence relating to the  activities  of
    the sponsor.  It noted that a Miss  D  was  refused  a  certificate  of
    approval of marriage to the sponsor on 9th July 2009, such  being  very
    close in time to the appellant's wedding.   The  sponsor  is  shown  as
    having a current French nationality and a previous nationality  of  the
    Cote d'Ivoire.  Ms I was refused a residence card on 13th March 2012, a
    bigamous marriage sought with the sponsor.  Ms N was  likewise  refused
    on 16th March 2013 and a Ms J was refused on 19th June 2014.

16.  The Judge found that the appellant was part of a series  of  women  who
    were being helped to marry to gain EEA nationality  in  sham  weddings.
    The Judge did not accept it credible that the appellant would have been
    unaware of the activity of the sponsor e to enter in the sham marriages
    or seek to arrange them as a business and not as  a  hobby.   Such  was
    found to be significant evidence falling into question for  genuineness
    of the marriage.

17.  Linked to that issue was the use by the appellant of a false  identity.
     It was said that the appellant was confronted by  the  authorities  in
    Ireland and gave a particular identity and  date  of  birth.   She  was
    communicated to in that identity for some time and  it  was  not  until
    2010 that she sought to correct her identity.

18.  In that connection it is important to note the  content  at  paragraphs
    55 and 56 of the determination where reference is made to  the  precise
    records which the respondent has adduced at the course of the hearing.

19.  Of particular importance is the illegal entry record of  4th  September
    2008 which is summarised in full in paragraph 56 of the  determination.
    The Republic of Ireland alerted the Immigration  Officer  to  the  fact
    that the subject had not been granted  access  through  Dunleary  Port.
    The Immigration Officer and another attended the port to apprehend  the
    person concerned, who gave her name as Lizzy Rose Benson and a date  of
    birth 13th June  1978.   It  was  because  of  that  that  the  Officer
    suspected that it was likely to be falsification, that she spelled  her
    name in various ways and appeared to be at least 50 years old.   It  is
    said that this person was in fact the appellant.  She claimed  to  have
    first entered Ireland six years ago, gave various  residences  in  both
    countries during the timeframe.  She was served as the  subject  of  an
    illegal entrant with an IS96 to report in London to  an  address  where
    she claimed that her friend lived.  That being [~] Bream Close.   Those
    documents were sent to her at that address.

20.  It was the case of the appellant that she had only been in Ireland  for
    the day and she had purchased something for Lizzy. The authorities  had
    been confused as to her  identity.   She  seemed  to  accept  that  she
    received notification in Lizzy's identity  but  did  not  correct  that
    until 2010.  She indicated however she had sought to do so before  then
    and it was simply a mistake on the part of the Home Office.

21.  The Judge, having considered the evidence, came to the conclusion  that
    the explanation for the appellant was not to be believed,  particularly
    in the light of the very specific report  of  the  Immigration  Officer
    that he set out.  It was the conclusion of the Judge that the appellant
    had not been honest with the authorities at a time immediately prior to
    the marriage which had been conducted and that in itself was  a  matter
    undermining of credibility.

22.  In terms of accommodation there were many changes of an address.

23.  In paragraph 57 and 58 of the determination, the  Judge  found  on  the
    evidence as presented that the appellant had stayed at Bream  Close  at
    material times.  Regard was had to a photograph showing that the person
    recorded as being Lizzy Rose Benson was that who appeared in  court  as
    the appellant.  There was evidence placing the sponsor at Bream  Close.



24.  It was noted that  there  was  a  tenancy  agreement  for  a  one  room
    apartment at [~] Clayton Road, London dated 26th September 2009 listing
    the sponsor and appellant as tenants.  There is a  letter  from  Virgin
    Media dated 20th October 2009 addressed to the sponsor at that address.
     A statement from a Mr [GL] seemingly indicated that he  had  inherited
    the sponsor and the appellant from the previous landlord on 16th  April
    2010.  Talk Talk bills dated around 18th August 2010 were addressed  to
    the sponsor at 1-5 Clayton Road, London.   A Talk Talk bill at page 298
    of the appellant's bundle dated 15th November 2009 shows the sponsor at
    [~] - [~] Clayton Road, London  rather  than  at  the  flat  above  [~]
    Clayton Road. Whether it is the same address or a variant of  the  same
    is perhaps not clear.  It was noted by the Judge, however,  that  apart
    from the one tenancy agreement,  the  documentation  did  not  put  the
    sponsor and the appellant as residing  at  that  address  and  did  not
    support  the  conclusion  of  cohabitation.  The  Judge  indicated   at
    paragraph 29 of the determination that the appellant was unclear as  to
    how long they were at the address above the Clayton Arms Pub.

25.  According to the evidence of the appellant they  had  moved  to  Dallas
    Road in 2010 but was still "in and out of that place".  The Judge could
    find no documentation which assisted on the issue  of  cohabitation  at
    that address.   At some stage the appellant had  moved  out  to  Friary
    Road but continued to go to Clayton Arms, where she claimed that  there
    was correspondence.  It was unclear as to why the appellant would  have
    correspondence at an address which she no  longer  lived.   An  example
    possibly of that correspondence is a bank  account  from  Barclays  for
    September to October 2011 addressed to  the  appellant  at  [~]  -  [~]
    Clayton Road, London.  Indeed there seemed  to  be  a  series  of  bank
    statements addressed to the appellant at that address.

26.  Significantly however the documentation  does  not  seem  to  show  any
    joint cohabitation at that address.

27.  It is the HSBC joint bank account, which seems  to  place  the  sponsor
    and the appellant at 77 Friary Road, the bank statements seem  to  date
    from November 2012 through to November 2014 at that particular address.
     Of course the appellant is still returning to Clayton Road to  collect
    mail addressed to her at that address.  It does not necessarily  follow
    because bank documents are  addressed  to  the  appellant  and  to  the
    sponsor at Friary Road, that they are living together.

28.  Indeed the documents, particularly a Lloyds TSB  account  of  September
    2012 through to 6th December 2012, March 2013 to  11th  April  2013  is
    addressed to the appellant herself at 25 Dallas Road, Sydenham during a
    period where there is also the joint account from HSBC addressed to the
    sponsor and appellant at the Friary Road address.  Wage slips  for  the
    appellant would seem to be in her name at 77 Friary Road and 26  Dallas
    Road.

29.  As the Judge had remarked, for the most part the  documentary  evidence
    is addressed to one or other of the sponsor  or  appellant  and  seldom
    both apart from the HSBC bank statements.  There would seem  to  be  an
    overlap between the documents and addresses.

0.   These were matters noted specifically by the Judge  in  the  course  of
    the determination and in particular the  dates  and  addresses  crossed
    over with 2009 being extremely poorly documented.  The Judge has  dealt
    with the address issue in some detail at paragraphs 57  to  65  of  the
    determination.

31.  The nature of the relationship was also considered.  There  was  little
    detail about what interests they had,  no  photographs  or  details  of
    domestic arrangements. That was however on the periphery of the central
    concerns.  In terms of domestic violence the Judge perhaps  employed  a
    marked degree of speculation and noted the paucity  of  information  on
    that matter.   It is perhaps in paragraph 72 of the determination  that
    the allegation of undue speculation about the cause and nature of  such
    violence has some merit.

32.  In terms of the factual matrix, therefore,  arise  the  issues  whether
    the appellant was credible, whether she lived with the sponsor  in  any
    meaningful way and whether or not the marriage was genuine at the  time
    it was entered into.  It seems to me that the findings of the Judge are
    entirely open to be made.  I reminded myself of the  case  of  Sadovska
    [2017] UKSC 54 of the relevant issues as to the standard of  proof  and
    burden of proof.  It was suggested that in parts the Judge has  perhaps
    been somewhat speculative in the consideration of a number  of  matters
    particularly as to the cause of violence at paragraphs 46, 50 and 72 of
    the determination.

33.  Overall however I find that proper  consideration  has  been  given  to
    what the appellant had to say.   There  is  no  suggestion  within  the
    determination that that which was recorded was not  the  evidence  that
    was given.  The appellant was at that time legally  represented  and  I
    find little in the answers that were given to indicate that she did not
    know or was confused as to matters by reason of her mental health.

34.  When looked at overall and in the light of the proper directions as  to
    the standard and burden of proof, I find that the findings of fact made
    by the Judge as determinative of the appeal were properly to be made in
    all the circumstances.  I do not find therefore there to be a  material
    error of law.  Although the Judge has expressed himself fairly strongly
    in certain passages in the determination, I find when read as  a  whole
    that it is a proper consideration of all relevant issues.

Notice of Decision

The appellant's appeals  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  are  dismissed.   The
decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand namely that the  appeals  of
the appellant are dismissed in respect of the EEA Regulations.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 17 December 2018

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
