






Upper Tribunal
(Immigration And Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33246/2014

                                                            IA/33250/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |                           Decision and     |
|On: 20 August 2015                |Reasons Promulgated                         |
|                                  |On: 25 September 2015                       |
|                                  |                                            |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                         Ms Nadine Natasha Rhoden(1)
                       Master Justice Ababio Afful(2)
                        (no anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr H Kannangara, counsel (instructed by IEC
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellants are mother and son born on 11  September  1977  and  10
      September 2005 respectively.  They are nationals of Jamaica.  I  shall
      refer to Ms Rhoden as "the appellant." Her son, Justice, was  born  in
      the UK on 10 September 2005.


   2. They  appeal  with  permission  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Martins, who in a decision promulgated on 14 April 2015
      dismissed their appeals against the decision of the respondent dated 5
      August 2014 giving directions under s.10 of the Immigration and Asylum
      Act  1999  for  their  removal  from  the  UK  having  refused   their
      application for further leave to remain in the UK.


   3. On 19 June 2015, First-tier Tribunal Judge P J M Hollingworth  granted
      the appellants permission to appeal on the basis  that  there  was  an
      arguable error of law "...in relation to the  extent  of  the  Judge's
      reasoning in the context of s.55 and  the  period  of  time  spent  by
      mother/child in the UK in reaching her conclusions".


   4. By way of background to the appeal, the appellant first entered the UK
      on 28 December 2002 as a visitor. She was granted further  periods  of
      leave to remain as a student initially until 28 June 2004 and was then
      until 31 May 2006. She was refused leave to remain as a student on  26
      June 2006 but has remained in the UK since that date.


   5. The appellant applied for leave to remain in October  2013.  That  was
      refused on 16 November 2013 on the basis that the appellants  are  not
      British citizens or settled in the UK and it was reasonable  for  them
      to return to Jamaica as a family unit.


   6. The respondent had acknowledged  the  agreement  to  reconsider  their
      applications  for  further  leave  to  remain,  and  stated  that  the
      applications under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention  had  been
      reconsidered, taking into account s.55 of the Borders, Citizenship and
      Immigration Act 2009 as well as the immigration rules in  place  on  9
      July 2012 (Appendix FM and paragraph 276 ADE of the rules).


   7. Judge Martins set out in some detail the route to  settlement  in  the
      UK. The  applications  were  considered  under  the  parent  route  in
      Appendix FM. The appellant had remained in the UK  in  breach  of  the
      immigration laws for more than 28 days  and  paragraph  EX.1  did  not
      apply in her case.


   8. The respondent noted that the  second  appellant  was  not  a  British
      citizen, although he had lived in the UK for  more  than  seven  years
      prior to the date of the application. However, it was considered  that
      it would not be unreasonable to expect them to leave  the  UK  as  the
      second appellant would be returning to Jamaica with his  mother  as  a
      family unit and it was not accepted that the requirements of paragraph
      EX.1 were met.


   9. Regard was  also  had  to  the  appellant's  private  life  under  the
      provisions of paragraph 276ADE. She did not satisfy the requirements.


  10. The second appellant did not meet the requirements of leave to  remain
      as a child under Appendix FM. Insofar  as  the  child's  private  life
      under paragraph 276ADE was concerned, Judge Martins had regard to  the
      respondent's reasons at [11]. The respondent was not satisfied that he
      met the requirements of paragraph 276ADE. It was reasonable to  expect
      him to leave the UK because he would be returning to Jamaica with  his
      mother as a family unit. His mother would be able to help  him  adjust
      to the change and provide him with maintenance and accommodation.  The
      second appellant had lived with his mother in the UK, a multi-cultural
      society with a resident Jamaican diaspora and therefore the respondent
       did not accept  that  the  child  had  lost  ties  including  social,
      cultural and family, to Jamaica.


  11. It was noted by Judge Martins  that  the  respondent  also  considered
      leave outside the rules [12]. However, she did not accept  that  there
      are   any   exceptional   circumstances   rendering   their    removal
      inappropriate.


  12. The respondent also had  regard  to  her  duties  under  s.55  of  the
      Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 [13]. The child would be
      returning to Jamaica with his mother, who would be able to support him
      while he adjusts to living there and enjoying his  full  rights  as  a
      citizen of Jamaica. Although he is currently enrolled in education  in
      the UK, Jamaica has a functioning education system which he  would  be
      able to enter.


  13. There was no evidence indicating that the appellant would be unable to
      maintain her child in Jamaica or that she would be unable  to  provide
      for his safety and welfare. They would be returning to  Jamaica  as  a
      family unit and would continue to enjoy family life together.


  14. Whilst that may involve a degree of disruption to their private  life,
      this was considered to be  proportionate  to  the  legitimate  aim  of
      maintaining effective immigration control and is  in  accordance  with
      the respondent's duties under s.55 of the 2009 Act.


  15. Finally the Judge noted that the  respondent  considered  the  factors
      under paragraph 353B of  the  Rules  in  addition  to  representations
      submitted on their behalf [14]. The appellant had remained in  the  UK
      without leave since 31 May 2006 when her leave  expired.  It  was  not
      accepted that the length of time she spent in the UK since refusal  of
      her leave to remain application meant that her removal from the UK was
      not appropriate.


  16.   A  one-stop  notice  was  issued  under  s120  of  the  Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum 2002 Act.


The appellant's case before the First-tier Tribunal


  17. The grounds of appeal before the First-tier  Tribunal  contended  that
      EX.1 of Appendix FM applied and that  the  respondent  had  not  taken
      account of her own guidance in respect of children who have  lived  in
      the UK for more than seven years, over which time they started to  put
      down roots and integrate into the UK. The same criticism was  made  of
      the respondent's consideration under s.55 and her treatment  of  their
      private life claims. Judge Martins noted that the pertinent  case  law
      was also cited in the grounds [15].


  18. In her  determination  Judge  Martins  summarised  evidence  that  the
      appellant gave at the hearing. She is Jamaican. She entered the UK  in
      December 2002. She has a brother and a sister who originally lived  in
      Jamaica. Her mother came to the UK some 30 years ago and is a  British
      citizen.  Her brother and sister are both British citizens who live in
      the UK. She has two half sisters who are also settled  in  the  UK  as
      British citizens.


  19. Judge Martins referred to her immigration history and  the  fact  that
      she was granted further leave to remain until 31 May 2006. Thereafter,
      her application in the same category was refused. She  contended  that
      she had made an application for settlement as all other members of her
      family are settled in the UK. Her father has died. She has  nobody  in
      Jamaica.


  20. She made a subsequent fresh application on 19 August 2011 for a  grant
      of leave outside the rules which was also refused.  She  made  further
      representations for reconsideration. She waited over two  years  since
      the application was made in August 2011.


  21. Further reconsideration requests were not responded  to  by  the  Home
      Office and with no likely outcome  "....she  made  a  fresh  paid  for
      application in October 2013 for further leave to remain in the  United
      Kingdom". She included in her application her minor son in  the  light
      of the amended immigration rules,  incorporating  former  Home  Office
      policy (DP 5/96). This related to children who had been in the UK  for
      seven years.  The  applications  were  refused  in  letters  dated  16
      November 2014 [20].


  22. The evidence relied on  before  Judge  Martins  regarding  the  second
      appellant was that he was born in September 2005 in London and at  the
      date of application, was 8 years and 5 months. He had lived in the  UK
      throughout the whole period and had never left the  country.  He  does
      not have a Jamaican passport.


  23. When the appellant made her witness statement on 9 April 2015, her son
      was 9 years and 3 months old. She claimed  in  evidence  that  it  was
      wrong to assert that her son had not formed strong cultural and social
      ties in the UK as he has lived here his entire life and  grown  up  in
      the British culture [21]. He has friends and relations here.


  24. When her application was made  under  the  amended  immigration  rules
      (Appendix  FM)  she  applied  for  judicial  review.  Eventually   the
      respondent offered to reconsider the application dated 17 October 2013
      and to grant a right of appeal if it was refused. The  appellant  then
      withdrew her judicial review application [23].


  25. In cross examination, The appellant stated that she  is  supported  in
      the UK by her mother, brother and sisters. She lives with  her  mother
      who looks after her and her son in terms of buying food  and  clothes.
      She receives financial support from her siblings.  She  accepted  that
      were she to return to Jamaica they would no doubt try to help her  for
      a short period but as life is difficult everywhere they would  not  be
      able to help her "consistently" [26]. She does not have much education
      and she did not go to school. It would be difficult to make  a  living
      in Jamaica to look after her child.


  26. Judge Martins heard evidence from the appellant's sister who confirmed
      that the appellant is a good mother and has been a  good  sister.  She
      will try to support  the  appellant  financially  if  she  returns  to
      Jamaica, but it would be far more expensive to support her. She  would
      not be able to afford to visit them in  Jamaica.  She  takes  holidays
      abroad such as in Paris, which is cheaper than Jamaica.


  27. A witness who is a member of the appellant's church gave evidence. She
      testified to the appellant's participation in community projects.  She
      was not cross examined [29-30].


The First-tier Tribunal's findings


  28.  In  her  assessment  Judge  Martins  stated  that  she  had  had  the
      opportunity of hearing and observing the appellant, her sister  and  a
      friend give evidence. This they did in a straightforward  and  helpful
      manner. She found them credible.


  29. However, the fact remained that the appellant has  not  had  leave  to
      remain in the UK since May 2006. She has made various applications  in
      an attempt to regularise her stay without success [33].


  30. Her case was put on the basis that paragraph EX.1 applies as  her  son
      has lived in the UK continuously and it would  not  be  reasonable  to
      expect him to leave the UK. However, the requirements to  be  met  for
      limited leave to remain as a parent under Appendix FM require that the
      appellant must not be in the UK in breach of immigration laws.


  31. The requirements under EX.1 are that the appellant and her son have  a
      genuine and subsisting parental relationship and that it would not  be
      unreasonable to expect the child to leave the UK [35].


  32. In that respect, the Judge noted that the second appellant  was  "some
      ten years of age" at the date of the hearing. He was born in  the  UK.
      He had known no other life other than life in  the  UK  and  with  his
      extended family, particularly his grandmother, with whom  he  and  his
      mother live.


  33. The Judge had regard to  the  submission  that  there  are  no  family
      members in Jamaica who could  assist  the  appellant  on  her  return.
      However, the appellants have not had permission to be in the UK.  They
      are both in good health and although there is no doubt that  it  would
      be an adjustment for the second appellant on his return to Jamaica,  a
      country which he does not know, he would be returning with his mother,
      who has spent 25 years of her life there and would therefore  be  able
      to assist him in adapting. Although difficult, the family  in  the  UK
      could assist the appellants from here to settle  in  Jamaica  as  they
      have been supporting the appellant in the UK [36].


  34. The Judge had regard to the s.117B considerations regarding the public
      interest in such cases. It was in the public interest that  those  who
      seek to enter or remain in the UK are  financially  independent,  such
      that they are not a burden on taxpayers and better able  to  integrate
      into society. She had regard to s.117B(4) noting that the weight to be
      given to a private life established by a  person  who  is  in  the  UK
      unlawfully.  Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a   private   life
      established by a person when their immigration  status  is  precarious
      [37].


  35. She concluded that for the reasons given, it would not be unreasonable
      to expect the second appellant to return to Jamaica  with  his  mother
      [38]. The appellants had failed on the totality  of  the  evidence  to
      discharge the burden on them. The decision was in accordance with  the
      law and the Rules [39].


The Upper Tribunal hearing


  36. Mr Kannangara submitted that the Judge had accepted  that  the  second
      appellant is a minor who is now nearly ten years old. The appellant is
      a single mother. The only issue was whether it is reasonable to expect
      the child to live in Jamaica where he has never been in his life.


  37. He submitted that the Judge's findings are only  to  be  be  found  in
      paragraphs 33 to 37 of her decision.  It  is  evident  that  the  only
      reasons she has considered and given were  that  the  child  would  be
      returned with his mother and therefore it was reasonable to expect the
      child to leave the UK.


  38. He submitted that the Judge has not given  consideration  to  relevant
      legal principles in this particular area. If the only reason that  the
      Judge could find was that the child would be leaving with  the  mother
      that would defeat the purpose of the rule. The child is likely to live
      with his parents. He thus submitted that the reasonableness test  goes
      beyond the fact that the child would be returned with the parent.


  39. Mr Kannangara also submitted that the Judge  failed  to  consider  the
      Home Office guidance relating to the seven year rule set  out  in  the
      IDIs under the title "Guidance on paragraph EX.1  -  consideration  of
      the child's best interests." He referred in particular to that part of
      the guidance which deals with a non-British citizen child who has been
      in the UK for more than seven years.


  40. The guidance recognises in respect of the seven  year  threshold  that
      over time children start to put down roots and integrate into life  in
      the UK to the extent that being  required  to  leave  the  UK  may  be
      unreasonable. The guidance instructs that "......you need to  consider
      whether in the  specific  circumstances  of  the  case,  it  would  be
      reasonable to expect the child to live in another  country.  You  will
      need to consider the facts for each child within that family, and  for
      the family in the round."


  41. He submitted that the  Judge  failed  to  consider  the  child's  best
      interests, in particular under s.55 of the  2009  Act.  He  relied  on
      authorities such as ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4, which requires
      a  proportionality  assessment  applying  the  child's  best  interest
      principle as a starting point. The next step is  to  consider  whether
      the best interests  are  outweighed  by  the  strength  of  any  other
      countervailing consideration.  Nor  should  a  parent's  "mistake"  be
      visited on a child.


  42. Mr Kannangara, who had also represented the appellant at the  hearing,
      stated that no  consideration  was  given  by  Judge  Martins  to  the
      decision in Azimi-Moayed and  others  (Decisions  affecting  children;
      onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 197 (IAC). The Judge had  also  failed  to
      consider the decision in JO and Others (s.55 duty) Nigeria [2014] UKUT
      00517 (IAC) where it was held that the duty imposed  by  s.55  of  the
      2009 Act requires the decision maker to be properly  informed  of  the
      position of a child  affected  by  the  discharge  of  an  immigration
      function. The decision maker must conduct a careful examination of all
      relevant information and factors.


  43. Being adequately informed and conducting  a  scrupulous  analysis  are
      elementary prerequisites to the inter related tasks of  identifying  a
      child's best interests and then balancing  them  with  other  material
      considerations.


  44. The question whether  the  duties  imposed  by  s.55  have  been  duly
      performed in any given case  will  invariably  be  an  intensely  fact
      sensitive and contextual one. In the real  world  of  litigation,  the
      tools available to the court or Tribunal considering the question will
      frequently be confined to the application or submission  made  to  the
      secretary of state and the ultimate letter of decision.


  45. Mr Kannangara also submitted that the Judge did not  consider  various
      letters from the  appellant's  mother,  brother,  sister  and  various
      friends produced from pages 66-88 of the bundle.


  46. On behalf of the respondent Ms Isherwood adopted the Rule 24  response
      in which the respondent contended  that  whether  viewed  through  the
      prism of Rule 276ADE(1)(iv) (private life of the  child)  or  that  of
      EX.1 of Appendix FM, or indeed under s.117B(6) of the  2002  Act,  the
      material test was one of reasonableness for the qualifying child.


  47. The IDI guidance relied  on  is  entirely  consistent  with  the  long
      established  understanding  of  "reasonableness"  referred  to  in  EB
      (Kosovo), the rule itself and EV (Philippines), supra.


  48. The Judge's analysis of the position of the child was consistent  with
      EV (Philippines) and Others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Cic 874 (CA).


  49. Moreover, a Judge is  entitled  to  consider  s.55  issues  themselves
      through the prism of proportionality, which this Judge did - MK  (s.55
      - Tribunal Options) [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC).


  50. Ms Isherwood submitted that that there had been no material  error  of
      law.  There was a reasoned decision which was  nine  pages  long.  The
      respondent's letter itself referred to the s.55 considerations.


  51. She submitted that the Judge was entitled to find that  the  appellant
      has had no basis to be in the UK for a very  significant  period.  The
      reasons for refusal letter had also referred at page 6 to the guidance
      relied on.


  52. She submitted that no alternative decision could  have  been  reached.
      The findings were open  to  the  Judge.  The  Judge  acknowledged  the
      evidence and letters of support but found  that  s.117B  (4)  required
      that little weight should be given to a private life established by  a
      person when that person is in the UK unlawfully.


  53.  At  [38]  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision,  the  Judge  has
      considered the second appellant's position. She has also  acknowledged
      the impact of a return to Jamaica on  the  child.  In  the  event  she
      submitted that there had been no material error of law.


  54. In reply, Mr Kannangara again submitted that the child was not  to  be
      visited with the "mistakes" of his mother. The child  was  almost  ten
      years old at the date of hearing.


     Assessment


  55. The Judge has set out and  considered  in  some  detail  the  evidence
      presented by the appellants,  including  the  appellant's  immigration
      history. She referred to the bundle of documents that  was  submitted,
      including the witness statements and letters of support  from  members
      of the family and friends, as well as  considering  letters  from  the
      appellants'  GPs  and  evidence  regarding  the   second   appellant's
      education in the UK  [17].  She  has  set  out  the  evidence  of  the
      appellant, her sister and Ms Adzam.


  56. The Judge has had regard to the  immigration  history  of  the  second
      appellant. In arriving at her finding that it was reasonable  for  the
      family to relocate to Jamaica, she has taken into account the facts as
      set out in the earlier paragraphs in support of her conclusions.


  57. I have had regard to the decision in EV (Philippines,  supra,  and  in
      particular to [35], [37] as well  as  the  comments  of  Lord  Justice
      Lewison at [49], where he stated that in the real world, the appellant
      is almost always the parent who has no right to remain in the UK.  The
      parent thus relies on the best interests of his  or  her  children  in
      order to "piggyback" on their rights.


  58. Lord Justice Lewison  noted that in  the  case  before  the  court  of
      appeal, as no doubt in many others, the Judge made two findings  about
      their best interests:


     a) The best interests of the children are  obviously  to  remain  with
        their parents; and


     b) It is in their best interests that education in the UK is not to be
        disrupted.


  59. At [58], Lord Justice Lewison stated that the assessment of  the  best
      interests of the children must be made on the basis that if one parent
      has no right to remain,  but  the  other  parent  does,  that  is  the
      background against which  the  assessment  is  conducted.  If  neither
      parent has the right to remain, it is the background against which the
      assessment is conducted.  Thus the ultimate question will  be,  is  it
      reasonable to expect the child to follow the parents with no right  to
      remain in the country of origin?


  60. I have also had regard to the  decision  in  Azimi-Moayed  and  others
      (Decisions affecting  children;  onward  appeals)  [2013]  UKUT  00197
      (IAC).


  61. It is correct as asserted by Mr Kannangara, that the Judge has not  in
      her decision expressly referred to the need to  consider  the  child's
      interests as a primary consideration.


  62. However,  it  is  necessary   to  consider  whether  as  a  matter  of
      substance, she has properly approached the assessment of  the  child's
      interests as a primary consideration. She has set out in  some  detail
      and has had regard to the evidence relating to the  second  appellant,
      including the fact that he was "some ten years of age" at the date  of
      the hearing. She acknowledged that he was born here and  that  he  has
      known no other life other than being here with his extended family.


  63. She had regard to the difficulties of adjustment that he would have on
      his return to Jamaica, a country which he does not know. Against  that
      he would be returning with his mother who had spent 25  years  of  her
      life there and who would be able to assist him. The  UK  family  would
      assist the appellants from the UK to settle in  Jamaica  as  they  had
      done in the UK.


  64. However, against  that  she  noted  that  neither  appellant  has  had
      permission to remain in the UK. They are both in good health.


  65. The Judge also properly considered as required to, the  provisions  of
      s.117B of the 2002 Act as amended.


  66. The Tribunal needs to assess the best interests  of  children  on  the
      basis of facts as they are in  the  real  world.  In  this  case,  the
      appellant had no right to remain. Accordingly, that is the  background
      against which the assessment is to be conducted. The ultimate question
      is whether it would be reasonable to expect  the  child  to  follow  a
      parent with no right to remain to Jamaica. The Judge bore in mind  the
      overall  factors  making  removal  of  the  child  reasonable  in  the
      circumstances.


  67. It is not contended that there was any significant factor, apart  from
      the fact that he had been here for almost  ten  years  throughout  his
      life, that had been left out of the account  relating  to  the  second
      appellant which affected her assessment of his interests in  returning
      to Jamaica.


  68. Although the First-tier Tribunal might have given  a  more  structured
      determination in respect of the second appellant's best  interests,  I
      am satisfied that she has in fact properly appreciated and  considered
      the significance of all the evidence relating to  their  circumstances
      in the UK.


  69. Having assessed the determination as a whole, I find  that  the  Judge
      has in substance considered the best interest of the child as required
      and has concluded that in the circumstances it would be reasonable for
      him to return to Jamaica  with  the  appellant.  Those  findings  were
      neither irrational nor perverse in any way. The Judge has given proper
      reasons for the conclusions reached.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
      any material error of law. The decision shall accordingly stand.


      No anonymity direction is made.


      Signed                             Date: 14 September 2015


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer




