
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  IA/33801/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Sent         |
|On 14th August 2013                             |On 16th September 2013     |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                             RAJA SHARAFAT KHAN
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     The Appellant in person
For the Respondent:    Mrs Petterson (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 2nd October  1972.   The
    Appellant appeals with permission against the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge  Howard)  who  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal
    against the decision of the Respondent made on 14th  November  2011  to
    refuse leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  based  on  human  rights
    grounds (Article 8) and to give directions for  his  removal  from  the
    United Kingdom.

 2. When this appeal was before  the  First  -tier  Tribunal  no  anonymity
    direction was  either made nor was sought by any of  the  parties.  The
    position has been the same    before  the  Upper  Tribunal.  This  case
    involves minors and for that reason  in  this  determination  they  are
    referred to by their initials as is their mother.

The Background to the Appeal

 3. The history of the appeal is as follows.  The Appellant was arrested by
    the South Yorkshire Police Service on 31st October 2010 on suspicion of
    assault and false imprisonment.  Following this on  1st  January  2011,
    the Appellant was interviewed by immigration officials and claimed that
    he had arrived in the United Kingdom in 1998 as  a  result  of  fearing
    persecution in his home country.  Following the Appellant's  subsequent
    release by  the  South  Yorkshire  Police  on  2nd  January  2011,  the
    Appellant was again encountered by immigration  officials  following  a
    visit to Sizzlers  Takeaway,  however,  no  further  action  was  taken
    against the Appellant due to his previous arrest on 31st December 2010.

 4. On 28th February 2011, a letter was sent to the  Appellant  by  the  UK
    Border Agency for him to attend an interview with immigration officials
    on 14th March 2011 to discuss his immigration position.  He attended on
    that day and claimed that he had arrived in the UK in January 1998.  He
    further claimed that he had not been  working  at  Sizzlers  Restaurant
    when encountered by the police.  He  also  claimed  that  he  had  left
    Pakistan  in  fear  of  his  life  and  had  previously  submitted   an
    application to the Home Office for asylum.  As regards his life in  the
    United Kingdom, he said that he was now estranged from his spouse,  MF,
    whom he claimed that he had married in an Islamic ceremony but that  he
    continued to maintain regular contact with her and the three  children.



 5. On 4th April 2011, the Appellant's solicitors submitted an  application
    on behalf of the Appellant under Article 8 of the ECHR on the basis  of
    his relationship with his three children living in the United  Kingdom.
    Those children are H S (6th June 2006), S S (25th May  2007)  and  M  S
    (25th January 2011).  It  was  also  stated  he  could  not  return  to
    Pakistan as he feared persecution in his home country.

 6.  On  2nd  September  2011,  the  UK  Border  Agency  requested  further
    information from the Appellant  regarding  his  relationship  with  the
    children as no  further  grounds  had  been  received  from  his  legal
    representatives.   The  UK  Border  Agency  also  notified  his   legal
    representatives that initial claims for international protection in the
    United Kingdom could not be made by post, but could  only  be  made  in
    person by the Appellant attending the Asylum Screening Unit in Croydon.
     He was given full instructions on how to lodge  such  an  application.
    No such application has been  made  by  this  Appellant  in  person  in
    respect of a claim for asylum.  Further material was  produced  by  the
    Appellant via his solicitors on 23rd September 2011 with regard to  the
    application made in April.  It was reiterated that  the  Appellant  had
    established a family life in the United Kingdom with his three children
    and that to remove him would be a breach of Article 8 of the ECHR.

 7. In a notice of immigration  decision  dated  14th  November  2011,  the
    Respondent refused  the  application  made  by  the  Appellant.   Those
    reasons were set out in a decision  letter  dated  14th  November.   In
    summary, the Respondent  was  not  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  had
    demonstrated that family life existed between  himself  and  his  three
    children or  that  he  had  established  family  life  with  any  other
    individuals.  In particular, the Respondent noted that there was little
    evidence of claimed contact between the Appellant and his children.  In
    order to maintain  contact  with  them,  he  would  have  submitted  an
    application for leave to remain on this basis sooner.  His  application
    was made only after he was  encountered  by  immigration  officials  in
    January  2011  whilst  his  eldest  child  had  been  born   in   2006.
    Accordingly it was considered that the timing of the submission of such
    an application after he had been apprehended  by  the  South  Yorkshire
    Police and served with notice of an IS151A in March 2011 undermined the
    overall credibility of his claims.  The Respondent also considered  his
    immigration history and did not accept that there was any record of  an
    application being lodged prior to  the  submission  stated  in  October
    2011.  The Respondent considered the Appellant's private life that  may
    have been established in the United Kingdom but after  considering  all
    of those matters, the Respondent refused the application.

 8. The Appellant exercised his right to appeal and the matter came  before
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Howard)  sitting  in  Bradford  on  19th
    December 2011.  The judge heard oral evidence from the  Appellant  only
    and set out a note of that evidence in pr�cis form at paragraphs 6-8 of
    the determination.  After considering the  evidence  in  this  case  he
    reached the conclusion that it had not been established that there  was
    family life in the United Kingdom between the Appellant and  the  three
    children nor that he had demonstrated that he  had  any  meaningful  or
    regular contact with those children in the United Kingdom.  Furthermore
    having considered the case in the light of the circumstances set out in
    paragraph 395C he found nothing  to  conclude  that  removal  would  be
    unlawful in this Appellant's case.

 9. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal that decision  and  such
    permission was granted on 30th January 2012 by the First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Nicholson).  The grant of permission reads as follows:-

         "The Appellant appealed on the grounds that the judge  had  ignored
         the law and not made a proper consideration of Article  8  on  'the
         case facts.'

         Although not raised in the Grounds of Appeal, it is  arguable  that
         the judge made errors of law in the following respects.

         (a)  The judge accepted that the Appellant is  the  father  of  the
             three minor children in this county.  In those  circumstances,
             it is arguable  that  the  judge  made  an  error  of  law  in
             asserting that  there  was  no  family  life  as  between  the
             Appellant and the children simply because  of  concerns  about
             contact  and  in  failing  to  consider  the  children's  best
             interests.  In Berrehab v The Netherlands [1989] 11  EHRR  322
             the European Court said  that  'the  concept  of  family  life
             embraces, even when there is no cohabitation, the tie  between
             the parent and his or her child ...'

         (b)  This finding arguably vitiates the  findings  under  paragraph
             395C of the Rules.

         4.   At paragraph 10 of the determination, the judge arguably erred
             in law in asserting that the relevant date  was  the  date  of
             decision,  albeit  that  he  appears   nonetheless   to   have
             considered the situation as at the date of hearing.

              Although I do not refuse permission on Grounds  2  to  8  they
             appear  to  be  no  more  than  an  attempt  to  re-argue  the
             evidence."

10. Thus the appeal came before the  Upper  Tribunal.   The  Appellant  was
    represented by Mr Medhurst (Counsel instructed on behalf of  Marks  and
    Marks Solicitors) and the Respondent  by  Mrs  Petterson  (Home  Office
    Presenting Officer).  I heard submissions for each of the advocates and
    reserved my decision on the error of law.  In a written decision I  set
    out my conclusions on the issues before the Tribunal.  There is annexed
    and marked as "Appendix 1" a copy of that decision.

11. The error of law was as follows:-

         "10. It is submitted on behalf of the  Appellant,  relying  on  the
             issues raised in the grant of permission rather  than  as  set
             out in the grounds of permission, that  the  judge  fell  into
             error by accepting that the Appellant was the father of  three
             minor children but that  there  was  no  family  life  due  to
             concerns of contact and not taking into account the children's
             best interests.  Mr Medhurst relies upon the case of  Berrehab
             v The Netherlands [1989] 11 EHRR 322 where  the  court  stated
             that "the concept of family life embraces, even when there  is
             no co-habitation, the tie between a  parent  and  his  or  her
             child ..." (see skeleton argument page 1 and  relied  upon  in
             oral submissions).  He further submits  the  judge  fell  into
             error by failing to consider Section 55 of the  2009  Act  and
             that the judge failed to follow the  guidance  given  by  Lady
             Hale in ZH (Tanzania) (as cited) in ascertaining the wishes of
             the children which may involve separate representation  or  at
             the very least some independent investigation.

         11.  I have considered those submissions  with  care.   Whilst  the
             European Court of Human  Rights  has  established  that,  from
             birth, a child has a  bond  with  his  or  her  parents  which
             amounts to "family life" which remains  in  existence  despite
             voluntary separation (see Sen v The Netherlands [2007] 36 EHRR
             7, (1996) Gul v Switzerland 22 EHRR 9).  However the  question
             which arose in this case before the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
             whether on the facts of this case family life  existed  within
             the meaning of Article 8(1).  This is a matter of fact for the
             judge to decide on the evidence presented by  this  Appellant.
             The judge had the opportunity to hear the oral evidence of the
             Appellant himself and for that to be  the  subject  of  cross-
             examination and to consider that evidence in  the  context  of
             the documentary evidence  also  produced.   He  gave  a  short
             pr�cis of the oral evidence before him at paragraphs 6 - 8  of
             the determination.

         12.  There is no dispute that the principles  to  be  applied  when
             considering a claim under Article 8 are those set out  in  the
             well-established five-stage test in R (Razgar) v  SSHD  [2009]
             1AC 1119.  The judge set out those principles at paragraphs 12
             to 15 of the determination.  He then set out  the  basis  upon
             which the issue of family life had been advanced on behalf  of
             the Appellant.  It is  important  to  set  out  those  factual
             findings that the judge made at paragraphs 16  to  17  of  the
             determination.  The judge said this:-

                  "16. The family life  advanced  here  is  predicated  upon
                      three core facts.  The first that he  is  married  to
                      MF.  The second that they have three children and the
                      third that they are in regular and meaningful contact
                      with one another.  The Appellant and MF met  in  2003
                      and married in 2005.  There is no document to support
                      the fact  of  the  marriage  and  the  'unregistered'
                      nature of the union is cited as a reason why they  do
                      not co-habit.  The Appellant is named as  the  father
                      on the birth certificates of the two older  children,
                      but  not  the  youngest.   Again  the  'unregistered'
                      status of the marriage is cited as  the  explanation.
                      I have evidence in photographic form of the Appellant
                      in company with a  woman  and  three  children  in  a
                      domestic  setting  and  a  letter  purporting  to  be
                      written by MF dated 9th  September  2011.   The  only
                      evidence that they are MF and the children comes from
                      the Appellant.   Ordinarily  that  would  not  be  of
                      concern, however given the absence of any input  from
                      her or those children in any other aspect of the case
                      causes concern on my part as to those actually in the
                      photographs and who wrote the letter.   He  has  also
                      produced some bills to show purchases by him  in  the
                      Slough area.  What is entirely absent in this case is
                      any evidence of contact between the Appellant and his
                      family.  I have nothing from either the mother of the
                      children or the children themselves to say what their
                      relationship with  the  Appellant  is.   As  for  the
                      Appellant his evidence of contact with his family  is
                      wholly unconvincing.  He lives miles away  from  them
                      when there is no real bar to his living much  closer.
                      There is not a single document  which  evidences  any
                      involvement in the children's welfare  or  education.
                      Evidence of any involvement in their collective  life
                      on the part of the Appellant is absent.  In short the
                      Appellant has failed to satisfy me it is more  likely
                      than not that he currently has any family  life  with
                      MF and the three children.  The most I  can  conclude
                      from the evidence is that  in  the  recent  past  the
                      Appellant has been in a relationship  with  her  that
                      has borne her three children.

                  17.  It is against this factual  background  that  I  must
                      decide whether the decision  of  the  Respondent  was
                      proportionate and therefore lawful.  I  am  satisfied
                      the decision of the Respondent does not interfere  in
                      the Appellant's family life, as the Appellant has not
                      satisfied me that there is any family life."

         13.  It had been the Respondent's case (as set out in the  decision
             letter of 14th November 2011) that the evidence  produced  did
             not demonstrate that  the  Appellant  maintained  a  level  of
             contact with the three children  as  claimed  citing  concerns
             regarding the content of a short letter  purportedly  sent  by
             the mother of the children and that there was no other  cogent
             evidence of contact with the children either  from  themselves
             or from relatives of the children/mother.   Thus  it  was  not
             accepted  that  the  evidence   demonstrated   that   he   had
             established close and frequent contact with  the  children  as
             claimed.  The Respondent  also  relied  upon  his  immigration
             history citing the point that if he had  genuinely  wished  to
             remain in the UK for the children then he would have submitted
             an application for leave to remain on that basis before  being
             encountered by immigration officials in March 2011 (the eldest
             child having been  born  in  2006).   The  submission  of  the
             application  only  after  being  apprehended  by  the   police
             undermined the overall credibility of his claimed family life.

         14.  The  judge  considered  the  "three  core  facts"  which  were
             advanced on behalf of  the  Appellant  before  the  First-tier
             Tribunal.  As to the first fact, that he was marred to MF, the
             judge considered the oral evidence given by the  Appellant  in
             which he had claimed that he and his  wife  did  not  co-habit
             because of the "unregistered nature of that union."   This  is
             also the explanation given as to why he  named  on  the  birth
             certificate of the eldest two children but not  the  youngest.
             The judge found as  a  fact  that  there  was  no  documentary
             evidence to support the Appellant's evidence  of  there  being
             such a marriage or the "unregistered"  nature  of  the  union.
             However in respect of the second core fact  he  accepted  that
             the Appellant was the father of the three children  concerned.
             In respect of the third core fact "that the  children  are  in
             regular and meaningful contact with  the  father,"  the  judge
             considered the evidence before the Tribunal.   That  consisted
             of  the  oral  evidence  of  the  Appellant,  the  photographs
             produced, copy bills/receipts produced and the letter from  MF
             dated 9th September 2011.   As  regards  the  cogency  of  the
             photographic evidence, he  noted  that  "I  have  evidence  in
             photographic form of the Appellant in company with a woman and
             three children in a domestic setting and a  letter  purporting
             to be written by  MF  dated  9th  September  2011.   The  only
             evidence that they are MF and  the  children  comes  from  the
             Appellant.  Ordinarily that would not be of  concern,  however
             given the absence of any input from her or those  children  in
             any other aspect of the case causes concern on my part  as  to
             those actually in the photographs and who wrote  the  letter."
             He gave consideration to the receipt/bills  produced  to  show
             purchases in  the  Slough  area.   Those  bills  were  in  the
             Appellant's bundle; some were undated (tasting  hut).   Others
             related to food bills, a car phone  warehouse,  receipts  from
             2011).  However the judge  found  that  the  most  significant
             feature in his analysis  of  the  evidence  was  a  dearth  of
             evidence concerning contact  between  the  Appellant  and  the
             children.  As the judge noted;-

                  "What is entirely absent in this case is any  evidence  of
                  contact between the Appellant  and  his  family.   I  have
                  nothing from either the mother  of  the  children  or  the
                  children themselves to say what  their  relationship  with
                  the Appellant is.  ...  There is  not  a  single  document
                  which evidences any involvement in the children's  welfare
                  or  education.   Evidence  of  any  involvement  in  their
                  collective life on the part of the Appellant is absent."

                  The judge went  on  to  find  that  the  evidence  of  the
                  Appellant himself was "unconvincing" and importantly there
                  was not a single document which evidenced any  involvement
                  in the children's welfare or education and  that  evidence
                  of any involvement on the Appellant's part was absent from
                  their collective life.  It was  on  this  basis  that  the
                  judge, whilst accepting that in the  recent  past  he  had
                  been in a relationship with MF and  she  had  borne  three
                  children, that was not the current position  and  that  he
                  currently had no  family  life  with  MF  or  those  three
                  children.

         15.  I have considered with care those  findings  of  fact  in  the
             light of the evidence that was produced before the  First-tier
             Tribunal.  I am satisfied that those  findings  of  fact  were
             made on the basis of all the  evidence  that  was  before  the
             First-tier Tribunal and I am equally satisfied that the  judge
             in reaching those conclusions, which were adequately reasoned,
             were ones that were entirely open to him on the evidence.  The
             grounds submitted on the Appellant's behalf  in  this  respect
             amount to no more than a  disagreement  with  the  conclusions
             that the judge reached having had the opportunity to hear  the
             oral evidence of the Appellant and against the  background  of
             the documentary evidence produced.

         16.  In considering this appeal I  have  also  borne  in  mind  the
             decision of MA (Somalia) [2010] UKSC  49  in  which  Sir  John
             Dyson SCJ at paragraph 43 reiterated the remarks  of  Baroness
             Hale in AH (Sudan) v SSHD UKHL [2008] 1AC  678  in  which  she
             urged caution  upon  the  part  of  Appellate  Tribunals  when
             dealing with decisions of the lower courts.  At  paragraph  45
             Sir John Dyson stated:-

                  "The court should not be  astute  to  characterise  as  an
                  error  of  law  what,  in  truth,  is  no  more   than   a
                  disagreement with  the  AIT's  assessment  of  the  facts.
                  Moreover,  where  a  relevant  point  is   not   expressly
                  mentioned by the Tribunal, the court will be slow to infer
                  that it has not been taken into account."

         17.  The judge did not make specific reference to Section 55 of the
             Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.   That  section
             came into force on 2nd November 2009 and the  decision  in  ZH
             (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4 explains the duty imposed by  Section
             55.  In the decision TS [2010] the duty under  Section  55  is
             described as thus:-

                  "To safeguard and promote the welfare of children who  are
                  in the UK.  Guidance  was  issued  entitled  'every  child
                  matters' stating, 'in accordance with the UN Convention on
                  the rights of the child the best interests  of  the  child
                  will be a primary consideration (although not  necessarily
                  the only consideration) when  making  decisions  affecting
                  children."

         18.  In the light of the decision  of  ZH  (Tanzania)  it  is  more
             accurate to say that the best  interests  of  the  child  will
             always be a primary consideration, but  that  those  interests
             may  be  outweighed  by  other  considerations.    Lady   Hale
             emphasised "a primary consideration" is not the same thing  as
             the 'paramount consideration' as found within the Children Act
             1989."  The Respondent in the decision letter of 14th November
             2011 had made reference to Section  55  of  the  2009  Act  at
             paragraph  33.   Whilst  the  judge  did  not  make   specific
             reference to that section,  in  the  decision  of  AJ  (India)
             [2011] EWCA Civ 1191 Pil LJ  stated  that  the  absence  of  a
             reference to Section 55(1) is not fatal to a decision.   "What
             matters is  the  substance  of  the  attention  given  to  the
             'overall wellbeing' (Baroness Hale) of the child."

         19.  The primacy of the interests of the child should be considered
             in the context of the  particular  family  circumstances.   Mr
             Medhurst submits that the judge fell into error by not  having
             in  mind  the  primary  interests  of  the  children  and   in
             particular that he did not ascertain the wishes  and  feelings
             of the children  concerned  in  this  case  as  identified  by
             Baroness  Hale  in  ZH  (Tanzania).   I  have  considered  the
             evidence submitted on behalf of the Appellant before the First-
             tier Tribunal which was his  opportunity  to  put  before  the
             judge all the evidence relevant to  the  application  made  to
             remain in the United Kingdom  on  Article  8  grounds  and  in
             particular his claim that he had established family life  with
             his three children with whom he enjoyed a relationship and one
             of meaningful contact.  It is clear in my  judgment  that  the
             First-tier Tribunal focused upon the interest of the  children
             concerned   but   reached   the   conclusion   after   careful
             consideration of the evidence produced before  the  First-tier
             Tribunal that there was a dearth of evidence relating  to  the
             issue of  meaningful  contact  and  the  relationship  between
             father and children.  The Appellant  had  the  opportunity  to
             provide evidence in this application to support his account of
             his relationship with the children.  The time to present  that
             evidence was  before  the  First  Tier  Tribunal.   The  judge
             identified, rightly in my judgment, that he  had  no  evidence
             from the children themselves or from their primary carer MF to
             even begin  to  ascertain  the  wishes  and  feelings  of  the
             children (I refer  to  paragraph  16  of  the  determination).
             Whilst Mr Medhurst submits that the judge should have  ordered
             separate representation for the children,  there  was  nothing
             upon which the judge could even  base  such  a  process.   The
             burden of proof is on the Appellant to produce the evidence to
             the  Tribunal  and  the  judge  clearly  identified  what   he
             considered to be  significant  evidence  which  had  not  been
             produced.  He specifically identified  that  absent  from  the
             case was evidence of contact between  the  Appellant  and  the
             children  and  in  particular  nothing   from   the   children
             themselves or their mother describing the relationship between
             themselves and their father.  Importantly the judge identified
             that there was not "a  single  document  which  evidences  any
             involvement in the children's welfare or  education."   Having
             considered the bundle of documents, there is no evidence  from
             their schools, any evidence from the mother as to the part  he
             plays in their welfare, there is nothing in his  statement  as
             regards specific evidence of their welfare.  In the  light  of
             the dearth of such evidence dealing with the matter that  went
             to the heart of the  issue,  in  my  judgment  the  judge  was
             entitled to reach the finding that he did that whilst  he  had
             in the past been in a relationship with MF and three  children
             had been born, he was not currently  enjoying  a  family  life
             with them and that he had not discharged the burden  upon  him
             to demonstrate  that  he  had  maintained  any  meaningful  or
             regular contact with those children.  In those circumstances I
             am satisfied that  the  judge  did  not  err  in  law  in  his
             consideration of the issue of family life under Article  8  of
             the ECHR.

         20.  The second point raised relates to the judge's failure to deal
             with the Appellant's private life.  Mr Medhurst  submits  that
             despite the Appellant being resident in the  UK  for  fourteen
             years and having provided evidence before the  judge  in  this
             regard, the First-tier Tribunal did not deal with  this  issue
             at all.  Miss Pettersen  submits  that  whilst  there  was  no
             reference to this in the determination, the  case  was  really
             advanced only on  the  basis  of  his  family  life  with  the
             children and thus there was no error of law.

         21.  I have considered  those  submissions  in  the  light  of  the
             determination of the First-tier Tribunal.  The decision letter
             of the Respondent deals with the issue of  private  life,  (as
             distinct from the family life arguments raised) at  paragraphs
             30 to 32 of the decision letter.  Whilst it is submitted  that
             the Appellant had been in the UK for  fourteen  years,  it  is
             clear that there was a dispute between  the  parties  and  the
             Respondent clearly identified this  dispute  in  the  lack  of
             acceptance that the Appellant had been resident in the UK  for
             that period of time citing the lack of  evidence  relating  to
             this and the fact that in 2002 a passport was issued  to  this
             Appellant in Mirpur, Pakistan on 29th  March  2002  which  was
             inconsistent with his claim to have entered the UK in  January
             1998.  Furthermore, his immigration history  was  referred  to
             and  that  there  was  no  evidence  that  he  had  made   any
             application to remain in the UK prior to being apprehended  in
             March 2011.

         22.  The Appellant had produced letters  from  solicitors  in  this
             respect and also letters from friends concerning the nature of
             the private  life  that  he  had  established.   However,  the
             determination of the First-tier Tribunal did not deal with any
             of those issues and there was no reference to the private life
             of the Appellant whatsoever.  The judge did  not  resolve  any
             issues of fact relating to the length of time that he had been
             in the UK nor the issue of  delay  raised  on  behalf  of  the
             Appellant based on the disclosure of albeit  limited  evidence
             from legal representatives that he  had  made  an  application
             before that in March  2011.   In  those  circumstances,  I  am
             satisfied that the judge made an error by not dealing with the
             aspect  of  the  Appellant's  private  life  raised  by   him.
             Consequently, there will be a resumed hearing  in  respect  of
             this issue only.  For the foregoing reasons, I  have  set  out
             that I am satisfied that the judge made no  error  of  law  in
             considering the issue of family life for the reasons given and
             therefore the findings of fact made by the First-tier Tribunal
             and that part of the decision  shall  stand.   Whilst  in  the
             skeleton argument it is submitted  that  the  case  should  be
             "remitted for a  separate  full  hearing  on  the  merits,"  I
             consider that the decision requires to be re-made dealing with
             the issue in which the error of  law  has  been  demonstrated,
             namely the issue of the Appellant's private life.  Therefore a
             hearing will take place in accordance  with  the  accompanying
             directions."

The Resumed Hearing:

12. The resumed hearing was listed  on  the  20th  February  2013  but  the
    hearing was adjourned as Counsel, Mr Lams, was unable  to  travel  from
    London due to transport problems.

13. The matter was listed on the 27th  June  2013.   At  this  hearing  the
    Appellant was represented by Mr Lams.  At that hearing, Mr Lams  stated
    that he had not seen the decision that been issued concerning the error
    of law and the ambit of the resumed hearing.  In those circumstances he
    sought further time to take instructions.   Upon  further  enquiry,  Mr
    Lams stated that there was further evidence that  the  Appellant  would
    wish to place before the Tribunal that had not been the subject of  any
    Rule 15(2A) Notice nor had that evidence been disclosed to the Tribunal
    or  the  Secretary  of  State.   That  evidence  consisted  of  further
    photographs and video clips relating to the children and phone calls on
    his telephone.  Mr Lams could not provide any dates for  that  evidence
    or any further details of it.  Having taking instructions, he requested
    an adjournment for that information to be ascertained and that he would
    wish to address the issue of the public statement  and  the  difference
    between the two letters  and  would  require  the  opportunity  to  put
    forward further evidence  concerning  the  issue  of  the  relationship
    between the children and the Appellant.

14. Mr Lams submitted that whilst the Tribunal had only found an  error  of
    law in respect of the issue of private life and that the Upper Tribunal
    had found the First-tier Tribunal's decision was sound  concerning  the
    issue of the family life between the Appellant, his former partner  and
    children, the Tribunal  still  retained  jurisdiction  at  the  resumed
    hearing to reopen the issue concerning contact with  the  children  and
    hear further  evidence  concerning  that  relationship.   Having  taken
    instructions, the Appellant had further evidence that he would wish  to
    provide in this respect but had not been produced.

15. Having considered the ambit of the proceedings and the submissions made
    by Mr Lams, I considered that it would be open to the Tribunal to  hear
    further evidence concerning the Appellant's family life  (children)  as
    it seemed to me that it would be artificial to consider  the  issue  of
    private life without considering the  Appellant's  ability  to  have  a
    relationship with others and that would include those of the  children.
    I made it clear to the parties that  the  findings  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal would remain and that I would have to  consider  any  evidence
    produced post-dating that  determination  concerning  the  relationship
    between the Appellant and the children.

16. Mr Diwnycz submitted that he was not in a position to  go  ahead  given
    what was said about the public statement and  sought  further  time  to
    take instructions on the public statement.

17. I observed that it was regrettable that despite this case  having  been
    listed  that   Counsel  had  not  been  provided   with   the   correct
    documentation.  In any event, it now appeared that  neither  side  were
    ready and in the interests of justice the matter would be adjourned  to
    be relisted on a future date.

The Hearing on the 14th August:

18. Thus the appeal was  listed  on  14th  August.   At  this  hearing  the
    Appellant appeared unrepresented.  The Respondent  was  represented  by
    Mrs Petterson, Home Office  Presenting  Officer.   In  the  intervening
    period,  despite  directions  being   served   upon   the   Appellant's
    solicitors, no Rule 15(2A) Notice had been served.  There was a  letter
    sent to the Tribunal that the Appellant would be  representing  himself
    before the Tribunal.  However no documentation or  Rule  15(2A)  Notice
    was served with that letter nor  was  there  any  compliance  with  the
    directions.

The Evidence:

19. The Appellant produced to the court a handwritten letter accompanied by
    some documentation in a  bundle  dated  24th  July  2013.   The  bundle
    consisted of an album of photographs, a DVD  which  was  said  to  have
    video clips on it, a letter  from  Howells  Solicitors  relating  to  a
    contact application to be made, some new receipts, and telephone bills,
    an amended copy of a birth certificate.

20. As the Appellant was unrepresented, and despite there having  being  no
    compliance with the directions in this case, I considered that  it  was
    in the interests of justice to consider those documents.  Mrs Petterson
    had a copy of them and had the opportunity to read  them.   As  regards
    the video clips which had been taken from a mobile phone, they had been
    a subject of some discussion at the last court hearing when it was made
    clear that a transcript and summary of such material should be provided
    in the event that the Appellant sought to rely upon  it.   Despite  the
    bundle of documents that the Appellant himself provided, that  had  not
    been complied with and  there  was  simply  a  DVD.   Nonetheless,  the
    Tribunal did view that DVD/CD which had some clips  upon  it.   I  will
    refer to that evidence in due course.

21. As to other evidence before the Tribunal, the original bundle that  had
    been placed before the First-tier Tribunal remained on file as did  the
    bundle of documentation produced for  the  application  for  permission
    under cover of a letter dated 12th November 2012 which had documents up
    to 250 pages including a statement of the Appellant.

22. On behalf of the Respondent, a further letter  had  been  served  along
    with a Rule 15(2A)  Notice  which  was  a  witness  statement  from  an
    Immigration  Officer  from  the  Enforcement  Team  who   had   had   a
    conversation with MF.  The circumstances of that conversation  and  the
    evidence in respect of that were set out  in  a  Criminal  Justice  Act
    witness  statement.   The  Respondent  also  relied  upon  the  earlier
    Respondent's bundle that was in the Tribunal  file  and  a  copy  of  a
    public statement made by MF.

23. As the Appellant was unrepresented, I ensured that he could  understand
    the court interpreter Mr Mohammed Maroof and that they were speaking in
    the Urdu language.  I was satisfied from questions asked  to  both  the
    interpreter and the Appellant that they both understood each other  and
    that throughout the proceedings that continued to be the  position  and
    it was not brought to my attention at any  time  that  there  were  any
    problems with the interpretation.

24. I also ensured that the procedure that would be adopted  was  explained
    to the Appellant at each stage of the  proceedings  in  order  that  he
    could play a full and active part in them.  When the Presenting Officer
    gave her submissions, I ensured that she gave those  submissions  at  a
    slow pace to enable the  interpreter  to  interpret  those  submissions
    fully and also gave Mr Khan the opportunity  to  make  notes  of  those
    submissions which he did in order to  assist  him  in  making  his  own
    submissions or summary at the conclusion of the case.

25. The Appellant confirmed that the statement that he had given previously
    in the proceedings at pages 14 to 18(a) was correct and  truthful  when
    he made the statement.  He  confirmed  that  there  was  no  up-to-date
    statement.  In respect of the letter in the  most  recent  bundle  from
    Howells Solicitors  dated  22nd  July,  he  stated  that  he  had  seen
    solicitors for the first time on 15th July 2013 to make an  application
    for contact to the children.  He said that he  had  waited  until  22nd
    July to make the application.  He said that he was in  regular  contact
    with his wife and children but that there was certain pressures on  the
    family if  they  continued  to  see  him.   He  said  that  there  were
    "financial" measures in place that would be taken  away  and  pressures
    had been placed on the wife from professionals working with the family.
     When asked to describe the professionals who  were  working  with  the
    family, the Appellant stated that  they  were  the  "social  services".
    When asked why the social services were working  with  the  family,  he
    said "I don't know why they are involved".  He said that he  knew  that
    social services were involved because "my wife tells me everything  and
    she had told me".  He said that she had told him that  social  services
    had said that if he stayed with the family the likelihood was that they
    would take the children away from her.  When asked why  that  had  been
    said, he said "I am not permitted to work  and  I  cannot  support  the
    family and there are financial measures that will be taken away  but  I
    do support the children".  When asked  to  explain  further  about  the
    claim that he made that the social services were going to take away the
    children, he said that his wife herself did not know  the  reasons  why
    they would take the children away but they  would  not  let  them  live
    together.

26. The Appellant was asked to give a history in his own  words  concerning
    the relationship with his wife and when or if they had ever  separated.
    The evidence from the Appellant was that they had never  separated  but
    she lived in Slough and he lived in Sheffield and he confirmed that  he
    was still in a relationship with his wife and it had never  ended.   He
    said that he had contact with the children.  There was  no  arrangement
    in place but he would get the coach from Sheffield to London.  He  says
    he would have contact when it was feasible for both of them but that he
    is now going through the court because the judge  had  said  previously
    that there was no contact and he wanted to show that there was contact.
     When asked why there was no evidence from his wife about  contact  the
    Appellant claimed that  she  was  fearful  of  providing  any  evidence
    because of the social services.

27. In respect of the bundle of photographs, they had already been produced
    previously in the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal.  He  invited
    the court to look at the first photographs and confirmed  that  he  had
    not dated any of them.  The first few were pictures in a park.  He said
    they were taken two or three  months  ago.   One  of  them  showed  the
    Appellant holding a baby and he said the baby was born on 15th  January
    2010.  When asked how that picture could have been taken two  or  three
    months ago when the baby was born in 2010, he changed his  evidence  to
    say that in fact the pictures were not taken two to  three  months  ago
    and therefore must have been taken some time soon after  January  2010.
    Other photographs taken of the Appellant's eldest daughter he said were
    taken in 2007.

28. In respect of the telephone bills, he said that they had been  produced
    to show that they were in regular contact.  He confirmed that there was
    no independent evidence to show his wife's mobile telephone number.  He
    said that she had had a particular mobile number since August 2012  but
    before that he could not remember what kind of phone  she  had  or  her
    number.

29. As to receipts, he referred to a receipt for April 2013 for Argos which
    showed a washing machine.  He said that he bought that to give  to  the
    family because their washing machine had stopped working.   In  respect
    of the job offer that was in the bundle, (a job  offer  from  the  same
    potential employer had been provided in 2010) he said that he had  been
    offered administrative work stating that he knew a number of  languages
    and that students coming from overseas would have problems and he would
    be able to interpret for them.  He said he  had  no  qualifications  in
    interpretation but he could do that work.

30. The Appellant was asked to provide reasons in his own words as  to  why
    he wished to stay in the United Kingdom.  The Appellant  said  that  he
    had come to the United Kingdom fearful of his life and that he now  had
    three children and a wife and wished to remain.  He said he had nothing
    left in his homeland having brought all his assets with him.   He  said
    that he had bought a house in Sheffield and if he was permitted to work
    he would do so and support the family.  He did not want to  be  reliant
    on public funds.

31. In cross-examination he was asked about his claim for  asylum  in  1998
    which he said he had made.  He was asked if he had  gone  to  the  Home
    Office to make the application or to  the  solicitors.   The  Appellant
    said that he had gone to the solicitors.  It was put to him  that  when
    his solicitors had submitted original Grounds of Appeal (page  240)  it
    is stated that he had claimed asylum on arrival  at  Gatwick.   He  was
    asked which was the correct version. The Appellant denied ever applying
    for asylum on arrival and that the first thing he said he  did  was  to
    see his solicitors.  The Appellant was asked about  the  birth  of  his
    daughter, he claimed that he was present at the birth of  his  daughter
    and present at the birth of his son and  pointed  to  a  photograph  of
    January 2010.  He  was  asked  about  his  evidence  concerning  social
    services and when they had first become  involved  with  his  wife  and
    children.  He said that they had first become involved  in  March  2011
    when he started proceedings  for  this  case  and  an  application  for
    Article 8.  He was asked why the social services had  become  involved.
    He said "I do not know the  reasons  why".   He  was  asked  about  the
    children who were living in Slough.  He said for the past two years  he
    had gone to visit but did not stay overnight.  He was asked when he did
    stop living in Slough and he said at the end of 2011.

32. In respect of the Argos receipt for a washing machine,  he  was  asked,
    why if it was for his family it was delivered to Sheffield and  not  to
    Slough.  The Appellant claimed that he had gone to the Argos store  and
    asked them to deliver it to Slough but they could  not  so  he  had  to
    deliver it himself.  It was put to him that he would be able  to  order
    it from Argos in Slough if that was the real  problem.   The  Appellant
    claimed that he had ordered it but it would take a few days to  deliver
    it as the family lived in a tower  block  he  would  have  to  put  the
    machine on and know that it was done right.  When asked how long it was
    taken to install, he said he bought it on 2nd July but he  did  not  go
    until 18th July to deliver it.  It was put to him that the reason  that
    he had given delivering to Sheffield was to save time but that that was
    not supported by his account that he had waited two weeks before he had
    taken it.

33. In terms of the length of time that he had been in the  United  Kingdom
    he was asked about the passport application that he had made in  Mirpur
    in 2002.  It was put to him that when he was interviewed about this and
    how a passport had been issued to  him  in  Pakistan  if  he  had  been
    resident in the UK since 1998, he  was  unable  to  answer  this.   The
    Appellant said that that was not accurate.  He said that he did give an
    answer and that he was present in the UK  but  the  solicitor  said  he
    needed a valid passport because he could not make an application so  he
    got a friend in Pakistan to make an application for a passport  on  his
    behalf.

34. The Appellant was then asked about the letter dated 9th September  2011
    which purportedly supported his application.  It was put  to  him  that
    the new evidence taken from the Immigration Officer  which  recorded  a
    conversation between MF and the Immigration Officer  demonstrated  that
    she had never written that letter.  He was therefore asked why  he  was
    claiming the relationship was subsisting?  The Appellant said that that
    letter was written under duress and by fear of threats that  she  would
    lose her children.  He was asked who had put his wife under duress  and
    he claimed that it was pressure from the social services and that there
    were other people present on  that  occasion.   When  asked  who  those
    people were, he said that she was crying but she did not know who  they
    were those people with the social services but  he  thought  that  they
    were from the same department.  He was also asked about the letter that
    she had written to the Home Office by way  of  a  public  statement  in
    2012.  He stated that that letter was also made under  duress  for  the
    fear of losing her children and the council house that  she  lived  in.
    He was asked why that would mean she would lose her house and  children
    but the Appellant said that he did not know the reason and claimed that
    there was an occasion when social services had stayed until midnight to
    see if he was coming and this happened just a month ago.

35. The CD that the Appellant had produced had not  been  served  upon  the
    Home Office.   Mrs  Petterson  sought  for  that  evidence  not  to  be
    admitted.  I asked the Appellant what was on the CD/DVD.  He said  that
    there was evidence of him and his wife collecting the children in 2010.
     When asked what the latest date was in 2010, the Appellant  then  said
    it was not just 2010 but 2011.  He then stated that  the  evidence  was
    from 2012 and that there were  seven  clips  in  total  showing  recent
    evidence.

36. I noted that the CD/DVD had not been served upon the Respondent  but  I
    considered that that was  evidence  that  was  relevant  and  that  the
    Tribunal could view it as it was not lengthy.  The CD/DVD consisted  of
    some clips which were taken from, I understand, the Appellant's  mobile
    phone.  The first clip showed the Appellant driving a car.  He  claimed
    that this was taken in 2010 and it showed him and his wife.   He  could
    not remember when in 2010 whether May  or  June  but  he  had  gone  to
    collect the children from school.  The second  clip  was  the  children
    being brought to Sheffield in 2009.  The  third  clip  shows  that  the
    Appellant claimed was taken in 2011 showing his youngest son.  He  said
    that it was taken probably before March 2011.  When asked what made him
    say it was March 2011, he said he remembered because he had come to see
    him.  The last clips were also taken of the young son in  the  bedroom.
    Whilst he claimed that he was not sure if it was taken on the same day,
    it is abundantly clear from those clips that they were all taken on the
    same day as it shows the woman with the child wearing the same  clothes
    on all three clips.  The child also was wearing the same  clothing  and
    it was taken in the same place.  That was the evidence from the CD/DVD.



The Submissions:

37. At the conclusion of the evidence I heard submissions from each of  the
    parties.  Mrs Petterson on behalf of the Respondent submitted that this
    Appellant had not been a credible witness  and  that  the  explanations
    that he had given in his evidence as to why the letters from  his  wife
    were made under duress and pressure from the social services to  ensure
    that he did not have contact with  them,  were  not  supported  by  any
    evidence nor had any such claim been made before in  the  previous  two
    years of the proceedings.  She invited the Tribunal to place weight  on
    the Immigration Officer's statement and the fact that  MF  had  made  a
    public statement in 2012 stating  that  the  relationship  between  the
    Appellant and children was not subsisting and referred to  his  violent
    behaviour.  Both those documents, which are  recent,  demonstrate  that
    there is no relationship either with  her  despite  his  claim  in  the
    evidence today nor with the children.  The evidence  provided  did  not
    demonstrate that he had any meaningful relationship with the  children.
    None of the  photographs  are  particularly  recent  and  there  is  no
    independent evidence that they are of the  Appellant's  former  partner
    and children.  The  photographs  were  not  dated.   His  claim  to  be
    pursuing contact has now been made in July 2013 and has  been  made  in
    order to delay his removal.  His explanation as to why he  had  delayed
    stating that it  was  because  of  the  difficulties  with  the  social
    services, his evidence was that he had known  about  this  since  March
    2011 thus it had been open to him to go through the courts  at  a  much
    earlier date.  This would  give  the  court  an  opportunity  of  clear
    reasons as to why he could not live in the same house as  the  children
    and partner.  Nonetheless there is no evidence  before  this  court  to
    support this claim concerning the social services and  the  claim  that
    the partner was coerced into  the  writing  of  the  letter  should  be
    disbelieved.

38. She submitted that any  family  life  with  the  children  is  entirely
    tenuous.  Although now he is attempting to go to the family  court,  he
    has been on notice since 2011 that he has not been allowed to  see  his
    wife and children but has not taken any opportunity to  do  that,  thus
    having now applied two years down the line adds little credence to  his
    claim that he wants to be in the UK with his children.  Whilst  it  was
    submitted there was no family life between the father and the  children
    or in the alternative, any removal would be proportionate.  There would
    be nothing to prevent him from proceeding with contact proceedings  out
    of country or to apply for entry clearance as the father of  a  settled
    child.

39. As to his private life, the  evidence  does  not  demonstrate  that  he
    arrived in 1998.  There  was  considerable  doubt  about  the  date  of
    arrival.  His evidence was inconsistent and has been unbelievable.   He
    claimed asylum at the airport but  now  claims  that  he  applied  with
    solicitors.  There is no record of him making  any  claim  until  April
    2011.  He did not surface until he was arrested in 2011.  He would  not
    have met the fourteen year threshold in any event  because  the  "clock
    stopped" in 2011.  He would not meet the new Rules either  relating  to
    private life as he did not meet  the  twenty  year  threshold  and  the
    doubts that he severed all ties with Pakistan.  The private life is not
    significant.  The letters from the friends,  although  have  not  given
    oral evidence, do not demonstrate deep strong friendships that outweigh
    the  proper  operation  of  immigration  control.   There  is   nothing
    exceptional compassionate circumstances as to why he could  not  return
    back to Pakistan and establish his private life there.   Therefore  the
    application should fail.

40. Mr Khan was provided with notepaper so that he  could  make  any  notes
    during Mrs Petterson's summary of the evidence.  Having done so he made
    the following oral submissions from those notes.  He said that  he  has
    always provided evidence that he was involved with  the  children.   He
    said that the first Immigration Judge said that he was not named on the
    third birth certificate.  He therefore went and got  himself  named  on
    the birth certificate.  He therefore submitted that he was  seeing  his
    wife and that the birth certificates  were  evidence  that  he  was  in
    contact with the children.  He said that he was telling the truth.   He
    submitted that he and his wife  had  got  into  an  argument  that  the
    neighbours had called the police and his wife had  then  withdrawn  the
    complaint that that not a reason why he could not see the children.  He
    said that the argument had taken place at the beginning  of  2011.   He
    said that he had not been properly represented and had  not  been  made
    aware that certain things needed to be done.   He  could  not  get  the
    CD/DVD transcribed as it would cost extra  money.   He  submitted  that
    whilst it had been said there were no compelling circumstances, that if
    he were removed from the UK it would affect his children and they  have
    not been asked how they would feel if their father  left  the  country.
    He said he came to the UK because he feared for his life if he was made
    to return to Pakistan.  He said that he  had  been  told  that  he  had
    obtained fourteen years' residency and therefore he could stay  in  the
    United Kingdom and would wish to do so.  Even if there was a  shortfall
    it was a very long time to be in the United Kingdom.  He  said  he  had
    never been a burden on the state and had been  present  in  the  United
    Kingdom and had contributed by bringing assets with him.   He  said  he
    had never worked illegally in the UK.  He further  submitted  that  his
    children were very long and not been asked how they feel  and  that  he
    should remain in the country until the  contact  application  had  been
    heard.  Whilst it was said he could  leave  the  country  and  make  an
    application if that was made  he  would  never  be  able  to  meet  the
    financial requirements.  He said that he had  brought  all  his  assets
    with him to the United Kingdom and therefore he  could  not  return  to
    Pakistan and stay there.  He said that he fled from the ISI in Pakistan
    (the internal police  forces)  and  if  made  to  return  he  would  be
    apprehended by the ISA and there are 900 cases  of  missing  people  in
    Pakistan.  He had come to seek safety for his life and  would  like  an
    opportunity to do so.

41. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision.

Assessment of the Evidence and Findings of Fact

42. It is plain from my earlier decision relating to the  determination  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Howard) who heard  this  Appellant  give
    evidence and considered the documents produced on his behalf, that  the
    findings of fact made were ones entirely open to him upon the  evidence
    that was before him.  The judge's findings are set out at paragraphs 16
    to 17 of that determination.  They are as follows:

         "16. The family life advanced here is predicated  upon  three  core
             facts.  The first that he is married to MF.  The  second  that
             they have three children  and  the  third  that  they  are  in
             regular  and  meaningful  contact  with  one   another.    The
             Appellant and MF met in 2003 and married in 2005.  There is no
             document  to  support  the  fact  of  the  marriage  and   the
             'unregistered' nature of the union is cited as  a  reason  why
             they do not co-habit.  The Appellant is named as the father on
             the birth certificates of the two older children, but not  the
             youngest.  Again the 'unregistered' status of the marriage  is
             cited as the explanation.  I  have  evidence  in  photographic
             form of the Appellant  in  company  with  a  woman  and  three
             children in a domestic setting and a letter purporting  to  be
             written by MF dated 9th September  2011.   The  only  evidence
             that they are MF and the children comes  from  the  Appellant.
             Ordinarily that would not be of  concern,  however  given  the
             absence of any input from her or those children in  any  other
             aspect of the case causes concern  on  my  part  as  to  those
             actually in the photographs and who wrote the letter.  He  has
             also produced some bills to  show  purchases  by  him  in  the
             Slough area.  What is entirely absent  in  this  case  is  any
             evidence of contact between the Appellant and his  family.   I
             have nothing from either the mother of  the  children  or  the
             children themselves to say what their  relationship  with  the
             Appellant is.  As for the Appellant his  evidence  of  contact
             with his family is wholly unconvincing.  He lives  miles  away
             from them when there is no real bar to his living much closer.
               There  is  not  a  single  document  which   evidences   any
             involvement in the children's welfare or education.   Evidence
             of any involvement in their collective life on the part of the
             Appellant is absent.  In short the  Appellant  has  failed  to
             satisfy me it is more likely than not that  he  currently  has
             any family life with MF and the three children.   The  most  I
             can conclude from the evidence is that in the recent past  the
             Appellant has been in a relationship with her that  has  borne
             her three children.

         17.  It is against this  factual  background  that  I  must  decide
             whether the decision of the Respondent was  proportionate  and
             therefore  lawful.   I  am  satisfied  the  decision  of   the
             Respondent does not interfere in the Appellant's family  life,
             as the Appellant has not satisfied me that there is any family
             life."

43. It is clear that the Respondent's case was that the  evidence  had  not
    demonstrated that the Appellant had maintained a level of contact  with
    the three children as claimed and cited concerns  regarding  the  short
    letter purportedly sent by the mother of the children  and  that  there
    was no other cogent evidence of contact with  the  children  from  they
    themselves or from relatives of the children/mother.  Thus the position
    was that it had not been established a close or frequent  contact  with
    the children as claimed.

44. Also in respect of his immigration history, it was observed that if  he
    genuinely wished to remain in the UK for the children,  that  he  would
    have submitted an  application  for  leave  to  remain  before  he  was
    encountered by Immigration Officers at Sizzlers in 2010 bearing in mind
    that the first child  was  born  in  2006.   Thus  the  timing  of  the
    application undermined the overall credibility of his claim to be in  a
    relationship with these children.

45. It is also plain from the determination  of  Immigration  Judge  Howard
    that he considered three core factors set out  at  paragraph  17.   The
    judge did not accept the Appellant's evidence concerning the "marriage"
    and the "unregistered" nature of the  union  as  the  reason  why  this
    Appellant had claimed the parties did not cohabit.   He  accepted  that
    the Appellant was the father of three children but he  did  not  accept
    that the evidence demonstrated that there was family life  between  the
    children and the Appellant on the evidence.  The judge  considered  the
    documentary evidence, the photographs, the copy  bills/receipts  and  a
    letter from MF  dated  9th  September  2011.   Having  considered  that
    evidence, the judge found that the  most  significant  feature  in  his
    analysis of the evidence was a "dearth of evidence  concerning  contact
    between the Appellant and the children".  As the judge noted,

         "What is entirely absent in this case is any  evidence  of  contact
         between the Appellant and his family.  I have nothing  from  either
         the mother of the children or the children themselves to  say  what
         their relationship with the Appellant  is.   ...  there  is  not  a
         single document which evidences any involvement in  the  children's
         welfare  or  education.   Evidence  of  any  involvement  in  their
         collective life on the part of the Appellant is absent."

    The judge went on to find that the evidence of  the  Appellant  himself
    was "unconvincing".  Consequently he found that whilst he had been in a
    relationship with MF and that she had borne him  three  children,  that
    was not the current position that he had no family life with her or the
    children.

46. I reached the conclusion previously that those findings  were  entirely
    open to the judge for the reasons given and the  evidence  before  him.
    Those findings therefore remain but I have heard further evidence  from
    the Appellant concerning his  "family  life"  in  the  context  of  his
    relationship with MF and the children.  In this respect, I have had the
    opportunity to hear the oral evidence of Mr Khan and for that to be the
    subject  of  cross-examination  by  the  Presenting  Officer.   I  have
    considered that  evidence  in  the  light  of  the  documents  provided
    including the public statement made by MF which post-dated  the  First-
    tier Tribunal hearing and a statement from an Immigration Officer  made
    on 25th July 2013.  I have also seen a CD/DVD and  have  been  provided
    with other documents including a letter from Howells Solicitors.

47. I observe that having considered that evidence  and  having  heard  the
    oral evidence of this Appellant, I have reached the conclusion that  he
    is not a credible witness, that  he  has  been  untruthful  and  he  is
    unreliable in a number of important respects and that  I  cannot  place
    weight on his evidence in any material respect.  I  shall  set  out  my
    reasons for reaching that view from my assessment of the evidence.

48. I first turn to the relationship between  the  Appellant,  MF  and  the
    children.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge found that in respect  of  the
    alleged marriage or the unregistered nature of the  marriage  that  the
    Appellant had not demonstrated that that was a reason why they did  not
    live together (see paragraph 17 of the First-tier  Tribunal  decision).
    The evidence given by the Appellant to the First-tier Tribunal that was
    rejected for sound reasons, was that they had not been living  together
    because of the unregistered nature of their union.  In his interview he
    claimed that she had not been divorced and  therefore  they  could  not
    live together (question 22).  In his oral evidence  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, he said she had lived in a council flat and the  council
    would not let him live there.  Thus there were a number of reasons  why
    he claimed he could not live with her.  The  judge  was  not  persuaded
    that there was any documentary evidence to support any of those reasons
    as to why the parties do not  live  together.   Similarly  before  this
    Tribunal, there remains no cogent evidence to demonstrate why, if these
    parties are in a relationship which is the evidence of  this  Appellant
    before the Tribunal now, as to why  they  do  not  live  together.   He
    claimed in his evidence  before  this  Tribunal  that  they  had  lived
    together until 2011.  There is no evidence of any kind  to  demonstrate
    that they live or have lived together at any time in Slough.

49. The  Appellant  maintains  that  his  relationship  with  MF  presently
    continues  as  a  subsisting  relationship.   I  have  considered  this
    evidence.   A  letter  was  produced  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    purportedly from MF dated 9th September 2011.  This was relied upon  by
    the Appellant to demonstrate that he has a continuing relationship with
    his wife and children.  That letter which purported to be from MF  made
    reference to Mr Khan being

         "a very good father to their children.  He takes too much care  for
         the children, too much in love with them".  He tried  his  best  to
         fulfil their ambitions.  He often coming to see  us  together  with
         us.  He also  buys  us  things  according  to  the  choice  of  the
         children.  He got a big car for me to take the children to  school.
         They always anxious to see their dad ..."

50. Immigration Judge Howard referred to that letter at paragraph 16 of the
    determination when considering the evidence.  The judge  was  concerned
    about the evidence in photographic form of the Appellant in company  of
    a woman and three children in a domestic  setting.   He  observed  that
    ordinarily that would not be of any concern but given  the  absence  of
    any input from the wife, it is plain that it caused this judge  concern
    as to who it was depicted in the photograph and as he  stated,  who  it
    was who wrote that letter.

51. The judge's view of the letter portrays  a  sense  of  disquiet  as  to
    whether or not it was written by  the  Appellant's  partner/wife.   The
    judge was right to be concerned about this letter.   The  Tribunal  has
    before it a witness statement from an Immigration Officer,  dated  25th
    July 2013. It is clear from the Criminal Justice Act statement that she
    has produced that has been  served,  that  she  conducted  a  telephone
    interview with MF to establish whether the letter of 9th September 2011
    was written by her.  That interview was conducted on 9th July 2013  and
    it is clear from the contents of the witness statement that  MF  denied
    writing that letter.  The letter was faxed to her  so  that  she  could
    read it to ensure that she had  referred  to  the  right  letter.   The
    letter was subsequently faxed back by her and it  was  written  on  the
    letter "I did not write the letter".  She then  signed  and  dated  the
    letter.

52. In cross-examination the letter was put to the Appellant and asked why,
    in the circumstances, did he continue to maintain that the relationship
    was subsisting? He said that it was a letter written under "duress"  by
    MF under fear of threats of losing her children.

53. That is not the only evidence from MF stating  that  that  he  was  not
    having a relationship  with  her  or  with  the  children.   The  other
    evidence is in the form of a public statement.  On 19th September  2012
    MF made a public statement to the Home Office.  This is a letter  given
    by an individual in the knowledge that it  will  be  disclosed  to  the
    Tribunal and to the  other  party.   They  give  such  consent  in  the
    knowledge that such a public statement will be  made  available.   That
    letter made by way of public statement says this:-

         "I MF confirm Raja Sharafat Khan does not live with us, he does not
         want to live with me and my children, he does not support me and my
         children.  He does see his children nor take  any  active  role  in
         their upbringing or well-being.  He doesn't provide  any  financial
         support to me and my children.  He is much too claver and liar,  he
         always try to deceive betray me, his  behaviour  is  very  bad  and
         violent with me and my childs.  My children dislike him and do  not
         want to see him.  I never support him for his stay to remain in the
         UK.  I again confirm that all above is true."

    The letter is then signed and dated as is the public statement.

54. The Appellant claims that  he  has  frequent  contact  with  all  three
    children with the consent of the mother.  He also claims that his  wife
    supports his contact with the children.  When he was asked why, if that
    were true, why there was no evidence from her, he claimed that she  was
    fearful of the social services who would take  back  financial  support
    and would also remove the children from her.

55.  It is the Appellant's account that the public  statement  was  written
    under duress.  He claims that it was to ensure that  he  did  not  have
    contact with her and the children.  When asked why the social  services
    took that view, he claimed not to know despite earlier in his  evidence
    stating that he was in day-to-day contact with his wife.

56. There is no evidence in support of such a claim.  His claim that he was
    in frequent contact with the children with the consent of his wife,  is
    inconsistent with the evidence from his wife herself.   The  letter  in
    November 2012 by way of the public statement made her position entirely
    clear.

57. The public statement was written in the  knowledge  that  it  would  be
    served and filed with the Tribunal.  It clearly states that there is no
    ongoing relationship between the Appellant and MF nor did he  have  any
    role with the children.  I consider that the fact that she was able  to
    make a public statement in the knowledge that he would be made aware of
    its contents, and gave her consent to the same,  does  not  demonstrate
    that they were the actions  of  a  woman  under  duress.  There  is  no
    sensible explanation or any cogent evidence in support of why she would
    be under duress or why social services would  be  taking  such  action.
    Despite these proceedings ongoing since 2011 this  is  the  first  time
    that any reference has been made concerning the social  services  being
    involved. I find that it has not been established that the  letter  was
    written under duress and find on the balance of probabilities that  the
    public statement was written by  MF  setting  out  the  nature  of  the
    relationship between the  Appellant,  M  and  the  children.  The  only
    sensible inference to be drawn from the recent communication  with  the
    immigration officer is that  the  letter  of  September  2011  was  not
    written by her. I have no reason to doubt that the statement  given  to
    the Immigration Officer by MF in July of this year was not truthful.  I
    do not accept that she was under duress by the social services  to  say
    that she had not written the letter.  Thus the fact that such a  letter
    was produced undermines the  credibility  of  his  claim  to  be  in  a
    relationship with the children and also undermines his credibility as a
    witness of truth.

58. I have also considered other evidence  provided  by  the  Appellant  to
    support his claim that he has meaningful  contact  with  the  children.
    That consists of receipts, bank statements, groceries and other  items,
    photographs, a mobile phone bill and the DVD.

59. The receipts were considered by the First-tier Tribunal and are set out
    in the original bundle.  There are some more up-to-date receipts in the
    bundle.  The Appellant claims that the receipts show  that  these  were
    items bought specifically for the children.  Some of  the  receipts  go
    back to 2006 and 2007  showing  debits  from  a  bank  statement  to  a
    supermarket in Slough.  I have considered those receipts but I  do  not
    find that they assist in establishing  whether  or  not  there  is  any
    current family life  between  the  Appellant  and  the  children.   The
    position from the evidence was that the parties may have been  together
    at that time.  There are some receipts from 2008/2009.  Again they  are
    in respect of  bank  statements  showing  debits  to  supermarkets  for
    example Tesco in Slough.  It is accompanied by handwritten notes to say
    that those expenses were for the children.   For  the  reasons  I  have
    given earlier, I would not place any weight on the claim  made  by  the
    Appellant in the handwritten statement that they were for the children.
     They are simply  supermarket  receipts  for  groceries,  they  do  not
    demonstrate in my judgment and when viewed in isolation that they  were
    for the children or it demonstrates any relationship with the children.
     Again in 2010 there were bank statements showing debits for Tesco's in
    Slough and other receipts in 2011 to show  from  Slough.   At  page  58
    there is one for Tasty Hut Takeaway Food, page 59 August  2011  sweets,
    Pepsi and groceries.  In August 2011 there is a Sheffield receipt for a
    colour fun pack.  None of those by themselves demonstrates  that  there
    is a meaningful relationship.  There is a bank statement and it is from
    Mohammed Shabbir who is not even the Appellant (see page 89).

60. As to other newer receipts, one receipt shows a washing  machine  being
    purchased from Argos.  It is claimed  that  this  washing  machine  was
    bought for MF and for the children's  benefit.   However  the  delivery
    note shows that it was delivered to his address in Sheffield and not to
    that of Slough.  As set out in the  recitation  of  the  evidence,  the
    reason given for sending it to Sheffield was that he could not have  it
    delivered to Slough.  However that explanation does not  satisfactorily
    explain why he could not have obtained the delivery from a store in the
    Slough area.  Further his claim that it was needed quickly is not borne
    out by the fact that it took  him  a  few  weeks  for  it  even  to  be
    delivered.  Consequently that does not show that it was for the benefit
    of the family.  There are Primark receipts for clothing,  cardi,  tees,
    hoodies.  Again that  does  not  necessarily  mean  they  are  for  the
    children and there is  a  Suits  Sheffield  receipt  for  "extra  extra
    large".  There are receipts for sweets and groceries in Sheffield.  The
    most recent receipts in the bundle are all from Sheffield and  none  of
    them have been bought in Slough.

61. My overall view of those receipts are that in  general  they  are  non-
    specific and do not relate specifically to the benefit of the children.
     They are not all necessarily purchases that are child based  and  even
    if I accepted that he has purchased items, that does not in my judgment
    demonstrate a genuine and subsisting relationship with the children.

62. As regards the telephone bills, he claims that  it  demonstrates  calls
    made to M.  However there is no  independent  evidence  of  his  wife's
    mobile number to demonstrate that those calls were made to her  mobile.
    Therefore that evidence does not take the matter any further.

63. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  saw  a  number  of  photographs.   Those
    photographs are set out at pages 25 onwards.  They  are  replicated  in
    the second bundle of documentation and in  the  photographs  that  were
    collated into an album.  None of those photographs have been dated.  He
    claimed at first in his oral evidence that the  pictures  in  the  park
    were taken two to three months ago and confirmed that he was holding  a
    baby.  However that baby was born in January 2010 but it was only  then
    that the Appellant confirmed that in fact it could not have been  taken
    two or three months ago but was taken a lot later.  There were pictures
    of his daughter taken in 2007.   The  photographs  themselves  are  non
    specific and do not in my judgment demonstrate reliable evidence as  to
    the type of family life or  relationship  with  the  children  that  he
    claims.  Many of the photographs show him with the children at a  young
    age even if it were accepted that some photos show  a  relationship  in
    2010, there are none that have been identified  cogently  as  to  later
    than 2010 nor more recently.

64. Photographs themselves cannot show  that  there  is  a  subsisting  and
    genuine relationship between the Appellant and the children.  As to the
    clips from the DVD, the Appellant claimed first of all that  it  showed
    him with the children in 2010, and 2011.  He  then  claimed  it  showed
    them in 2012.  However on viewing the clips he  changed  his  mind  and
    said that clip 2 showing him playing with one of the children was  made
    in 2009 in Sheffield.  As to clip 1 he said it was taken in 2010 in the
    car showing him driving  with  him  and  his  partner  picking  up  the
    children from school.  As to clips 3 and 4 he claimed they  were  taken
    in March 2011.  I do not find that that can be the position as it shows
    a young baby on the floor and showing  a  woman  with  the  baby.   The
    youngest child being born in 2010.  It is entirely plain from the clips
    that whilst he could not say they were made on  the  same  occasion,  I
    find that they clearly were.  The woman is  wearing  the  same  clothes
    throughout those clips as is  the  child.   The  clips  also  are  made
    against the same background in a bedroom thus I conclude they were  all
    taken on the same occasion.

65. I do not consider  that  the  clips  assist  the  Appellant's  case  in
    establishing that he is in a subsisting relationship with  his  partner
    or that he is having contact with the children to the degree and nature
    as claimed.  There are no clips from 2012, the earliest is 2009 and the
    last he claimed was March  2011  although  it  is  likely  that  it  is
    earlier.  There are no dates on the clips despite them having come from
    a mobile phone and four clips were taken on the same occasion.

66. Even if I accepted this evidence to show a relationship in the past, it
    pre-dates the evidence of the wife in 2012 in which she has  said  that
    he has no relationship with the children.  As Mrs Petterson  submitted,
    it has been accepted that in the past he has had  a  relationship  with
    the children but the most recent  evidence  does  not  demonstrate  any
    support for the Appellant's case that he has current contact with  them
    or the nature and quality of that contact.  Importantly none  of  those
    clips showed him having any relationship between the children.  It  did
    not show the Appellant being close to the children at all and  thus  is
    limited evidence.

67. If his claim were true  that  he  was  in  frequent  contact  with  the
    children with the consent of the mother, I  do  not  find  that  it  is
    credible that he  would  have  now  taken  steps  to  initiate  contact
    proceedings as set out in the letter from Howells dated 22nd July 2013.
     His evidence about this application was that he had made it because of
    the  "certain pressures" on the family that if they continue to see him
    that financial measures would be taken and also the children  would  be
    removed from her care.  He further claimed in his  oral  evidence  that
    the social services had been working with the family since  March  2011
    "when I started proceedings with this  case".   He  was  asked  several
    times in cross-examination why the social services were involved but he
    claimed "I do not know the  reasons  why".   That  evidence  is  wholly
    inconsistent with the evidence given earlier that  he  knew  about  the
    social services because "my wife tells me everything".   If  that  were
    true, it is more likely than not that he would have known  the  reasons
    for the social services' interest because she  as  the  mother  of  the
    children would be entitled to know.

68. Furthermore his evidence was that  he  claimed  to  be  having  contact
    without the knowledge of the social services and  that  they  had  been
    involved since March 2011.  If that were the position it is more likely
    than not that he would have made an application for contact before July
    2013.

69.   I find that there has been a considerable delay in any attempt to  be
    involved in contact proceedings.  His immigration history  demonstrates
    that if he had genuinely wished to remain in the United Kingdom for the
    children that he would have  submitted  an  application  for  leave  to
    remain on this  basis  before  being  encountered  by  the  Immigration
    Officers in March 2011 in a raid, given that the eldest child was  born
    in 2006.  The lateness of the submission of such an Article 8 claim  to
    remain in my judgment, severely undermines the credibility of his claim
    to  have  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  these  three
    children.

70. Despite being in proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal in December
    2011, an application for permission to appeal that decision in 2012,  a
    hearing in November 2012 and one in June 2013, there has never been any
    claim made about social services' involvement and that this  is  reason
    why he cannot adduce evidence  concerning  the  relationship  with  his
    children and with the mother of those children whom he claims is  under
    duress from the  social  services  who  have  threatened  to  take  the
    children away if she sees Mr Khan.  This is despite his  oral  evidence
    that the social services had been involved since March 2011. I can only
    conclude that the reason that this has been raised now is that  he  has
    either deliberately not disclosed social services' involvement prior to
    the hearings despite being involved in immigration proceedings for over
    two years or there is no such involvement and  this  is  an  excuse  to
    support the lack of  meaningful  and  cogent  evidence  concerning  the
    relationship and contact with his children and to support  why  he  has
    now made an application for contact demonstrably late.

71. I conclude from the evidence that I cannot accept anything that is said
    by  the  Appellant  unless  firmly  supported  by   cogent   verifiable
    documentation in the light of the circumstances and  evidence  outlined
    above.

72. In this context I remind myself of the decision of RS (Immigration  and
    Family Court Proceedings) India [2012] UKUT  00218  (IAC);  a  decision
    that makes reference to outstanding family proceedings.  That  decision
    makes it clear that in the case of contact proceedings initiated by  an
    Appellant in an immigration appeal, whether there are  any  reasons  to
    believe that the family proceedings have been instituted  to  delay  or
    frustrate removal and not to promote the child's welfare.  In assessing
    the above question, judges are asked to  consider  the  degree  of  the
    claimant's previous interest and contact with the child, the timing  of
    the contact proceedings, the commitment with which they have progressed
    such an application, when a decision is likely to be reached  and  what
    material (if any) is available to point  to  where  a  child's  welfare
    lies.

73. I have therefore applied the decision to the facts of this case and the
    evidence before me.   As  I  have  set  out  in  my  findings  of  fact
    concerning the evidence, I consider that there are substantial  reasons
    for believing that the family proceedings have been instituted to delay
    or frustrate removal of this Appellant from the United  Kingdom  rather
    than to promote the children's welfare.  The evidence before the First-
    tier Tribunal was that there was no evidence from the  mother  or  from
    the children concerning the  nature  of  their  relationship  with  the
    Appellant.  There is evidence now.  There is a public statement from MF
    who makes it clear that there is no relationship  between  herself  and
    the Appellant, that he does not see the children and that they  do  not
    wish to see him.  In the letter that was  purportedly  written  on  9th
    September 2011 she has stated that the letter was never written by  her
    and thus the only sensible inference reached  from  that  evidence  was
    that that letter had been a fabrication.

74. I have also found that the reasons given by the  Appellant  for  making
    the application on 22nd July 2013 are not  credible,  bearing  in  mind
    that these proceedings have been ongoing since 2011,  and  his  conduct
    does not demonstrate that he is seeking to promote the welfare  of  the
    children but that those proceedings have been instituted  to  delay  or
    frustrate removal.  If  the  Appellant  has  known  since  March  2011,
    according to his claim, that the social services were stating  that  he
    could not have contact with the children or with his wife and  this  is
    the reason why he has now made such an  application,  the  date  itself
    demonstrates that he has known this for such a  considerable  time  and
    that if it were true, he would  have  made  such  an  application  well
    before July 2013.  This case has been before the Tribunal on  a  number
    of occasions yet there was never any attempt to make an application for
    contact  until  the  last  possible  moment.   All  of  that   evidence
    demonstrates in my judgment that these proceedings have been instituted
    to delay or frustrate removal.  There is evidence before this  Tribunal
    as to where the children's welfare lies.  That  evidence  is  from  his
    wife herself is that he does not see the children or that there is  any
    meaningful relationship between them.  There is no evidence before  the
    Tribunal that his removal would be likely to cause them serious harm or
    any detriment.  There is no evidence before this Tribunal that he plays
    any role in their upbringing.

75. The First-tier Tribunal Judge considered the  evidence  and  found  the
    evidence to be "wholly unconvincing" and what was entirely  absent  was
    evidence of contact between the Appellant and the children or  anything
    from the children and their mother to say what  that  relationship  was
    like.

76.  The judge noted that there was nothing from the wife  concerning  that
    relationship.  However before this Tribunal there is evidence from  the
    wife that firstly she did not write the letter dated 9th September 2011
    attesting to his relationship with her and the family.  Secondly,  that
    she had given a public statement that he did not  have  a  relationship
    with the children in 2012.  For the reasons given I have  rejected  the
    Appellant's evidence that such letters were written "under  duress"  as
    there is no evidence to support such an  allegation.   Furthermore  for
    the reasons I have given, the evidence of  receipts,  telephone  calls,
    etc do not in my judgment demonstrate that the Appellant is maintaining
    any meaningful relationship with the children or that he  has  face-to-
    face contact in a way that is claimed.  As the First-tier  Judge  noted
    there is "not a single document which evidences any involvement in  the
    children's welfare or education or any evidence of their involvement in
    their collective life."  That is still the position.  I find  from  the
    evidence before me that it has not been established  by  the  Appellant
    that he is maintaining a relationship with the children or  the  mother
    in the terms that he has claimed.  Any historical evidence  shows  that
    there was a relationship in 2010 and that there may have been  in  2011
    but there is no evidence that I can place  weight  and  reliance  upon,
    given the lack of credibility of this Appellant, the fact that a letter
    had been fabricated and the evidence given by the mother to  find  that
    he  has  given  an  accurate  and  reliable   representation   of   his
    relationship with the children.

77. There is no evidence from any other relative of the children concerning
    the father's relationship with them or the nature and  quality  of  any
    time they may spend together.  There is no information from the  school
    to show any part that he plays in their  welfare  or  upbringing.   The
    point made by the First-tier Tribunal judge that there was a "dearth of
    evidence which evidenced any involvement  in  the  child's  welfare  or
    education" was entirely right and there has been no  evidence  provided
    subsequent to that.

78. Whilst it has been  accepted  that  he  is  the  father  of  the  three
    children, and that some of the photographs  demonstrate  him  with  the
    children on much earlier dates, they do  not  demonstrate  any  current
    continuing relationship nor do they support the claimed  recent  visits
    made, the duration of any visits or give any support  for  there  being
    any meaningful contact.

79. I now turn to the Appellant's private life and the length  of  time  he
    claims to have been in the United Kingdom.

80. It is the Appellant's claim that he arrived  in  January  1998  due  to
    threats to his life in his home country (see statement at paragraph 4).
     He claimed that in 1998 he applied  for  asylum  through  Maher  &  Co
    Solicitors and had regular contact with them who said that the  "matter
    was still under consideration with the Home Office".   There  are  some
    letters provided in the first bundle which I have  considered  in  this
    regard.  There is a letter dated 29th August 2002 (page 19) from  Maher
    & Co.  I have considered  the  documentation  provided  but  I  am  not
    satisfied that they are documents upon which I can place  reliance  and
    weight.  No  original  documents  have  been  made  available  and  the
    photocopies produced are of poor quality.  For example, the  typing  is
    not straight.  The letter has a photograph attached to it and there  is
    no reason why such a letter would have a photograph, further the letter
    is not signed by anyone from the firm.   I  have  also  considered  the
    content of the letter.  It says this:-

         "To Whom It May Concern

         We confirm that we represent the above-named  in  relation  to  his
         immigration matter.  We confirm that his matter is pending  in  the
         Home Office.  It is envisaged that this  application  will  take  a
         considerable period of time to be processed.

         We also confirm that the photograph below is a true likeness of the
         above-named client.   If  however  you  require  anything  further,
         please do not hesitate to contact us."

81. As I have stated it is not signed by anyone from Maher & Co.  There  is
    no indication as to why that letter was ever written or to whom it  was
    sent.  It is simply entitled "To Whom It May Concern".

82. At paragraph 5 of his statement he claims to have changed to solicitors
    to Mahmood Mirza Solicitors in 2008.  There is a  letter  at  page  20.
    This is not a letter to the Home  Office  but  a  letter  to  Mr  Khan.
    Indeed  there  is  no  evidence  from  those  solicitors  showing   any
    communications with the Home Office, showing any applications  made  by
    this Appellant or any reference numbers given by  the  Home  Office  in
    respect of any applications made prior to April 2011.  The letter to Mr
    Khan simply states "In this respect I wish to confirm that we have made
    representations on  your  behalf  to  the  Home  Office  that  on  24th
    September 2008 your application was  submitted  to  the  Home  Office".
    Again this letter  is  of  poor  quality,  it  is  not  signed  by  any
    particular named solicitor and furthermore, as outlined above, there is
    no evidence from Mahmood Mirza showing any communications with the Home
    Office to support the fact that there were any representations made  on
    his behalf by that firm to the Home Office.

83. The Appellant then stated that he changed solicitors to Zacharia &  Co.
    There is a letter dated 26th May 2010.  In that letter it states

         "I write with reference that on  behalf  of  the  above.   Mr  Khan
         claims that he applied for his  visa  extension  under  the  Legacy
         Scheme some time ago.  Originally on 29th  August  2002  he  had  a
         legal representative from Middlesex to deal with his case.  ..."

    I do not find that there is any support  from  this  letter  either  to
    demonstrate that the Appellant made  any  claim  for  leave  or  asylum
    before he made his application in  2011.  It refers to Mr Khan applying
    for "his visa extension under the Legacy Scheme".  However  he  entered
    the UK illegally and therefore would never have been able to apply  for
    a "visa extension".  The letter from Zacharia & Co also sets  out  only
    what the solicitor has been told by Mr Khan and it does not appear that
    they have had any documentation from any  earlier  solicitors  to  show
    that any such applications were made.  It is of significance also  that
    the solicitors that he had prior to coming off record,  Marks  &  Marks
    Solicitors, wrote to Zacharia & Co asking for details from  their  file
    but there are no replies from that firm setting out the nature  of  any
    enquiries that they had made from the earlier firms of solicitors.

    Thus I do not find from that evidence that it gives any support to  the
    Appellant's case that he arrived in 1998.  There is  no  correspondence
    from 1998 nor is there any evidence of any applications made after that
    date save for the application made by Marks & Marks Solicitors in April
    2011.  The earliest letter is from 2002.  As to a phone  bill  at  page
    122 from 2003 again this is a poor copy but it is in the  name  of  "K.
    Shrafat-Khan".  There is no information to show that he has been  known
    as Mr K Shrafat-Khan and the spelling of "Shrafat"  is  different  from
    Sharafat.  Thus I place no reliance upon this.

84. It is the Appellant's evidence that he first  claimed  asylum  in  1998
    (see witness statement paragraph 4).  In cross-examination he was asked
    whether he went to the Home Office or to the solicitors to make such  a
    claim.  He claimed that  he  had  gone  to  the  solicitors.   This  is
    inconsistent with the original Grounds  of  Appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (see page 240) the solicitors state that he had claimed asylum
    on arrival at Gatwick.   Thus  the  Appellant  has  given  inconsistent
    evidence concerning these circumstance in making a claim for asylum.

85. I also make the following findings from the evidence before me.   There
    is no record of any arrival in the United Kingdom by this Appellant  in
    1998.  I further find for the reasons that I have set out earlier  that
    the Appellant has not discharged the burden on  him  to  show  that  an
    application was lodged with UKBA prior to 2011 and there is no reliable
    evidence from any firm of solicitors to  show  that  such  applications
    were lodged for the reasons that I have given and I attach no weight to
    the Appellant's evidence that he made a claim for asylum in 1998.

86. It is also right that when he was interviewed, the Appellant could  not
    satisfactorily explain how, if  he  had  arrived  in  1998,  he  had  a
    passport issued to him in Mirpur, Pakistan on 29th March 2002.  It  was
    also put to him in the interview  that  a  visa  application  had  been
    lodged with the Appellant's personal details in August 2000.

87. The Appellant's explanation was that the  application  was  made  by  a
    solicitor.  However  when  informed  by  the  Immigration  Officer  the
    application was made overseas in Pakistan, the Appellant is recorded as
    saying he knew nothing about the application for a visa.  I do not find
    that that reflects well upon his credibility or upon his claim that  he
    had arrived in 1998 if that visa application  had  been  made  in  2000
    overseas in Pakistan using this Appellant's personal details.

88. In oral evidence before this Tribunal, the Appellant claimed in  cross-
    examination in respect of the passport that  the  solicitors  told  him
    that he needed a passport for an application so he got  a  friend  from
    Pakistan to  make  the  application  on  his  behalf.   I  reject  that
    explanation.  It had not been raised by this Appellant in his interview
    and I find that if that had been the truth it is more likely  than  not
    that he would have given such  an  explanation   when  asked  about  it
    contemporaneously.  I further find that it is not likely that he  would
    have got a friend to obtain  a  passport  for  him  in  Pakistan.   The
    evidence before me is that there  was  a  passport  issued  to  him  in
    Mirpur.

89. Thus it has not been established on the balance of  probabilities  that
    he arrived in 1998 and  in  the  light  of  the  unreliability  of  the
    evidence produced I do not accept  his  oral  evidence.   He  has  been
    inconsistent about how he claimed asylum, there is no  cogent  evidence
    that he made any application for asylum given the difficulties  that  I
    have set out and there was evidence that he was  in  Pakistan  in  2002
    applying for  a  passport.   The  explanation  that  he  has  given  is
    different and not credible.  There is a reference from  a  friend,  who
    did not appear to give oral evidence, he refers to knowing him for  ten
    years so at the earliest he has been in the  United  Kingdom  would  be
    2003.  Despite his claim, he would not have accrued fourteen  years  as
    the "clock stopped" in 2011.

90. As to return to Pakistan, I reject any suggestion that the Appellant is
    in fear of his life and that was the reason that he came to the  United
    Kingdom.  If that were the position, I am satisfied that he would  have
    made an application for asylum and would have pursued it.  He failed to
    do so even when invited to do so by the Home Office in 2011.

The Law

Article 8 of the ECHR

91. There is no dispute that I should consider the questions  addressed  by
    Lord Bingham in (Razgar) v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27 at paragraph 17.   Those
    questions are as follows:-

      i) Will the proposed removal be an interference by a public  authority
         with the exercise of the  Appellant's  right  to  respect  for  his
         private or (as the case may be) family life?

     ii) If so, will such interference have consequences of such gravity  as
         potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?

    iii) If so, is its interference in accordance with the law?

     iv) If so, is such interference necessary in a  democratic  society  in
         the interests of national security, public safety or  the  economic
         wellbeing of the country, for the prevention of disorder or  crime,
         for the protection of health or morals, or for  the  protection  of
         rights and freedom of others?

      v) If so, is such interference proportionate to the legitimate  public
         end sought to be achieved?

92. In respect of the first question, whether the decision  to  remove  the
    Appellant from the United Kingdom is an interference with his Article 8
    rights in respect for his family life is in issue as it is not accepted
    by the Respondent that the Appellant has any family life at the present
    time.

93. Whilst the European Court of Human Rights has  established  that,  from
    birth, a child has a bond with his or  her  parents  which  amounts  to
    "family life" which remains in existence despite  voluntary  separation
    (see Sen v The Netherlands [2007] 36 EHRR 7, and Gul v  Switzerland  22
    EHRR 9, the question that arises in this case as well as on  the  facts
    presented, family life existed within  the  meaning  of  Article  8(1).
    This is a matter of fact to be decided on the evidence presented by the
    Appellant and the quality of the family life as claimed.

94. As I have set out earlier in this determination the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge, for sound reasons did not find the evidence demonstrated that he
    had any family life of the type claimed and gave reasons for that.  For
    the reasons that I have set out earlier in this judgment, I have  found
    that the evidence presented by the  Appellant  does  not  change  those
    findings of fact, indeed, there is further evidence  from  MF  herself,
    which I can only accept, which demonstrates that there is no meaningful
    relationship between the Appellant and the children presently.   Whilst
    historically, some of the evidence presented by way of photographs show
    that there was a relationship in 2010 or early 2011, the evidence as at
    the  present  time  does  not  show  that  there  is   any   meaningful
    relationship.  The Appellant has not demonstrated by any  reliable  and
    cogent evidence that he has maintained a relationship with the children
    of the type that he claims.  There is no evidence of  the  duration  of
    the contact visits, where they take place, how the children respond  or
    any wishes and feelings that they may have.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    noted the "dearth of evidence relating to the  children's  welfare  and
    education" and this Appellant's role in their upbringing.  That has not
    been changed by any evidence that has been placed before this Tribunal.
     Therefore for the reasons that I have set out and the findings of fact
    earlier in this determination, I am not satisfied  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities that the evidence demonstrates that there is a meaningful
    and continuing relationship between the Appellant and the  children  of
    the type that he claims.

95. Even if I were to accept that there was some limited contact by way  of
    providing items for the children,  there  is  no  evidence  before  the
    Tribunal as to the quality and nature of any contact or the wishes  and
    feelings  of  the  children.   The  Tribunal  must  consider  the  best
    interests of the children.  In doing so, in  making  an  assessment  of
    their wishes and feelings concerning the removal of this Appellant, the
    Tribunal has the evidence from MF in her written  public  statement  of
    2012 is that they do not have a good relationship  with  their  father.
    There is no other evidence to counteract that view independent  of  the
    parties.  I would find that the best interests of the children  require
    them to remain with their mother and their primary carer.  There is  no
    evidence whatsoever of any role that  he  plays  in  their  upbringing.
    Thus there is no evidential basis  to demonstrate that the  Appellant's
    removal will be likely to cause them any harm or any detriment.   There
    is an absence of evidence concerning the children's welfare despite the
    length of time that these proceedings have  been  continuing.   I  have
    also found on the evidence in this case  that  the  recent  application
    made for contact has been made in an  attempt  to  delay  or  frustrate
    removal for the reasons that I have given.

96. It is accepted that the decision would  interfere  with  his  right  to
    respect for his private life.  Considering the second issue, it has not
    been in dispute before me that  the  refusal  decision  amounts  to  an
    interference with his private life and  that  it  crosses  the  minimum
    level of severity to engage Article 8(1).  It is common ground  between
    the parties that the decision here was in accordance with the  law  and
    it has not been suggested  that  the  Respondent's  decision  does  not
    further a legitimate  aim,  namely  proper  and  effective  immigration
    control. Even if I accepted  there  was  family  life  and  the  Razgar
    questions were answered in the affirmative as above,  the  issue  would
    concern the proportionality of that decision.

97. The correct approach to proportionality is as set out by  Lord  Bingham
    in the decision of Razgar at paragraph 20:-

         "... [It] involves the striking  of  a  fair  balance  between  the
         rights of the individual and the interests of the  community  which
         is inherent in the whole of the Convention."

98. The assessment is a fact specific exercise and each case must depend on
    its own specific  facts.   A  judicial  decision  must  be  reached  by
    applying an "even-handed application of the  proportionality  test  (WB
    (Pakistan) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 215 at (16) per Sedley LJ).

99. In assessing proportionality the Tribunal must have regard to the  need
    to safeguard and promote the welfare of the child  who  is  in  the  UK
    (Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009).

100. In EB (Kosovo) [2008] UKHL 41, at � 12, Lord Bingham, with  the  assent
    of the other members of the Appellate Committee, said:

         "Thus  the  Appellate  Immigration  Authority  must  make  its  own
         judgment and that judgment  will  be  strongly  influenced  by  the
         particular facts and circumstances of  the  particular  case.   The
         authority will, of course, take note of factors which have, or have
         not, weighed with the Strasbourg  court.   It  will,  for  example,
         recognise that it will rarely be proportionate to uphold  an  order
         for removal of a spouse if there is a close and genuine  bond  with
         the other spouse and that spouse cannot reasonably be  expected  to
         follow the removed spouse to the country  of  removal,  or  if  the
         effect  of  the  order  is  to  sever  a  genuine  and   subsisting
         relationship  between  parent  and  child.   But  cases  will   not
         ordinarily raise such stark choices, and there  is  in  general  no
         alternative to making a careful  and  informed  evaluation  of  the
         facts of the particular case.   The  search  for  a  hard-edged  or
         bright-line rule to be  applied  to  the  generality  of  cases  is
         incompatible with the difficult evaluative exercise which Article 8
         requires."

101. As to the  Appellant's  private  life,  the  Appellant  has  failed  to
    discharge the burden of proof upon him to demonstrate that he has lived
    in the UK since 1998 for the reasons set out earlier.  At its  highest,
    the earliest date of his residence would be 2003 and he entered the  UK
    illegally and the ensuing time has been unlawful residence.  The First-
    tier Tribunal accepted, as does this Tribunal that he had established a
    private life during that time.  That is  likely  to  be  the  position.
    Whilst I have heard no evidence of any friends it  is  likely  that  he
    would have established friendships and in  the  light  of  the  letters
    provided.  There are no  reasons  why  those  relationships  cannot  be
    maintained by letter, telephone calls or visits.  There is no  evidence
    before the Tribunal of any employment.  There is nothing to demonstrate
    that the type of private life established in the United Kingdom, whilst
    of course different to that that he would establish in Pakistan,  could
    not be re-established in Pakistan.  He retains  his  use  of  the  Urdu
    language, having given  his  evidence  before  this  Tribunal  in  that
    language.  He has provided a letter  stating  that  he  has  skills  to
    obtain employment.  There are no reasons why he cannot use those skills
    in obtaining employment in his country of nationality.   He  has  spent
    his formative years in Pakistan and can be expected to be able  to  re-
    establish links in his home country.

102. Whilst he claims he has no assets having sold them  all  to  enter  the
    UK, he claims to have purchased a house  in  Sheffield.   There  is  no
    reason why he cannot sell that property and utilise the proceeds to re-
    establish himself in Pakistan.  As to his immigration history, he is an
    illegal entrant and there is no evidence to support his  claimed  entry
    date of 1998.  What is known is that he was encountered  at  "sizzlers"
    in 2010 and it was at that time, after  his  arrest  that  he  made  an
    application to remain on Article 8 grounds.  I have found that  in  his
    case that he did not take any reasonable opportunity  to  claim  asylum
    arising out of the circumstances in which he claimed would place him at
    risk of harm or in fear of his life.  Indeed I have found that  he  has
    not made any application for asylum even when invited to do so in 2011.
     Consequently, he has not demonstrated that  there  is  any  likelihood
    that he would be at risk upon return to Pakistan.

103. I now turn to the countervailing factors when considering  the  overall
    and wider assessment of proportionality.  As  an  illegal  entrant  and
    someone resident in the UK  without  any  form  of  leave,  he  has  no
    expectation that he would be able to remain in the UK and he has chosen
    to establish his family life/ private life in the UK without any  valid
    leave to remain.  I pay regard to the well-settled principle that  each
    state has a right to  control  the  entry  of  non-nationals  into  its
    territory (see Abdulaziz, Cabales and Balandali v UK [1985] 7 EHRR  and
    that Article 8 does not give the person an automatic right to choose to
    pursue his or her family or private life in the United Kingdom and  the
    general administrative desirability of applying known Rules if a system
    of immigration control is to be workable, predictable,  consistent  and
    fair as between one applicant and another.

104. Having considered with care the particular facts of this  case  I  have
    found that the best interests of the  children  will  be  met  by  them
    remaining with and being brought up by their mother and primary  carer.
    On the findings of fact made  it  has  not  been  demonstrated  on  the
    evidence that there is any meaningful relationship currently  with  his
    wife or children or that he  is  exercising  direct  contact  to  them.
    Whilst the FTT accepted that he was the father  of  these  children  as
    does this Tribunal, and that he has expressed his love for them,  there
    is no evidence that he plays any role in  the  care  or  upbringing  of
    these children.  In the light of the evidence before me,  in  which  it
    has not been established that there is any significant contact with the
    children, there is no evidential basis that his removal would be likely
    to cause them any harm or be of any detriment to their welfare.  As  Ms
    Petterson submits, it would be open to him to make an  application  for
    visits to the UK as the  father  of  settled  children  and  could  re-
    establish or maintain the relationship by way of  indirect  contact.  I
    have concluded that it would not be unreasonable to expect the  private
    life  of  the  Appellant  to  be  re-established  in   Pakistan.    The
    countervailing factors as identified by  the  Respondent  and  set  out
    above, in my judgment should have significant weight attached to  them.
    I have taken into account the length  of  residence  of  the  Appellant
    concerned, and weighed all the factors  in  the  balance.   Nonetheless
    when considering the competing  interests  in  the  balancing  exercise
    based on the  particular  facts  of  this  case,  I  have  reached  the
    conclusion that the decision to remove the Appellant is a proportionate
    one.  Thus the appeal is dismissed under Article 8.

105. It has previously been asserted on behalf of  the  Appellant  that  the
    judge did not consider  the  factors  under  paragraph  395C.   In  the
    refusal letter dated 14th November 2011 account was taken  of  all  the
    relevant circumstances before a decision to remove was taken.  They are
    set  out  at  paragraphs  34  onwards.   They  take  into  account  the
    Appellant's age, who at that date was 39 and the fact that  he  had  no
    medical ailments or had any physical infirmity  which  would  make  his
    return to Pakistan unreasonable.  His age was not a  compelling  factor
    to justify him allowing remaining in the United  Kingdom.   As  to  his
    length of residence it had not been demonstrated  that  he  arrived  in
    1998 and that he had  done  nothing  to  regularise  his  status  until
    encountered in 2011.  Furthermore he had  not  been  given  any  lawful
    leave in the United Kingdom.  The length of residence is not considered
    a sufficiently compelling factor to justify allowing him to  remain  in
    the UK.  As to strength of connections, the ties to the United  Kingdom
    were not considered sufficient compelling to justify  allowing  him  to
    remain in the United Kingdom.  In the light of  the  findings  of  fact
    that I have made that also remains the position.  As  to  his  personal
    history, including character, conduct and  employment  record,  it  was
    considered that he  had  attempted  to  evade  immigration  control  by
    failing to take reasonable steps to regularise  his  stay.   There  was
    nothing in his history, character or conduct sufficiently compelling to
    justify allowing him to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.   He  has  no
    criminal history but after compassionate circumstances,  there  was  no
    compelling compassionate grounds submitted to the Secretary  of  State,
    nor before this Tribunal to demonstrate why he  should  be  allowed  to
    remain in the United Kingdom  on  a  compassionate  basis  outside  the
    Rules.  The representations made were taken into account but  they  did
    not raise any factors which justify  allowing  him  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom.

106. I have therefore considered the evidence before me.  In determining  an
    appeal against the  decision  to  give  directions  under  Section  10,
    consideration should be given to whether  the  decision  shows  by  its
    terms that the decision-maker took into account the factors set out  in
    paragraph 395C and exercised a discretion on the basis of them.  I find
    the Respondent has given  consideration  to  the  factors  set  out  in
    paragraph 395C in the  Notice  of  Refusal  at  paragraph  34  and  has
    exercised a discretion on the  basis  of  those  factors  and  for  the
    reasons that are given.  As set out, it was not considered that any  of
    those factors identified were sufficiently compelling  to  justify  him
    remaining  in  the  United  Kingdom.   Having  considered  the  matters
    referred to by the Secretary of  State  in  the  evidence  and  in  the
    refusal letter, I am satisfied that  the  decision  took  into  account
    those factors and exercised a discretion on the basis of them  and  the
    decision was therefore made in accordance with the law.

107. I have considered whether or not the removal  of  the  Appellant  would
    breach his rights under the Refugee Convention or  the  ECHR.   I  have
    reached the conclusion that removal of the Appellant would  not  breach
    his rights under either Convention for the reasons given.

108. The third matter I have to consider is  whether  the  discretion  under
    paragraph 395C should be exercised  differently.   In  my  judgment,  I
    consider that the factors outlined have been considered properly and in
    accordance with the law and I adopt the reason  given  earlier  in  the
    determination considering those factors.  I do not find that discretion
    should have been exercised differently and  the  decision  made  is  in
    accordance with the law.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error of law. The decision is set aside. The decision  is  re-made  as
follows:

The appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 8/9/13
Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds





                               APPENDIX 1[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  IA/33801/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 19th November 2012                           |                           |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS



                                   Between

                             RAJA SHARAFAT KHAN
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Medhurst (Counsel, instructed on behalf of Marks
                    and Marks Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mrs Petterson (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

109. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 2nd October  1972.   The
    Appellant appeals with permission against the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge  Howard)  who  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal
    against the decision of the Respondent made on 14th  November  2011  to
    refuse leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  based  on  human  rights
    grounds (Article 8) and to give directions for  his  removal  from  the
    United Kingdom.

110. The history of the appeal is as follows.  The  Appellant  was  arrested
    by the South Yorkshire Police Service on 31st October 2010 on suspicion
    of assault and false imprisonment.  Following this on 1st January 2011,
    the Appellant was interviewed by immigration officials and claimed that
    he had arrived in the United Kingdom in 1998 as  a  result  of  fearing
    persecution in his home country.  Following the Appellant's  subsequent
    release by  the  South  Yorkshire  Police  on  2nd  January  2011,  the
    Appellant was again encountered by immigration  officials  following  a
    visit to Sizzlers  Takeaway,  however,  no  further  action  was  taken
    against the Appellant due to his previous arrest on 31st December 2010.

111. On 28th February 2011, a letter was sent to the  Appellant  by  the  UK
    Border Agency for him to attend an interview with immigration officials
    on 14th March 2011 to discuss his immigration position.  He attended on
    that day and claimed that he had arrived in the UK in January 1998.  He
    further claimed that he had not been  working  at  Sizzlers  Restaurant
    when encountered by the police.  He  also  claimed  that  he  had  left
    Pakistan  in  fear  of  his  life  and  had  previously  submitted   an
    application to the Home Office for asylum.  As regards his life in  the
    United Kingdom, he said that he was now estranged from his spouse,  MF,
    whom he claimed that he had married in an Islamic ceremony but that  he
    continued to maintain regular contact with her and the three  children.



112. On 4th April 2011, the Appellant's solicitors submitted an  application
    on behalf of the Appellant under Article 8 of the ECHR on the basis  of
    his relationship with his three children living in the United  Kingdom.
    Those children are HS (6th June 2006), S S (25th May 2007) and MS (25th
    January 2011).  It was also stated he could not return to  Pakistan  as
    he feared persecution in his home country.

113.  On  2nd  September  2011,  the  UK  Border  Agency  requested  further
    information from the Appellant  regarding  his  relationship  with  the
    children as no  further  grounds  had  been  received  from  his  legal
    representatives.   The  UK  Border  Agency  also  notified  his   legal
    representatives that initial claims for international protection in the
    United Kingdom could not be made by post, but could  only  be  made  in
    person by the Appellant attending the Asylum Screening Unit in Croydon.
     He was given full instructions on how to lodge  such  an  application.
    No such application has been  made  by  this  Appellant  in  person  in
    respect of a claim for asylum.  Further material was  produced  by  the
    Appellant via his solicitors on 23rd September 2011 with regard to  the
    application made in April.  It was reiterated that  the  Appellant  had
    established a family life in the United Kingdom with his three children
    and that to remove him would be a breach of Article 8 of the ECHR.

114. In a notice of immigration  decision  dated  14th  November  2011,  the
    Respondent refused  the  application  made  by  the  Appellant.   Those
    reasons were set out in a decision  letter  dated  14th  November.   In
    summary, the Respondent  was  not  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  had
    demonstrated that family life existed between  himself  and  his  three
    children or  that  he  had  established  family  life  with  any  other
    individuals.  In particular, the Respondent noted that there was little
    evidence of claimed contact between the Appellant and his children.  In
    order to maintain  contact  with  them,  he  would  have  submitted  an
    application for leave to remain on this basis sooner.  His  application
    was made only after he was  encountered  by  immigration  officials  in
    January  2011  whilst  his  eldest  child  had  been  born   in   2006.
    Accordingly it was considered that the timing of the submission of such
    an application after he had been apprehended  by  the  South  Yorkshire
    Police and served with notice of an IS151A in March 2011 undermined the
    overall credibility of his claims.  The Respondent also considered  his
    immigration history and did not accept that there was any record of  an
    application being lodged prior to  the  submission  stated  in  October
    2011.  The Respondent considered the Appellant's private life that  may
    have been established in the United Kingdom but after  considering  all
    of   those   matters,   the   Respondent   refused   the   application.



115. The Appellant exercised his right to appeal and the matter came  before
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Howard)  sitting  in  Bradford  on  19th
    December 2011.  The judge heard oral evidence from the  Appellant  only
    and set out a note of that evidence in pr�cis form at paragraphs 6-8 of
    the determination.  After considering the  evidence  in  this  case  he
    reached the conclusion that it had not been established that there  was
    family life in the United Kingdom between the Appellant and  the  three
    children nor that he had demonstrated that he  had  any  meaningful  or
    regular contact with those children in the United Kingdom.  Furthermore
    having considered the case in the light of the circumstances set out in
    paragraph 395C he found nothing  to  conclude  that  removal  would  be
    unlawful in this Appellant's case.

116. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal that decision  and  such
    permission was granted on 30th January 2012 by the First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Nicholson).  The grant of permission reads as follows:-

         "The Appellant appealed on the grounds that the judge  had  ignored
         the law and not made a proper consideration of Article  8  on  'the
         case facts.'

         Although not raised in the Grounds of Appeal, it is  arguable  that
         the judge made errors of law in the following respects.

         (a)  The judge accepted that the Appellant is  the  father  of  the
             three minor children in this county.  In those  circumstances,
             it is arguable  that  the  judge  made  an  error  of  law  in
             asserting that  there  was  no  family  life  as  between  the
             Appellant and the children simply because  of  concerns  about
             contact  and  in  failing  to  consider  the  children's  best
             interests.  In Berrehab v The Netherlands [1989] 11  EHRR  322
             the European Court said  that  'the  concept  of  family  life
             embraces, even when there is no cohabitation, the tie  between
             the parent and his or her child ...'

         (b)  This finding arguably vitiates the  findings  under  paragraph
             395C of the Rules.

         4.   At paragraph 10 of the determination, the judge arguably erred
             in law in asserting that the relevant date  was  the  date  of
             decision,  albeit  that  he  appears   nonetheless   to   have
             considered the situation as at the date of hearing.

              Although I do not refuse permission on Grounds  2  to  8  they
             appear  to  be  no  more  than  an  attempt  to  re-argue  the
             evidence."

117. Thus the appeal came before the  Upper  Tribunal.   The  Appellant  was
    represented by Mr Medhurst (Counsel instructed on behalf of  Marks  and
    Marks Solicitors) and the Respondent  by  Mrs  Petterson  (Home  Office
    Presenting Officer).  Mr Medhurst had produced a skeleton argument  and
    supplemented this with his oral submissions.   He  submitted  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Howard)  had  made  an  error  of  law  as
    identified by Immigration Judge Nicholson in the  grant  of  permission
    although that had not been submitted in the grounds of the  application
    for permission to appeal.  The error in this case was that  whilst  the
    judge had found the Appellant is the father of the  three  children  he
    did not accept that there was any family life and that was contrary  to
    the European case of Berrehab (as cited in the  grant  of  permission).
    Furthermore, the judge erred in law by not considering  the  children's
    interests in accordance with  Section  55  of  the  BCIA  2009  and  in
    particular, as emphasised in the decision of the Supreme  Court  in  ZH
    (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4, the wishes and feelings of the  children  had
    not been ascertained when reaching a decision.  In  this  case  it  may
    have involved separate representation of  the  child  or  at  least  an
    independent investigation.

118. Mr Medhurst also submitted that there had  been  family  life  in  this
    case and that he had produced photographic evidence and evidence in the
    form of bills and receipts and that that  was  sufficient  evidence  to
    demonstrate that there was family life.  Whilst the grant of permission
    made reference to Grounds  2  to  8  as  an  attempt  to  re-argue  the
    evidence, it was still the position that the judge was in error by  not
    considering the interests of the children as a primary consideration in
    reaching  the  decision  in  relation  to  family  life  and   removal.
    Furthermore, the judge failed to consider the issue of private life  in
    any way whatsoever.  The Appellant claimed to have been in  the  United
    Kingdom for a period of fourteen years and therefore had established  a
    private life but the judge made no findings or considered that specific
    aspect of the case at all.  The Appellant had provided a statement  and
    letters from friends and also provided information concerning  attempts
    made to make applications to remain in the United Kingdom prior to that
    of March 2011.  Thus it was submitted there was an error of law in  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal.

119. Miss Pettersen on behalf of the Respondent submitted  that  whilst  the
    Judge did not make a reference to Section 55 of the  2009  Act  it  was
    clear why he had  rejected  the  Appellant's  evidence  concerning  his
    claimed contact  with  the  children.   It  was  significant  that  the
    Appellant's evidence was described as being wholly  unconvincing  which
    led to the conclusions of the judge in the  determination.   The  judge
    therefore did have the children's welfare in mind but it was clear that
    because he had not accepted the Appellant's evidence about  the  nature
    of contact that he reached the  conclusion  that  there  had  not  been
    established on the evidence produced a family life between the children
    and their father.  As regards the  private  life  point  raised  by  Mr
    Medhurst, the Secretary of State did deal with the issue of the claimed
    private life in the decision letter and  Section  395C  considerations.
    Whilst she accepted that there were various issues raised in respect of
    the  Appellant's  private  life,  it  had  not  been  accepted  by  the
    Respondent that he had lived in the United Kingdom for  fourteen  years
    and the length of  residence  was  disputed.   Regardless  of  when  he
    arrived, in 2011 he would not have met the fourteen  years  requirement
    in any event having been apprehended in March of that year.  Whilst she
    conceded that the judge had failed to deal with the  issue  of  private
    life she submitted that it was not fatal to the determination and  that
    the decision should be upheld.  Mr Medhurst by way of reply  reiterated
    that the children's interests had not been  considered  and  that  Lady
    Hale made reference to  the  fact  that  they  should  have  their  own
    representation or their thoughts, wishes and feelings should have  been
    ascertained.  The Appellant had claimed to be visiting  them  regularly
    and produced photographs and travel tickets.  In those circumstances he
    invited the court to find that the First-tier  Tribunal  had  erred  in
    law.

120. I reserved my determination.

121.   It is submitted on behalf of the Appellant,  relying  on  the  issues
    raised in the grant of permission rather than as set out in the grounds
    of permission, that the judge fell into error  by  accepting  that  the
    Appellant was the father of three minor children but that there was  no
    family life due to concerns of contact and not taking into account  the
    children's best  interests.   Mr  Medhurst  relies  upon  the  case  of
    Berrehab v The Netherlands [1989] 11 EHRR 322 where  the  court  stated
    that "the concept of family life embraces, even when there  is  no  co-
    habitation, the tie between a parent and his or  her  child  ..."  (see
    skeleton argument page 1 and relied  upon  in  oral  submissions).   He
    further submits the judge  fell  into  error  by  failing  to  consider
    Section 55 of the 2009 Act and that the  judge  failed  to  follow  the
    guidance given by Lady Hale in ZH (Tanzania) (as cited) in ascertaining
    the wishes of the children which may involve separate representation or
    at the very least some independent investigation.

122. I have considered those submissions with  care.   Whilst  the  European
    Court of Human Rights has established that, from birth, a child  has  a
    bond with his or her parents  which  amounts  to  "family  life"  which
    remains in existence  despite  voluntary  separation  (see  Sen  v  The
    Netherlands [2007] 36 EHRR 7, (1996) Gul  v  Switzerland  22  EHRR  9).
    However the question which arose in this  case  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was whether on the facts of  this  case  family  life  existed
    within the meaning of Article 8(1).  This is a matter of fact  for  the
    judge to decide on the evidence presented by this Appellant.  The judge
    had the opportunity to hear the oral evidence of the Appellant  himself
    and for that to be the subject of  cross-examination  and  to  consider
    that evidence in the context of the documentary evidence also produced.
     He gave a short pr�cis of the oral evidence before him at paragraphs 6
    - 8 of the determination.

123. There is no dispute that the principles to be applied when  considering
    a claim under Article 8 are those set out in the well-established five-
    stage test in R (Razgar) v SSHD [2009] 1AC 1119.   The  judge  set  out
    those principles at paragraphs 12 to 15 of the determination.  He  then
    set out the basis upon which the issue of family life had been advanced
    on behalf of the Appellant.  It is important to set out  those  factual
    findings  that  the  judge  made  at  paragraphs  16  to  17   of   the
    determination.  The judge said this:-

         "16. The family life advanced here is predicated  upon  three  core
             facts.  The first that he is married to MF.  The  second  that
             they have three children  and  the  third  that  they  are  in
             regular  and  meaningful  contact  with  one   another.    The
             Appellant and MF met in 2003 and married in 2005.  There is no
             document  to  support  the  fact  of  the  marriage  and   the
             'unregistered' nature of the union is cited as  a  reason  why
             they do not co-habit.  The Appellant is named as the father on
             the birth certificates of the two older children, but not  the
             youngest.  Again the 'unregistered' status of the marriage  is
             cited as the explanation.  I  have  evidence  in  photographic
             form of the Appellant  in  company  with  a  woman  and  three
             children in a domestic setting and a letter purporting  to  be
             written by MF dated 9th September  2011.   The  only  evidence
             that they are MF and the children comes  from  the  Appellant.
             Ordinarily that would not be of  concern,  however  given  the
             absence of any input from her or those children in  any  other
             aspect of the case causes concern  on  my  part  as  to  those
             actually in the photographs and who wrote the letter.  He  has
             also produced some bills to  show  purchases  by  him  in  the
             Slough area.  What is entirely absent  in  this  case  is  any
             evidence of contact between the Appellant and his  family.   I
             have nothing from either the mother of  the  children  or  the
             children themselves to say what their  relationship  with  the
             Appellant is.  As for the Appellant his  evidence  of  contact
             with his family is wholly unconvincing.  He lives  miles  away
             from them when there is no real bar to his living much closer.
               There  is  not  a  single  document  which   evidences   any
             involvement in the children's welfare or education.   Evidence
             of any involvement in their collective life on the part of the
             Appellant is absent.  In short the  Appellant  has  failed  to
             satisfy me it is more likely than not that  he  currently  has
             any family life with MF and the three children.   The  most  I
             can conclude from the evidence is that in the recent past  the
             Appellant has been in a relationship with her that  has  borne
             her three children.

         17.      It is against this factual background that I  must  decide
             whether the decision of the Respondent was  proportionate  and
             therefore  lawful.   I  am  satisfied  the  decision  of   the
             Respondent does not interfere in the Appellant's family  life,
             as the Appellant has not satisfied me that there is any family
             life."

124. It had been the Respondent's case (as set out in  the  decision  letter
    of 14th November 2011) that the evidence produced did  not  demonstrate
    that the Appellant  maintained  a  level  of  contact  with  the  three
    children as claimed citing concerns regarding the content  of  a  short
    letter purportedly sent by the mother of the children  and  that  there
    was no other cogent evidence of contact with the children  either  from
    themselves or from relatives of the children/mother.  Thus it  was  not
    accepted that the evidence demonstrated that he had  established  close
    and frequent contact with the children as claimed.  The Respondent also
    relied upon his immigration history citing the point  that  if  he  had
    genuinely wished to remain in the UK for the  children  then  he  would
    have submitted an application for leave to remain on that basis  before
    being encountered by immigration officials in March  2011  (the  eldest
    child having been born in 2006).  The  submission  of  the  application
    only after being apprehended  by  the  police  undermined  the  overall
    credibility of his claimed family life.

125. The judge considered the "three core  facts"  which  were  advanced  on
    behalf of the Appellant before the  First-tier  Tribunal.   As  to  the
    first fact, that he was married to M F, the judge considered  the  oral
    evidence given by the Appellant in which he had claimed that he and his
    wife did not co-habit because  of  the  "unregistered  nature  of  that
    union."  This is also the explanation given as to why he named  on  the
    birth certificate of the eldest two children but not the youngest.  The
    judge found as a fact that there was no documentary evidence to support
    the Appellant's  evidence  of  there  being  such  a  marriage  or  the
    "unregistered" nature of the union.  However in respect of  the  second
    core fact he accepted that the Appellant was the father  of  the  three
    children concerned.  In respect  of  the  third  core  fact  "that  the
    children are in regular and meaningful contact with  the  father,"  the
    judge considered the evidence before the Tribunal.  That  consisted  of
    the oral evidence of the  Appellant,  the  photographs  produced,  copy
    bills/receipts produced and the letter  from  MF  dated  9th  September
    2011.  As regards the cogency of the photographic  evidence,  he  noted
    that "I have evidence in photographic form of the Appellant in  company
    with a woman and three children in a  domestic  setting  and  a  letter
    purporting to be written by MF dated  9th  September  2011.   The  only
    evidence that they are MF and the children comes  from  the  Appellant.
    Ordinarily that would not be of concern, however given the  absence  of
    any input from her or those children in any other aspect  of  the  case
    causes concern on my part as to those actually in the  photographs  and
    who wrote the letter."  He  gave  consideration  to  the  receipt/bills
    produced to show purchases in the Slough area.  Those bills were in the
    Appellant's bundle; some were undated (tasting hut).  Others related to
    food bills, a car phone warehouse, receipts from  2011).   However  the
    judge found that the most significant feature in his  analysis  of  the
    evidence was a  dearth  of  evidence  concerning  contact  between  the
    Appellant and the children.  As the judge noted;-

         "What is entirely absent in this case is any  evidence  of  contact
         between the Appellant and his family.  I have nothing  from  either
         the mother of the children or the children themselves to  say  what
         their relationship with the Appellant is.   ...   There  is  not  a
         single document which evidences any involvement in  the  children's
         welfare  or  education.   Evidence  of  any  involvement  in  their
         collective life on the part of the Appellant is absent."

126. The judge went on to find that the evidence of  the  Appellant  himself
    was "unconvincing" and importantly there  was  not  a  single  document
    which evidenced any involvement in the children's welfare or  education
    and that evidence of any involvement on the Appellant's part was absent
    from their collective life.  It was  on  this  basis  that  the  judge,
    whilst accepting that in the recent past he had been in a  relationship
    with MF and she had borne three children,  that  was  not  the  current
    position and that he currently had no family  life  with  MF  or  those
    three children.

127.   I have considered with care those findings of fact in  the  light  of
    the evidence that was produced before the First-tier  Tribunal.   I  am
    satisfied that those findings of fact were made on the basis of all the
    evidence that was before the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  I  am  equally
    satisfied that the judge in  reaching  those  conclusions,  which  were
    adequately reasoned, were ones that were entirely open to  him  on  the
    evidence.  The grounds submitted on  the  Appellant's  behalf  in  this
    respect amount to no more than a disagreement with the conclusions that
    the judge reached having had the opportunity to hear the oral  evidence
    of the Appellant and against the background of the documentary evidence
    produced.

128. In considering this appeal I have also borne in mind  the  decision  of
    MA (Somalia) [2010] UKSC 49 in which Sir John Dyson SCJ at paragraph 43
    reiterated the remarks of Baroness Hale  in  AH  (Sudan)  v  SSHD  UKHL
    [2008] 1AC 678 in which she urged caution upon the  part  of  Appellate
    Tribunals  when  dealing  with  decisions  of  the  lower  courts.   At
    paragraph 45 Sir John Dyson stated:-

         "The court should not be astute to characterise as an error of  law
         what, in truth, is no more  than  a  disagreement  with  the  AIT's
         assessment of the facts.  Moreover, where a relevant point  is  not
         expressly mentioned by the Tribunal, the  court  will  be  slow  to
         infer that it has not been taken into account."

129. The judge did  not  make  specific  reference  to  Section  55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.  That section came  into
    force on 2nd November 2009 and the decision  in  ZH  (Tanzania)  [2011]
    UKSC 4 explains the duty imposed by Section 55.   In  the  decision  TS
    [2010] the duty under Section 55 is described as thus:-

         "To safeguard and promote the welfare of children who  are  in  the
         UK.  Guidance was issued entitled 'every  child  matters'  stating,
         'in accordance with the UN Convention on the rights  of  the  child
         the best interests of the child will  be  a  primary  consideration
         (although not  necessarily  the  only  consideration)  when  making
         decisions affecting children."

    In the light of the decision of ZH (Tanzania) it is  more  accurate  to
    say that the best interests of the  child  will  always  be  a  primary
    consideration, but that those interests  may  be  outweighed  by  other
    considerations.  Lady Hale emphasised "a primary consideration" is  not
    the same thing as the 'paramount consideration'  as  found  within  the
    Children Act 1989."  The Respondent in  the  decision  letter  of  14th
    November 2011 had made reference to Section  55  of  the  2009  Act  at
    paragraph 33.  Whilst the judge did not make specific reference to that
    section, in the decision of AJ (India) [2011]  EWCA  Civ  1191  Pil  LJ
    stated that the absence of a reference to Section 55(1) is not fatal to
    a decision.  "What matters is the substance of the attention  given  to
    the 'overall wellbeing' (Baroness Hale) of the child."

    The primacy of the interests of the child should be considered  in  the
    context of the particular family circumstances.   Mr  Medhurst  submits
    that the judge fell into error  by  not  having  in  mind  the  primary
    interests of the children and in particular that he did  not  ascertain
    the wishes and feelings of the  children  concerned  in  this  case  as
    identified by Baroness Hale in ZH (Tanzania).  I  have  considered  the
    evidence submitted on behalf of the  Appellant  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal which was his opportunity to put  before  the  judge  all  the
    evidence relevant to the application  made  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom on Article 8 grounds and in particular his claim  that  he  had
    established family life with his three children with whom he enjoyed  a
    relationship and one of meaningful contact.  It is clear in my judgment
    that the First-tier Tribunal focused upon the interest of the  children
    concerned but reached the conclusion after careful consideration of the
    evidence produced before the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  there  was  a
    dearth of evidence relating to the issue of meaningful contact and  the
    relationship between  father  and  children.   The  Appellant  had  the
    opportunity to provide evidence in  this  application  to  support  his
    account of his relationship with the children. The time to present that
    evidence was before the First  Tier  Tribunal.  The  judge  identified,
    rightly in my judgment, that he  had  no  evidence  from  the  children
    themselves or from their primary carer MF to even  begin  to  ascertain
    the wishes and feelings of the children (I refer to paragraph 16 of the
    determination).  Whilst Mr Medhurst submits that the judge should  have
    ordered separate representation for the  children,  there  was  nothing
    upon which the judge could even base such a  process.   The  burden  of
    proof is on the Appellant to produce the evidence to the  Tribunal  and
    the judge clearly identified  what  he  considered  to  be  significant
    evidence which had not been produced.  He specifically identified  that
    absent from the case was evidence of contact between the Appellant  and
    the children and in particular nothing from the children themselves  or
    their mother describing the relationship between themselves  and  their
    father.  Importantly the judge identified that there was not "a  single
    document which evidences any involvement in the children's  welfare  or
    education."  Having considered the bundle of  documents,  there  is  no
    evidence from their schools, any evidence from the  mother  as  to  the
    part he plays in their welfare, there is nothing in  his  statement  as
    regards specific evidence of their welfare.  In the light of the dearth
    of such evidence dealing with the matter that went to the heart of  the
    issue, in my judgment the judge was entitled to reach the finding  that
    he did that whilst he had in the past been in a  relationship  with  MF
    and three children had been born,  he  was  not  currently  enjoying  a
    family life with them and that he had not discharged  the  burden  upon
    him to demonstrate that he had maintained  any  meaningful  or  regular
    contact with those children.  In those  circumstances  I  am  satisfied
    that the judge did not err in law in his consideration of the issue  of
    family life under Article 8 of the ECHR.

130. The second point raised relates to the judge's  failure  to  deal  with
    the Appellant's private life.  Mr Medhurst  submits  that  despite  the
    Appellant being resident in  the  UK  for  fourteen  years  and  having
    provided evidence before the  judge  in  this  regard,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did not deal with this issue at all.  Miss  Pettersen  submits
    that whilst there was no reference to this in  the  determination,  the
    case was really advanced only on the basis of his family life with  the
    children and thus there was no error of law.

131. I have considered those submissions in the light of  the  determination
    of the First-tier Tribunal.  The  decision  letter  of  the  Respondent
    deals with the issue of private life, (as distinct from the family life
    arguments raised) at paragraphs  30  to  32  of  the  decision  letter.
    Whilst it is submitted that the  Appellant  had  been  in  the  UK  for
    fourteen years, it is clear  that  there  was  a  dispute  between  the
    parties and the Respondent clearly identified this dispute in the  lack
    of acceptance that the Appellant had been resident in the UK  for  that
    period of time citing the lack of evidence relating  to  this  and  the
    fact that in 2002 a passport was issued to this  Appellant  in  Mirpur,
    Pakistan on 29th March 2002 which was inconsistent with  his  claim  to
    have entered the UK in  January  1998.   Furthermore,  his  immigration
    history was referred to and that there was no evidence that he had made
    any application to remain in the UK prior to being apprehended in March
    2011.

132.  The Appellant had produced letters from  solicitors  in  this  respect
    and also letters from friends concerning the nature of the private life
    that he had established.  However, the determination of the  First-tier
    Tribunal did not deal with  any  of  those  issues  and  there  was  no
    reference to the private life of the Appellant whatsoever.   The  judge
    did not resolve any issues of fact relating to the length of time  that
    he had been in the UK nor the issue of delay raised on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant based on the disclosure of albeit limited evidence from legal
    representatives that he had made an application before  that  in  March
    2011.  In those circumstances, I am satisfied that the  judge  made  an
    error by not dealing with the aspect of the  Appellant's  private  life
    raised by him.  Consequently,  there  will  be  a  resumed  hearing  in
    respect of this issue only.  For the foregoing reasons, I have set  out
    that I am satisfied that the judge made no error of law in  considering
    the issue of family life  for  the  reasons  given  and  therefore  the
    findings of fact made by the First-tier Tribunal and that part  of  the
    decision shall stand.  Whilst in the skeleton argument it is  submitted
    that the case should be "remitted for a separate full  hearing  on  the
    merits," I consider that the decision requires to  be  re-made  dealing
    with the issue in which the error of law has been demonstrated,  namely
    the issue of the Appellant's private life.  Therefore  a  hearing  will
    take place in accordance with the accompanying directions.



Signed                              Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds


