
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33641/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 3rd September, 2014                          |On 11th September, 2014    |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD

                                   Between

                          mr ernest chuka nwanolue
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Pipi, Counsel instructed by Templeton Legal
Services
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of  Nigeria,  who  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom on 25th July 2004 with a student visa.  He applied for leave to
    remain as a visitor which was refused  and  he  was  found  undertaking
    employment without permission.  By 22nd June  2010  all  appeal  rights
    were exhausted and on 29th October 2010 he made an  application  to  be
    considered outside the Rules on human rights grounds.  That application
    was refused but his appeal before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Iqbal  was
    allowed in a determination promulgated on 26th June 2014.

 2. The judge concluded that the Appellant could not meet  the  Immigration
    Rules and therefore considered Article 8 ECHR  taking  into  account  a
    number of factors in undertaking the  balancing  exercise  between  the
    competing rights.  She considered the best interests  of  the  children
    and in all of the circumstances found that the decision to  remove  the
    Appellant and his family and in particular his daughter Deborah not  to
    be a proportionate one.

 3. Grounds of application were lodged referring  to  well-known  case  law
    including Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC) and  Nagre  [2013]  EWHC  721
    (Admin).  It was said that the Tribunal had failed to provide  adequate
    reasons why the Appellant's circumstances  were  either  compelling  or
    exceptional.  While the child was aged 7 years it  was  submitted  that
    she was young enough to adapt to life in Nigeria and it was also in her
    best interests to enjoy the benefits of being a Nigerian citizen there.



 4. Permission to appeal was granted.   First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Parkes
    found that it was arguable that the judge erred  in  finding  that,  by
    implication, it was not reasonable to expect the child to  relocate  to
    Nigeria.  There was also no reference to the  case  of  Zoumbas  [2013]
    UKSC 74.  A Rule 24 response  was  lodged  stating  that  some  of  the
    grounds were misconceived and the judge had followed the  authority  of
    Nagre.

 5. Thus the matter came before me on the above date.

 6. For the Home Office Mr Wilding relied on his grounds.  At no stage  had
    the judge referred herself back to the Immigration Rules in the  course
    of her determination.  In particular there  was  no  proper  assessment
    towards what was  the  Secretary  of  State's  side  in  the  balancing
    exercise.  There was an incomplete proportionality assessment.   I  was
    referred to well-known case law including Zoumbas  and  what  was  said
    there in paragraph 24 namely that, other things being equal, it was  in
    the best interests of the children that they and their  parents  stayed
    in the United Kingdom so  that  they  could  obtain  such  benefits  as
    healthcare and education which the decision-maker recognised  might  be
    of a higher standard than would be available in the Congo.  However  it
    was noteworthy that other things were not equal  and  that  the  family
    were not British citizens.

 7. In addition I was reminded of what was stated in EV  (Philippines)  and
    Others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874 and to paragraphs 58 to 66  where  it
    was said "we cannot educate the world".  It was also useful to look  at
    what was said in FK &  OK  (Botswana)  v  SSHD  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  238,
    paragraph 11, where Sir Stanley  Burnton  gave  reasons  for  attaching
    considerable importance to immigration control.  I was asked to set the
    decision aside, re-make it and dismiss the appeal.

 8. For the Home Office Mr Pipi relied on his written submissions.  It  was
    quite clear that the judge had regard to the Rules and I  was  referred
    to various paragraphs in  the  determination  which  showed  that.   In
    paragraph 30 the judge had rejected the  Respondent's  case  under  the
    Rules.

 9. Contrary to what was said by the Home Office the judge had meticulously
    followed and applied the principles as recommended by Gulshan.   I  was
    asked to uphold the decision.

10. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

11. The judge set out, in considerable detail, the reasons for  refusal  of
    the application by the Secretary of State.  The judge noted the  change
    of Immigration Rules post 9th July 2012 which set out the Secretary  of
    State's position on Article 8 ECHR.  She noted that at the date of  the
    hearing  the  Appellant's  daughter  had  acquired  over  seven  years'
    continuous residence here.  She considered Immigration Rule 276ADE(vi).
     For reasons she gave she  found  that  the  Appellant  was  unable  to
    succeed with reference to that ground.  She  therefore  concluded  that
    the Appellant could not meet the Immigration Rules.

12. The judge then recognised that she should consider Article 8 outside of
    the Rules and referred to MF (Nigeria) v SSHD  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1129.
    She also referred to Gulshan and Nagre.  After that the judge  referred
    to further well-known case law in terms of Huang (described as UKHL 11)
    as well as R (Razgar) v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27.

13. She found Article 8 was engaged because there was a family life between
    the Appellant and his family who are  Nigerian  citizens  as  well  the
    private life that the family had established here.   Furthermore  their
    first child was born on 28th October 2006 in  the  United  Kingdom  and
    their second child was also born here on  13th  February  2013.   Their
    first child was aged 7 and attending school.  She considered the  House
    of Lords decision in Beoku-Betts [2008] UKHL 39.

14. She took account of a number of factors in  considering  the  balancing
    exercise as required under Article 8.  It seems to me that, contrary to
    the submissions made on behalf of the Home Office, the judge was  aware
    and commented on the fact  that  the  Appellant  and  his  partner  had
    remained here unlawfully from at least 2005.

15. The judge had regard to the best interests  of  Deborah  and  that  the
    welfare of a child was a primary consideration  going  on  to  consider
    what was said in ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4.

16. It seems to me that the critical point in the argument on  whether  the
    judge erred in law is that the judge recognised  that  neither  of  the
    Appellant's children was British nationals unlike the  children  in  ZH
    (paragraph 45).  While the judge did not refer  in  specific  terms  to
    Zoumbas she was clearly aware of the significant distinction to be made
    between those children who are British citizens and those who are  not.
    She went on to say that despite the fact  that  they  were  non-British
    nationals it would be unfair for them to be uprooted from their life in
    the United Kingdom and in particular Deborah who  he  found  was  well-
    established in her life here as  opposed  to  an  uncertain  future  in
    Nigeria.  She was performing well and was integrated in all  activities
    of the school.  As such she had become  "an  innocent  victim"  of  her
    parents' choices.  The judge then referred to further case  law  in  MK
    (best interests of child) India [2011] UKUT 475 (IAC) and  Azimi-Moayed
    and Others (decisions affecting children; onward appeals)  [2013]  UKUT
    00197 (IAC) setting out the Tribunal conclusions in that regard.

17.  In  paragraph  49  the  judge  referred  to  the  "totality"  of   the
    circumstances that she had highlighted  and  acknowledged  this  was  a
    finely balanced case.  She then turned to the fact that  there  was  no
    redeeming quality in  relation  to  the  Appellant  and  his  partner's
    actions and, as such, she was plainly attaching considerable weight  to
    the public interest.   Nevertheless  she  found  on  balance  that  the
    Appellant had demonstrated that the  decision  tor  remove  him  was  a
    disproportionate one.  In my view, contrary to  what  is  said  in  the
    grounds of application, the judge had referred to Gulshan and Nagre and
    appreciated that there had to be exceptional circumstances to  consider
    the case outwith the Rules.  She did have regard to the actions of  the
    parents.  As stated  she  made  it  quite  clear  that  there  was  "no
    redeeming quality" in relation  to  the  Appellant  and  his  partner's
    actions.  She acknowledged that  the  two  children  were  not  British
    nationals and therefore did not follow the route set out  in  ZH.   She
    was entitled to conclude that  it  would  be  unfair  for  particularly
    Deborah to be uprooted, given  that  she  was  integrated  in  all  her
    activities in school and that she had become an innocent victim of  her
    parents' decision.

18. As the judge put it this was a finely balanced case. Of course it might
    well be that having regard to the actions of  the  parents  that  other
    judges would have placed more weight on the public interest and that  a
    decision would have been made to dismiss the appeal.  Such  a  decision
    may not have been challengeable.  However  it  seems  to  me  that  the
    decision of the judge cannot be categorised as perverse or unreasonable
    or that she did not consider the appeal within  the  appropriate  legal
    framework or did not give proper weight to the public interest.

19. It follows that, in my view, there is no material error of law in  this
    determination which must stand.

Decision

20. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

21. I do not set aside the decision.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald
