
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/33155/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:    Field House               |Determination Promulgated |
|On 20 June 2014                        |On 2 July 2014            |
|                                       |                          |

                                   Before


                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                 ILIJA GACEV
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:             Mr S Kandala, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:            Ms V Targonska, Igor & Co, Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against  the  determination
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge L Murray in which she allowed  the  appeal
    of the Claimant, a citizen  of  Macedonia,  against  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision to refuse to  issue  a  Permanent  Residence  Card  as
    confirmation of the Appellant's right to reside in the United  Kingdom.
    The Judge allowed the appeal on the basis that the decision was not  in
    accordance with the law because the Respondent failed to  consider  the
    application under the Long  Residence  and  Private  Life  policy.  For
    convenience I will refer to the parties as  they  appeared  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant's  application  for  a  Residence  Card  was  refused  by
    reference  to  regulations  15(1)(f),  15(1)(b)  and   10(5)   of   the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 (as amended) on 18 July  2013.   The
    Appellant exercised his right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  and
    at the appeal hearing accepted that he did not meet the requirements of
    the EEA regulations but asserted that the decision had not been made in
    accordance with the Respondent's policy. It was on this  limited  basis
    that the appeal was allowed. The Respondent applied for  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  The application was  granted  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Reed on 13 May 2014 on the basis that

        "The  Grounds  do  disclose  arguable   errors   of   law   because
        irrespective of whether or not the appellant had previously held  a
        Residence Card, for the policy to apply, the appellant  would  have
        to show 10 years of lawful residence. This means during any  period
        during which the appellant relied  upon  the  EEA  Regulations  the
        relevant EEA national must have been exercising her treaty  rights.
        The Judge has erred because he appears to have  concluded  that  as
        the appellant had a Residence Card as the family member of  an  EEA
        national between February 2002 and February 2007 there was no  need
        for  him  to  demonstrate  that  the  relevant  EEA  national   was
        exercising her Treaty  rights  during  this  period.  There  is  no
        reference in the determination to evidence that  the  EEA  national
        was indeed exercising her Treaty rights throughout that period."



 3. At the hearing before me  the  Appellant  was  represented  by  the  Ms
    Targonska and Mr Kandala appeared to represent the Secretary of  State.
    Ms Targonska submitted a copy of the Respondent's policy guidance 'Long
    Residence and Private Life' having previously submitted a copy  of  the
    determination in the Appellant's previous  appeal  (IA/18773/2007).  Mr
    Kandala submitted a copy of the decision in Boodhoo  and  another  (EEA
    Regs: relevant evidence) [2013] UKUT 00346 (IAC).


Submissions - Error of Law

 4. On behalf the Secretary of State Mr Kandala relied on  the  grounds  of
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal. The authority of  Boodhoo  (at  paragraph
    18) and previous authorities show that the issue of a Residence Card is
    not a status given but a confirmation of status and whether a person is
    a qualified person is a matter of fact. The Court of Justice  took  the
    same approach in Dias [2011] EUECJ C-325/09. It  was  conceded  at  the
    First-tier Tribunal  hearing  that  the  Appellant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of the  regulations  (paragraph  12).  The  chronology  is
    referred to in paragraph 21 of the determination and  the  Judge  notes
    that the Appellant held a Residence Card from 11  February  2002  until
    February 2007 and finds that he was therefore "lawfully  resident  over
    this period". This does not automatically follow.  The Judge goes on to
    note that his application for a Permanent Residence Card was refused on
    24 October 2007 and his appeal against  that  refusal  dismissed  on  2
    April 2008 and adds that before the time limit for appeal that decision
    had expired he was granted temporary admission. Temporary admission  is
    not a grant of lawful residence and whereas a gap between  certificates
    is not necessarily fatal it is a question of fact  whether  during  any
    period a person is the  family  member  of  someone  exercising  treaty
    rights.  The  Respondent's  Long  Residence  and  Private  Life  Policy
    referred to in paragraph 22 is  not  applicable,  if  lawful  residence
    cannot be shown under the regulations it  cannot  be  shown  under  the
    policy.

 5. For the Appellant Ms Targonska referred to KA  (Afghanistan)  and  said
    that once an application has been refused the Secretary of State  needs
    to consider all grounds put forward. The  Long  Residence  and  Private
    Life policy was raised in the application.  It  is  accepted  that  the
    Appellant does not  meet  the  requirements  of  the  EEA  regulations.
    However the issue of the Residence Card is proof that the appellant has
    been here lawfully. The policy should be looked at as a whole  and  the
    Judge was correct in her finding at paragraph 22. Despite the fact that
    the Appellant's former wife was not exercising her treaty  continuously
    the Judge was correct in allowing the appeal. There would be  no  sense
    in having a policy outside the regulations if to meet the  requirements
    of the  policy  a  person  needed  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    regulations. It all comes back to 10 years  lawful  residence  and  the
    only issue is whether the Appellant has completed this period.

 6. Mr Kandala responded to say that the rationality of the policy could be
    the situation where a person has a mixture  of  lawful  residence  part
    being in accordance with the Immigration rules and part  in  accordance
    with the Regulations. Mr Targonska disagreed.


Decision

Error of law

 7. The Appellant applied for a Permanent Residence Card as confirmation of
    a right to reside in the United Kingdom. His application was based upon
    a retained right of residence following his divorce from Marcia  Regina
    Leites an  EEA  national.  The  application  was  refused  because  the
    Respondent was not satisfied that the Appellant had a retained right of
    residence in accordance with regulation 10 of the Immigration (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006. There were three prime reasons  given.
    Firstly it was not accepted that his divorce, obtained in Macedonia was
    valid under  English  law.  Secondly  it  was  not  accepted  that  the
    Appellant's former spouse was exercising treaty rights at the  time  of
    the divorce. Thirdly it was not accepted that  the  Appellant's  former
    spouse had continuously exercised treaty rights up to the time of their
    divorce.

 8. At the appeal hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal  the  Appellant's
    representative accepted that the Appellant  was  not  validly  divorced
    and therefore could not rely on the EEA regulations and instead  relied
    upon the Respondent's guidance on Long Residence and Private life.  The
    argument put forward was that the Appellant had lived lawfully  in  the
    United Kingdom for more  than  10  years  and  that  although  residing
    lawfully under the EEA regulations does not count as  lawful  residence
    under paragraph 276A of the Immigration Rules for family members of EEA
    nationals the Respondent's policy makes such provision. The Judge found
    (at paragraph 22) that the  Appellant  was  lawfully  resident  in  the
    United Kingdom "under the EEA regulations, by virtue of statute due  to
    appeal rights and by virtue of temporary admission"  from  11  February
    2002 to 5 May 2014 and so met  the  requirements  of  the  Respondent's
    policy.  The  Judge  therefore  dismissed  the  appeal  under  the  EEA
    regulations but allowed it on the basis that the decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law because the Respondent failed to  consider  the
    application under the Long Residence and Private Life policy.

 9. In my judgement the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  law  in  making  the
    finding that the Appellant had been lawfully  resident  in  the  United
    Kingdom from 11 February 2002 to 5 May  2014.  The  error  comes  about
    firstly in the finding (paragraph 21) that the fact that the  Appellant
    held a Residence Card from 11 February 2002 until February  2007  meant
    that he was lawfully resident during this period. It is trite law  that
    the issue of a Residence Card is not a grant of leave  to  remain.  The
    effect, as confirmed by Dias is that whether a person  is  a  qualified
    person is a matter of fact.

10. Secondly the Judge finds that the Appellant's residence remained lawful
    due to his exercise of appeal rights. This is a further error  of  law.
    The exercise of appeal rights has  the  effect  of  extending  existing
    leave to remain (section 3C Immigration Act 1971). The Appellant  never
    held leave to remain, his appeal was against the decision to refuse  to
    issue a Permanent Residence Card as confirmation of a right to  remain.
    Whether he held a right to remain (as the spouse  of  an  EEA  national
    exercising treaty rights) was a matter of fact.

11. Thirdly the Judge errs by finding that temporary admission  constitutes
    lawful residence. It does not. Section 276A(b)(ii) of  the  Immigration
    Rules  states  that  temporary  admission  only  qualifies  as   lawful
    residence if leave to enter or  remain  is  subsequently  granted.  The
    Respondent's policy upon which the decision to allow  this  appeal  was
    based specifically states (page 22 of 67)

        "Temporary admission only qualifies as lawful residence if leave to
        enter
        or leave to remain is later granted."


    The Appellant has never had leave to enter or leave to remain.


12. Finally the finding that the Appellant's Residence Card granted from  5
    May 2009 until 5  May  2014  means  that  the  Appellant  was  lawfully
    residence during this period is an error of law. As with  the  previous
    Residence Card this is not a grant of leave to remain and  whether  the
    Appellant was entitled to residence as the spouse of an EEA national is
    a question of fact.

13. The errors of  law  identified  are  all  fundamental  to  the  Judge's
    decision to allow the appeal on the basis that the decision was not  in
    accordance with the law because the Respondent failed to  consider  the
    application under the Long  Residence  Policy.  It  cannot  render  the
    decision unlawful because the Respondent failed to  consider  a  policy
    that was not applicable. The decision in this respect is set aside.


Remaking the decision

14. In remaking the decision the conclusion that must be drawn follows from
    the above. In the first place the appeal was dismissed by virtue of the
    EEA regulations and that decision is not  challenged  and  must  stand.
    There is in my judgment no reason to  reach  the  conclusion  that  the
    Respondent's decision was not in accordance with the  law.  It  clearly
    was, the Appellant having made an application for a Permanent Residence
    Card in accordance with the EEA Regulations accepts  that  he  did  not
    meet the requirements of the Regulations because he was not entitled to
    reside as the spouse or  former  spouse  of  a  qualified  person.  The
    Appellant was not able to show, indeed for the reasons given  above  he
    could not show, that he had been lawfully resident either in accordance
    with the Immigration Rules or the  EEA  regulations  for  a  continuous
    period of 10 years. He therefore did not meet the requirements  of  the
    Respondent's Long  Residence  Policy.  The  Respondent's  decision  was
    lawful and the appeal is dismissed.


 Summary

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to  allow  the  appeal  on  the
    basis that the Respondent's decision was not in accordance with the law
    involved the making of a material error of law. I allow  the  Secretary
    of State's appeal against the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  and
    set aside that decision.

16. My decision is that the Secretary of State's decision was in accordance
    with the law  and  the  EEA  Regulations.  The  Appellant's  appeal  is
    dismissed.



Signed:                                                  Date:



J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
