
[pic]
IAC-AH-CO-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/34697/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 13 November 2014                  |On 18 November 2014                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         mr Yusuf Ebrahim Kheriwala
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    None


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The respondent whom I shall refer to as the appellant as he was  before
    the First-tier Tribunal is a citizen of India and his date of birth  is
    29 August 1978.
2.   The appellant made an application on 18 July 2012 for leave  to  remain
    on the basis of his private and family life here.  The application  was
    refused by the Secretary of State in a decision of 6 August 2013.   The
    application was considered under the partner route in Appendix FM.  The
    appellant's spouse, Maria Shabbir Hussian is a citizen of Pakistan  and
    she has leave to remain in the UK as a Tier 2 (General)  Migrant  to  1
    August  2014.   The  decision  maker  decided  that   the   appellant's
    application could not succeed under Appendix FM and the application was
    also refused under paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

3.   The appellant entered the UK in 2010 having been granted permission  to
    enter as a Tier 2 (Student).  His leave was extended until 4  September
    2012.  The appellant's wife is in the UK on a work permit  having  come
    here originally in 2007.

4.   The appellant appealed against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    and his appeal was allowed under Article 8 by Judge Monro  following  a
    hearing on 29 July 2014 in a decision that was promulgated on 4  August
    2014.

5.   Permission to appeal against the decision of Judge  Monro  was  granted
    by Judge McClure on 9 October 2014. Thus the matter came before me. The
    appellant attended the hearing alone and unrepresented.

The Findings of the FtT

6.   The findings of the First-tier Tribunal are as follows:-

    "24. In accordance with Gulshan I find that her  are  good  grounds  to
         consider whether the refusal of leave to remain is a breach of  the
         UK obligations under the wider law relating to Article  8  ECHR  as
         there are features relating to the appellant's wife and child which
         are not sufficiently recognised  by  the  Immigration  Rules  which
         would make a failure to do so unjustifiably harsh.


    25.  In considering the position under Article 8  I  have  applied  the
         staged approach  as  set  out  in  Razgar  [2004]  INLR  349.   The
         appellant has established family life  with  his  wife  and  child.
         Potentially the decision interferes with that family  life  and  it
         does interfere  with  the  appellant's  private  life  and  engages
         Article 8 (AG Eritrea) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
         [2007] EWCA Civ 801).


    26.  Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration  Act  2009
         requires the UK Border Agency to carry out its  existing  functions
         in a way that takes into account the need to safeguard and  promote
         the welfare of children in the UK.  The respondent did not consider
         the welfare of the appellant's child as at the time the application
         was made his child had not been born.  I consider Adam's welfare in
         the course of this Determination.


    27.  The decision is  in  accordance  with  the  law  and  pursues  the
         legitimate aim of a fair and firm immigration policy.
    28.  In considering whether the removal would be proportionate  I  have
         had regard to the decisions in Huang [2007] UKHL 11 and  KR  (Iraq)
         [2007] EWCA Civ 514. and bear in mind that at paragraph 19  in  the
         Huang decision, reference was made with approval to the decision in
         Razgar in which it was stated that the judgement on proportionality
         "must always involve the striking of a  fair  balance  between  the
         rights of the individual and the interest of the community which is
         inherent  in  the  whole  of  the  Convention.   The  severity  and
         consequences of the interference will call for  careful  assessment
         at this stage."


    29.  ...


    30.  The appellant and his wife have claimed that neither could live in
         the other's country, but they have not demonstrated  that  this  is
         anything other than a choice each is making.  Although Muslims  are
         a minority, India has the world's second largest Muslim population,
         according to the USRF 2009 Report.  The appellant has not given any
         history of being discriminated again because of his religion.  I do
         not accept that if his wife lived in India with him this  would  be
         to her detriment  or  that  of  their  son.   I  do  not  have  any
         documentary evidence that indicates that it would be impossible for
         the appellant to live in Pakistan with his wife.


    31.  However I note that the appellant's wife will have  been  lawfully
         in the United Kingdom for ten years next year, and she is  well  on
         track to qualify for indefinite leave to  remain;  and  that  would
         confer British citizenship on their son with the  advantages  those
         will bring to him.  If she were to leave the  United  Kingdom  Mrs.
         Kherwala would lose her prospects of a future in this  country  and
         it would be unreasonable to expect her to give those  up.   If  she
         remained while her husband left the UK to make  an  application  to
         join her as a spouse, I accept  her  evidence  that  she  would  be
         placed in an intolerable position as far as her work is  concerned;
         she has to date relied on her husband to assist  with  child  care;
         and at one time her mother came  to  stay  while  he  was  working.
         Without child care support, she would probably have to  leave  work
         and her future would then be very troubled.  Indeed she might  then
         be unable tot sponsor her husband to join her.


    32.  In considering the interests of Adam, which in  this  jurisdiction
         are a  primary  consideration  I  take  into  account  Lord  Hope's
         comments in ZH (Tanzania) 2011 UKSC 4 'there is an obvious  tension
         between the need to maintain  a  proper  and  efficient  system  of
         immigration control and the  principle  that,  where  children  are
         involved, the best interests of the  children  must  be  a  primary
         consideration'; the proper approach....is, having  taking  this  as
         the starting point, to assess  whether  their  best  interests  are
         outweighed by the strength  of  any  other  considerations.   ...it
         would be wrong to devalue what  was  in  their  beset  interest  by
         something for which they would  have  in  no  way  be  held  to  be
         responsible'.
    33.  ...


    34.  To date Adam has had the benefit of growing up with  both  of  his
         parents.  I have already commented on the fact that if  his  mother
         were to leave the UK at this point, he would lose  the  opportunity
         of acquiring British nationality  in  the  event  that  his  mother
         obtains indefinite leave to remain next  year.   That  would  be  a
         significant loss to him.  I accept that at  the  age  of  two,  his
         significant attachments are to his parents, and leaving the  UK  as
         such would not be  to  his  detriment,  leaving  aside  his  future
         prospects here.  If his father were  to  leave  for  an  indefinite
         period of time then Adam would remain with  his  mother  but  their
         future would be rendered precarious by her likely inability to work
         full time.  It is hard to see how the  interest  of  the  community
         would be served by making the life of this  child  and  his  mother
         precarious when the  continued  presence  of  the  appellant  would
         enable the family to flourish.


    35.  In considering the pubic interest question, I  take  into  account
         that the appellant has always been in  this  country  lawfully;  he
         speaks English; has a Masters Degree obtained in this country; that
         he and his wife have demonstrated that they  are  able  to  support
         themselves financially.  This is not a case where the appellant has
         overstayed and is now pleading that marriage and a son should  turn
         his unlawful stay.  He has been able to work in the past and  there
         is every prospect that he will be able to do so again if he remains
         here.  I do  not  ignore  his  criminal  conviction,  but  have  to
         consider this in its context; in the light of his  wife's  evidence
         and support for the appellant; and the light sentence;  and  taking
         into account the lack of evidence that there is any likelihood of a
         recurrence of  such  behaviour.  I  find  that  there  are  factors
         relating to this appellant that outweigh the public interest in his
         removal,  and  that  there   are   compelling   circumstances   not
         sufficiently recognised under the rules to warrant a grant of leave
         to remain outside the rules."


The Grounds Seeking Leave to Appeal and Oral Submissions

7.   The Secretary of State's grounds seeking permission  to  apply  can  be
    summarised.

8.   Ground 1 argues that asserts that  the  Judge  misdirected  himself  at
    [17] in relation to the standard of proof.  He referred to the case  of
    Kacaj (Article 3 - Standard of Proof - Non-State Actors) Albania [2001]
    UKIAT 00018, but this applies to Article 3 and not Article 8.

 9.  Ground 2 argues that the Judge went behind a criminal conviction  which
    is contrary to Section 117C(1)  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.  The Judge was required by statue to  give  weight  to
    the appellant's conviction conviction.

10.  Ground 3 argues that the  Judge  misdirected  himself  in  relation  to
    Article 8.  The Tribunal failed to give any  or  adequate  reasons  for
    finding  that  there  are  arguably  good  grounds  for  conducting  an
    assessment outside the  Rules.   The  approach  is  at  odds  with  the
    decisions of Izuazu (Article 8 - new  rules)  Nigeria  [2013]  UKUT  45
    (IAC), MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192, Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin)
    and Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT  040
    (IAC).

11.  The grounds argue that the Judge's decision that it  would  be  in  the
    best interests of the appellant's child to remain in the UK is entirely
    speculative and it is irrelevant to the proposition that the  appellant
    should return to India to make an application for  entry  clearance  or
    that the family should relocate.  The court failed to direct itself  in
    relation to EV (Philippines) & Ors [2014] EWCA Civ  874  where  it  was
    held that the best interests of the children should be assessed "in the
    real world", and not in isolation to the  particular  circumstances  of
    the child.  The appellant's presence in the UK is not conducive to  the
    public good and there are two other countries in the  UK  where  family
    life could continue.  The child is very young and has not  developed  a
    significant private  life  here  (Azimi-Moayed  and  Others  (decisions
    affecting children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 197 (IAC).

12.  Mr Melvin made oral submissions  in  the  context  of  the  grounds  of
    appeal.  The appellant made submissions which can  be  summarised.   He
    confirmed that he has filed a  complaint  with  the  IPCC  (Independent
    Police Complaints Commission) in relation to  his  conviction  and  the
    investigation of the offence.  He has been married for five years.  His
    wife can apply for indefinite leave to remain in six months'  time  and
    then their child will be entitled to British citizenship.   He  is  not
    able to go  back  to  India  alone  because  the  appellant's  wife  is
    dependent on him for childcare to enable her to work.  They  would  not
    be able to meet the financial requirement  of  the  Rules  because  the
    appellant's wife would not be able to work without him here in the  UK.
    She would not be able to return with him as she would lose his job.  In
    India the police have been told about his conviction and  he  has  been
    written to and told that he must report daily  to  the  police  station
    there.  He would be in a difficult position in India having  married  a
    Pakistani woman whose brother is in the Pakistani army.  He referred in
    submissions  to  recent  convictions  of  Muslim  men  in  India.   His
    connection with a  Pakistani  family  would  put  him  in  a  difficult
    position.

Error of Law

13.  There is no error of law by the First-tier Tribunal in relation to  the
    appellant's criminal conviction (sexual assault committed on his wife).
    The appellant is not a foreign criminal as defined in  the  UK  Borders
    Act 2007 ("the 2007 Act") or the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 ("the 2002  Act")  because  it  was  not  established  by  the
    Secretary of State that has been convicted of an offence  which  causes
    "serious harm."  In my view Section 117C of the 2002 Act does not apply
    to this case.  It is not an appeal against a deportation  decision  and
    the appellant is not a foreign criminal. I do not agree that the  Judge
    went behind the findings of the  Magistrates'  Court.   The  Judge  was
    entitled to take into account  that  the  appellant  was  not  given  a
    custodial sentence and he heard evidence from the appellant's wife  who
    was the complainant in the matter.  The Judge clearly took into account
    the criminal conviction (see [35]); however, it was a  matter  for  the
    Judge what weight and significance took place on it.

14.  The appellant could not satisfy the requirements in Appendix  FM.   The
    Judge found that there were features relating to the  appellant's  wife
    and child which are not  sufficiently  recognised  by  the  Immigration
    Rules and on this basis he went on to consider whether or not there was
    a further Article 8 claim.  Although he found that it is  a  matter  of
    choice that the family has decided not  to  live  in  either  India  or
    Pakistan [30], he accepted the evidence that without child care support
    from the appellant his wife would probably have to leave work which may
    mean that she would be unable to sponsor the appellant to enable him to
    join her here.  The challenge is that the Judge gave inadequate reasons
    for finding that there are arguably  good  grounds  for  conducting  an
    assessment outside the  Rules  and  the  Judge  having  embarked  on  a
    freewheeling Article 8 analysis.  In the light of the findings  of  the
    Court of Appeal in MM (Lebanon) & Ors, R  (On  the  Application  Of)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 985 there is
    in my view little merit in this ground.

15.  The Judge assessed Adam's best  interests  on  the  basis  that  he  is
    entitled to British  citizenship.   However,  Adam  is  not  a  British
    citizen and nor is his mother to date. He was not entitled to it at the
    date of the hearing  before  the  FtT.  The  Judge  assessed  his  best
    interests on the basis of Adam  losing  British  citizenship  and  this
    amounts to a material error of law. The Judge  in  my  view  took  into
    account irrelevant considerations and in my  view  this  amounts  to  a
    material error of law.  The error is compounded by the  application  of
    the wrong standard of proof. The error is material and I set aside  the
    decision to allow the appeal pursuant to Section 12(2)(a).

16.  I indicated to the parties that I would go on to  remake  the  decision
    pursuant to Section 12(2)(b)(ii) without the need for  a  rehearing  as
    contemplated in the directions to  the  parties  issued  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Mr Melvin  did  not  object  to  the  admission  of  further
    evidence namely documents relating to his complaint against the police.
    However, the evidence is not material  to  the  error  of  law  of  the
    inevitable outcome of the appeal.

Conclusions

17.  The appellant cannot satisfy the requirements under Appendix.  In  this
    case Appendix FM is not a complete code; but, there are in my  view  no
    compelling circumstances.

18.  Adam's best interests are to remain with his  parents.   He  is  not  a
    British citizen and there is no evidence to support the assertion  that
    it would be in his best interests to remain here in the UK. His  mother
    has a right to be here on a temporary basis. His father has no right to
    be here.  Adam is very young (his date of birth is 28 September  2012).
    He has not started education in the UK and Judge  Monro  did  not  find
    that there would be any difficulties in  the  appellant  and  his  wife
    relocating to India or Pakistan.  I note the appellant and his wife are
    educated and employable (in either Pakistan or India).  I  accept  that
    the appellant's wife has been here for  some  time  and  there  may  be
    career and economic advantages to her staying here, but it has not been
    shown the family cannot make an application to come to the UK and  work
    here at some stage in the future or that it is not reasonable to expect
    the family to relocate.

19.      The  appellant  gave  evidence  at  the  hearing  before  me  about
    difficulties that he would encounter on return to India, but  there  is
    no good  reason  why  that  evidence  was  not  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  It is my view that the appellant was  simply  responding  to
    the Judge's findings at [30] of the determination and exaggerating  the
    problems that his family would face on return to  India.  There  is  no
    reason for me to go behind the findings of the FtT.

20.  It would be reasonable  and  proportionate  to  expect  the  family  to
    relocate to India or Pakistan. However, it is a matter for them  should
    they decide that it would be preferable for  the  appellant  to  return
    alone to India in order to make an application for entry clearance.   I
    accept that there may well be difficulties in relation to  child  care,
    but I do not accept that the evidence establishes that the  appellant's
    departure from the UK would inevitably  lead  to  his  wife  having  to
    resign from her position of employment. The decision  is  proportionate
    to the legitimate aim. The maintenance of effective immigration control
    is in the public interest (section 117B of the 2002 Act). The appeal is
    dismissed on substantial Article 8 grounds.

The Decision

21.  The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration Rules.

22.  The appeal is dismissed under Article  8  of  the  1950  Convention  on
    Human Rights.



Signed        Date 13 November 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam


