
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/33132/2014
                                                               IA/34213/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 November 2015                   |On 20 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Mr Henry Agyemang
                               Mr Gilbert Manu
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Savage, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms N Nnamani, Counsel, instructed by Simon Bethel
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Andonian (Judge Andonian)  promulgated  on  12  May
    2015 in which he  allowed  the  appeals  of  the  two  Respondents,  Mr
    Agyemang and Mr Manu.  Those appeals were in turn against the Secretary
    of State's  refusal  to  issue  permanent  residence  cards  under  the
    Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)   Regulations   2006    (the
    Regulations).  The refusals were dated 30 July 2014.

 2. The two Respondents are citizens of Ghana.  They are  the  stepbrothers
    of the Sponsor in the  United  Kingdom,  who  is  herself  an  Austrian
    national.  The two Respondents were originally issued  residence  cards
    as extended family members valid from 12 March 2008 to 12  March  2013.
    An application was made on 6 March  2013  seeking  the  issuance  of  a
    permanent residence card.

 3. The appeal was first heard by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Scott-Baker.
    Her decision was promulgated on 15 April 2014.  Judge Scott-Baker found
    that the Sponsor had in fact been exercising her Treaty  rights  for  a
    continuous period of five years.  In the light of  this  finding  Judge
    Scott-Baker allowed the appeals on the limited basis that the decisions
    of the Secretary of State were not otherwise in accordance with the law
    because the discretion under Regulation 17(4) of  the  Regulations  had
    yet to be exercised.  She reached this conclusion  notwithstanding  the
    fact that the Respondents had applied for  permanent  residence  cards,
    not residence cards.

 4. The Secretary of State then made a fresh decision.  In that decision it
    was said that neither of the Respondents  had  in  fact  been  extended
    family members within the meaning of Regulation 8(2) of the Regulations
    for a continuous period  of  five  years.   They  had  failed  to  show
    residence in the United Kingdom either  as  members  of  the  Sponsor's
    household and/or as her financial dependants.

 5. On appeal to Judge Andonian the Respondents maintained their claim that
    they were  in  fact  entitled  to  permanent  residence  cards.   Judge
    Andonian noted that in his view Judge Scott-Baker  had  been  wrong  to
    send the matter back  to  the  Secretary  of  State  on  the  basis  of
    Regulation 17(4) of the Regulations.  He then set out  aspects  of  the
    evidence provided by the Respondents and ultimately concluded  that  as
    there was a "connection" between the Respondents and the  Sponsor,  the
    former had acquired a permanent right of residence in this country  and
    were therefore entitled to the relevant documentation.

 6. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal arguing that Judge Andonian had failed to deal  with  relevant
    evidence and had failed to engage with relevant issues in the  appeals.
    Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Pirotta
    by a decision dated 31 July 2015.

The hearing before me

 7. At the hearing before me Ms Savage for the Secretary  of  State  relied
    upon the grounds.  In addition to the grounds she  submitted  that  the
    term "connection" used by Judge  Andonian  on  repeated  occasions  was
    unclear, that he had failed to address the  relevant  dependency  test,
    that there were effectively no findings of fact on relevant issues, and
    that in any event he had misdirected himself in law as to the  relevant
    requirements  for  permanent  residence  under  Regulation  15  of  the
    Regulations.

 8. Ms  Nnamani  for  the  Respondents  submitted  in  essence  that  Judge
    Andonian's decision was sustainable, that he had had regard to relevant
    evidence, had deemed the  Respondents  to  be  credible  and  had  made
    relevant findings albeit, she accepted, perhaps not as  clearly  as  he
    may otherwise have done.  It  was  her  submission,  expressed  perhaps
    somewhat tentatively, that his legal direction was adequate and that as
    a whole the decision should stand.

Decision on error of law

 9. In my view Judge Andonian has made a number of material errors of  law.
    He has failed to address relevant evidence, in particular that cited in
    the Secretary of State's refusal letter in respect  of  evidence  given
    before Judge Scott-Baker in the first appeal.  He has failed to resolve
    material conflicts in the evidence.  He has failed in fact to make  any
    clear findings in relation to either  the  issue  of  membership  of  a
    household or financial dependency.  He has failed to express  or  apply
    the relevant test of dependency; that being  whether  the  Respondents'
    essential living needs were being met by  financial  support  from  the
    Sponsor.  He has failed to explain adequately or at all what was  meant
    by the term "connection", a word used repeatedly in his  decision,  and
    he has, in my view, misdirected himself in law as to the  correct  test
    under Regulation 15(1)(b) of the Regulations.

10. In this last regard, it is not enough that the Respondents were  simply
    living in this country and that the Sponsor  had  been  exercising  her
    Treaty rights for five continuous years.   It  was  necessary  for  the
    Appellants to show that they had been residing for the five  continuous
    years as extended family members of the Sponsor, and  this  meant  that
    they had to show that they had satisfied the requirements of Regulation
    8(2) of the Regulations throughout the relevant period.

11. On the basis of the numerous errors of law stated above,  I  set  aside
    the decision of Judge Andonian.

Disposal

12. In terms of disposal of these appeals, I  have  considered  whether  to
    retain the cases within the Upper Tribunal or, unusually, to remit them
    back to the First-tier Tribunal.  Having heard from Ms  Savage  and  Ms
    Nnamani I conclude that in these particular cases I should  remit  back
    to the First-tier Tribunal having regard to paragraph 7 of the relevant
    Practice Statements.  I have taken this course of action because  there
    has in effect been a complete failure to make any relevant findings  of
    fact on what is extensive and  contentious  evidence  on  a  number  of
    material issues.

13. It will take  careful  consideration  of  all  the  evidence  including
    additional oral evidence from the Respondents and the Sponsor in  order
    for a sound final determination of these appeals to be made.  In  light
    of that the appeals will go back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
    reheard.

14. There is one finding made previously that will be preserved in  respect
    of the remitted hearings before the First-tier Tribunal,  and  that  is
    that the Sponsor has already acquired a permanent right of residence in
    this country  by  virtue  of  her  exercising  Treaty  rights  for  the
    requisite five continuous years.  Other than that preserved finding the
    issues in respect of the Respondents  are  at  large  and  fall  to  be
    determined by the First-tier Tribunal in due course.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

Procedural Directions:

      1. These appeals are to remain linked;

      2. The appeals are remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  rehearing
         on a date to be fixed by the Taylor House hearing centre;

      3. The appeal shall not  be  reheard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judges
         Andonian or Scott-Baker.

Substantive Directions:

      1. The only preserved finding that shall apply in the remitted hearing
         is that referred to in paragraph 14 of my Decision, above;

      2. The issues to be determined in the  remitted  appeals  are:  first,
         whether either Mr Manu and/or Mr Agyemang have acquired a permanent
         right of residence in the United Kingdom; second, if not,  whether,
         depending on the factual findings of the First-tier Tribunal,  they
         nonetheless have an extended right to reside in the United  Kingdom
         as extended family  members  of  the  Sponsor  (see,  for  example,
         paragraph 44 of MDB [2010] UKUT 161 (IAC).

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 19 November 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

