
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34294/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 20 April 2017                           | On 3 May 2017                   |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                              MD RAFIQUL ISLAM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Unrepresented and not in attendance
For the Respondent:    Mr I. Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 15 September 1988. He
      is appealing against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
      Roopnarine-Davies, made on the papers on 12 September 2016 and
      promulgated on 23 September 2016, whereby his appeal against the
      decision of the respondent to refuse to vary his leave to remain as a
      Tier 4 (General) Student was dismissed.


   2. The appellant did not attend the hearing before me. The usher
      telephoned him to enquire as to his non attendance. She reported to me
      that she spoke to him and he expressed the wish that the hearing
      proceed in his absence.


   3. The background to this matter is that the appellant was granted leave
      as a Tier 4 student from 23 October 2009 until 28 October 2012. On 25
      October 2012 he applied for further leave as a student but his
      application was refused because his college's licence had been revoked
      and therefore his Confirmation of Studies ("CAS") was not valid. The
      appellant appealed and his appeal was allowed to the extent that the
      matter was remitted to the respondent to allow him 60 days to find a
      new sponsor. It then fell to the respondent to send the appellant a
      letter confirming he had 60 days to find a new sponsor ("the 60 day
      letter").


   4. The 60 day letter is not on the court's file. The respondent's
      position is that the 60 day letter was sent to the appellant's
      solicitors by recorded delivery on 28 August 2015.


   5. The appellant, in a statement dated 11 September 2016 (and faxed to
      the First-tier Tribunal on that date), states that he did not receive
      the 60 day letter. He states that he sent a letter to the respondent
      on 25 October 2015 by recorded delivery to remind them to send the 60
      day letter. A copy of the letter along with tracking information has
      been provided by the appellant.


   6. However, the appellant's Form IAFT-1, which was lodged on 19 November
      2015, unambiguously states that the 60 day letter was received by the
      appellant's representatives and thereafter acted upon by the
      appellant.


   7. On 5 November 2015 the respondent refused the appellant's application
      on the basis that the appellant had not obtained a new CAS even though
      the 60 day period expired on 27 October 2015.


   8. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. The basis of the
      appellant's appeal, as set out in his Form IAFT-1, was that after
      receiving the 60 day letter he approached various colleges but was
      declined a place. He claims to have been told that he could not be
      given a place as colleges had been directed to not offer places to
      students from colleges which had had their license revoked. He also
      claimed that some colleges had been specifically instructed by the
      respondent to not offer him a place on any course. The appellant also
      claimed that removing him from the UK would breach Article 8 ECHR.


   9. The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Roopnarine-Davies, to
      decide on the papers. The judge found that there was no evidence to
      support the appellant's assertion about colleges being directed to not
      offer him, or people in his position, a place. The judge was satisfied
      that the appellant had been given, and notified of, the 60 day period
      in accordance the respondent's policy. The judge also considered the
      appellant's Article 8 claim and rejected it on the basis that there
      was no evidence to substantiate a family or private life in the UK.


  10. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal. His grounds make three
      arguments:  firstly, that the judge failed to have regard to his
      witness statement dated 11 September 2016; secondly, that the judge
      proceeded on the basis that the 60 day letter was received by him when
      it was not; and thirdly, that he never made an Article 8 claim and
      therefore the judge should not have made a finding on his private and
      family life.


  11. Judge Roopnarine-Davies has not made any reference to the witness
      statement dated 11 September 2016 or addressed the assertion therein
      that the appellant never received the 60 day letter. It is more likely
      than not that the reason for this omission is that the witness
      statement, which was faxed to the court the day before the case was
      considered, was not in the file when the judge evaluated the evidence.




  12.  If a decision is made without all the material evidence being
      available to the judge, this can give rise to procedural unfairness,
      rendering a decision unsafe.  As this is what occurred here - the
      judge made the decision without having considered the appellant's
      statement of 11 September 2016 - it would be unfair to allow the
      decision to stand. Accordingly, I set aside the decision.


  13. Where there is an issue of unfairness, it is generally appropriate for
      an appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal. However, as all
      of the evidence is before me and this appeal was decided on the
      papers, I am satisfied that it would not be unfair for me to proceed
      with the remaking myself.


  14. In remaking the decision I have considered, and taken into account,
      the documents that were before the First-Tier Tribunal, the
      appellant's statement of 11 September 2016, and his further statement
      dated 2 April 2017.


  15. The appellant has provided contradictory information about whether he
      received the 60 day letter. In his appeal to the First-tier Tribunal,
      submitted on 19 November 2015, he clearly asserted that he had
      received the 60 day letter. The basis of his appeal was the
      difficulties he faced obtaining a new CAS after having been furnished
      with the 60 day letter. Although he complained it had been received
      late, there is no allegation that it was not received. This flatly
      contradicts the assertion made in the statements of 11 September 2016
      and 2 April 2017 that the 60 day letter was never received.


  16. Having considered and attempted to reconcile the different assertions
      of the appellant, I have reached the view that it is more likely than
      not that the appellant received the 60 day letter as he stated in his
      appeal on 19 November 2015.  I find as a fact that the appellant
      received the 60 day letter.


  17. As the appellant received the 60 day letter, I am satisfied that the
      respondent provided the appellant with an appropriate opportunity to
      obtain a new CAS, in accordance with her policy to give a 60 day
      period.


  18. The appellant claims that the respondent instructed colleges to not
      offer him, or people in his position, a CAS. However, this assertion
      is not supported by any evidence whatsoever. The burden of proof is on
      the appellant and he cannot succeed by merely making an
      unsubstantiated allegation.


  19. In respect of the appellant's Article 8 claim, it is apparent from the
      grounds that the appellant no longer wishes to pursue the claim.
      However, for the avoidance of doubt, if Article 8 had been pursued, I
      would have dismissed the claim for the reasons given by Judge
      Roopnarine-Davies.


  20. In the grounds of appeal the claimant states that he has a "serious
      problem" in Bangladesh and his life would be in danger if he returned.
      No explanation is given as to what the problem is or why he believes
      he would be in danger. Nor is it clear if the appellant is seeking to
      make human rights or protection claim. Given the paucity of
      information, there is no basis for me to make any findings, or draw
      any conclusions, about the appellant's situation in Bangladesh.


Decision

A. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material error of law
and is set aside.

B.  I remake the decision by dismissing the appellant's appeal.





      |                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |                                     |
|                                     |Dated: 28 April 2017                 |










