
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34264/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On the 22nd July 2015                |On the 31st July 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER Tribunal JUDGE KELLY


                                   Between

                              MR MD MAMUN AHMED
                          (anonymity not directed)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Haque, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1.  The  appellant  appeals  with   permission   (granted   upon   renewed
    application) against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Myers,
    promulgated on  the  10th  December,  to  dismiss  the  appeal  against
    curtailment of his leave to remain so that no leave remained.

 2. The respondent's original decision is dated the 30th July 2014 and  was
    taken under paragraph 323(v) of the Immigration Rules. This states that
    "a person's leave to enter or remain  may  be  curtailed  ...  where  a
    person has, within the first six  months  of  being  granted  leave  to
    enter, committed an offence for which they are  subsequently  sentenced
    to a period of imprisonment". The reason for  the  invocation  of  this
    provision was that the  appellant  had,  on  the  6th  May  2014,  been
    sentenced to a period of  22  weeks'  imprisonment  in  respect  of  an
    offence (of which he had been convicted  on  the  3rd  April  2014)  of
    assaulting his wife thereby occasioning her actual bodily harm. It  was
    the appellant's wife who had sponsored  his  application  to  come  the
    United Kingdom.

 3. Judge Myers set out her findings and reasons at paragraphs 11 to 20  of
    her decision:

         "11. The Appellant clearly cannot meet the  Immigration  Rules  and
             for his appeal to succeed would  have  to  show  circumstances
             warranting granting of leave outside the  rules.   In  Gulshan
             (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 640  it
             was said that after applying the requirements  of  the  Rules,
             only if there may be arguably good grounds for granting  leave
             to remain outside them is it necessary for Article 8  purposes
             to consider whether there  are  compelling  circumstances  not
             sufficiently recognised under them.

         12.  In MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA 1192, a case involving deportation
             of a foreign criminal and therefore  not  directly  applicable
             here, it was  said  that  the  new  immigration  rules  are  a
             complete code and that the  exceptional  circumstances  to  be
             considered in the balancing exercise involve  the  application
             of a  proportionality  test  as  required  by  the  Strasbourg
             jurisprudence.

         13.  In Azimi-Moayed  and  Others  (decisions  affecting  children;
             onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197 (IAC), the Chamber President
             (Blake J) summarised the case law of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
             relation to the "best interest principle" as follows:

                  "It is not the case  that  the  best  interests  principle
                  means that it is automatically in  the  interests  of  any
                  child to be permitted to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom,
                  irrespective of age, length of stay, family background  or
                  other circumstances. The case law of  the  Upper  Tribunal
                  has identified the following principles to assist  in  the
                  determination of appeals where children  are  affected  by
                  the decisions:

                      i)   As a starting point it is in the best  interests
                      of children to be with both their parents and if both
                      parents are being removed  from  the  United  Kingdom
                      then the  starting  point  suggests  that  so  should
                      dependent children who form part of  their  household
                      unless there are reasons to the contrary.

                      ii)  It is generally in the interests of children  to
                      have both stability  and  continuity  of  social  and
                      educational provision and the benefit of  growing  up
                      in the cultural norms of the society  to  which  they
                      belong.

                      iii) Lengthy residence in a country  other  than  the
                      state of origin can lead  to  development  of  social
                      cultural  and  educational  ties  that  it  would  be
                      inappropriate  to  disrupt,   in   the   absence   of
                      compelling reason to the contrary.  What  amounts  to
                      lengthy residence is  not  clear  cut  but  past  and
                      present policies have identified  seven  years  as  a
                      relevant period.

                      iv)  Apart from the terms of published  policies  and
                      rules, the Tribunal notes that seven years  from  age
                      four is likely to be more significant to a child than
                      the first seven years of life.  Very  young  children
                      are focused on their parents rather than their  peers
                      and are adaptable.

                      v)   Short periods of  residence,  particularly  ones
                      without leave or the reasonable expectation of  leave
                      to  enter  or  remain,  while  claims  are   promptly
                      considered, are unlikely to give rise to private life
                      deserving of respect in the  absence  of  exceptional
                      factors. In any event,  protection  of  the  economic
                      well being of society amply justifies removal in such
                      cases."

         14.  It is also necessary to consider S. 117 of the Immigration Act
             2014 and have regard to the considerations listed in  sections
             117 as to whether an interference with  a  person's  right  to
             respect for private and family life is justified under Article
             8(2).

         15.  Article 8 provides that everyone has the right to respect  for
             his private and family life. However,  Article  8  is  not  an
             absolute right; the Secretary of State can interfere with that
             right if it serves a legitimate aim  and  is  a  proportionate
             response. I am to balance the Appellant's rights  against  the
             wider rights and freedoms of others and that  in  the  general
             public interest the  Secretary  of  State  has  the  right  to
             control the entry of non nationals into its territory.

         16.  Clearly even on his own evidence the Appellant does  not  have
             family life  with  his  wife.  Although  he  may  hope  for  a
             reconciliation, there is nothing to suggest that his wife does
             likewise. The Appellant had no witnesses  in  support  of  his
             family life; he stated that his brother in  law  had  said  he
             would come to court but had not been able to  because  he  was
             ill. He submitted a letter from the  friends  he  was  staying
             with who described him as helpful round the house with a  good
             relationship with their children and their cat. They  made  no
             mention of his relationship with his wife and  child,  and  in
             any event I place little weight on the contents of the  letter
             because they state that he has lived with them since  16/04/14
             and makes no mention of his sentence of imprisonment.

         17.  The Appellant submitted some court documents relating  to  his
             recent court appearance. These included his  wife's  statement
             to the police in which she said she  was  separated  from  her
             husband who started being violent towards her after a month of
             being in the UK.  In  spite  of  the  restraining  order  made
             against him he sent her letters from prison and tried to phone
             her and she had to complain to the prison to make him stop. He
             had phoned her again on his release and she did not  want  any
             contact with him because he was violent and she was frightened
             of him.

         18.  The Appellant was interviewed by the police  and  stated  that
             although he had not seen the restraining order he was aware of
             the condition that he was not to contact his wife. He admitted
             making the phone calls but  said  that  this  was  by  mistake
             because he had intended phoning his uncle who  had  a  similar
             phone number to his wife.

         19.  The account given in these documents is markedly different  to
             the Appellant's oral evidence to me. It is  apparent  that  he
             was well aware of  the  contents  of  the  restraining  order,
             accepted that it had been explained to him, and  therefore  he
             must have known that he could not try to make arrangements  to
             see his son except through his wife's solicitors.  I  conclude
             that the Appellant has not been truthful in his  evidence  and
             is prepared to lie to further his own ends.

         20.  It  is  clear  to  me  that  his  wife  has  no  intention  of
             reconciling and that he has  not  made  any  attempt  to  have
             access to his son. Indeed there is little evidence that he has
             a son, although there is some passing mention of  a  child  in
             the documents he submitted to the court. Even  if  he  is  the
             father of a British child there is no evidence that he has any
             right to contact with the child  or  that  he  is  taking  and
             intends to take an active role in  the  child's  life.   As  a
             judge who also sits in the Family Courts I am aware that  even
             were he to make an application for contact with his child  the
             Family Court will only make an order if it is in  the  child's
             best  interests  and  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  has   a
             conviction for domestic violence and has subsequently broken a
             restraining order may well militate against a contact order.

         21.  In conclusion, this is an  Appellant  who  was  granted  entry
             clearance on the sole basis of his relationship with his wife.
             However, within a very short period of entering  the  UK  this
             relationship  had  broken  down  because   of   his   criminal
             behaviour. His wife has made it clear she wants  nothing  else
             to do with him. He has demonstrated contempt for  the  law  of
             this country by breaking the restraining  order  against  him,
             and by lying in court. There are no  circumstances  warranting
             granting of  leave  outside  the  rules,  and  I  dismiss  the
             appeal."

 4. The appellant was unrepresented at the hearing  of  his  appeal  before
    Judge Myers. He has therefore been granted  permission  to  argue  that
    Judge Myers erred in law in that there is  "no  indication"  (to  quote
    from the grounds) that she followed the  'Adjudicator  Guidance  Note',
    issued in April 2003,  concerning  the  procedures  to  be  adopted  in
    respect of an unrepresented appellant. However,  as  Mr  Haque  readily
    conceded, neither is there any evidence to indicate that the judge  did
    not follow those procedures. Tellingly,  no  complaint  has  been  made
    about this by the appellant himself. Mr Haque therefore abandoned  this
    ground of appeal.

 5. Linked to (but in my view  discrete  from)  the  above  ground  is  the
    suggestion,  contained  within  Deputy  Judge  Chamberlain's  grant  of
    permission to appeal,  that  Judge  Myers  failed  to  put  it  to  the
    appellant that he had lied about his reason for breaching the terms  of
    a  Restraining  Order  (following  release   from   his   sentence   of
    imprisonment) by contacting his wife by telephone.

 6. The judge recorded the account that the appellant gave at  the  hearing
    for breaching the Restraining Order at paragraph 8 of her decision:

         "He was in court again at the beginning of November for breach of a
         restraining order under the Protection from Harassment Act  against
         his wife. This was due to a misunderstanding; he did not understand
         the terms of the order because when he was sent to prison  he  lost
         the paper with the restraining order on it and did  not  understand
         when it said. When he was released from prison he called  his  wife
         because he wanted to know how his son was. He has not seen his  son
         since the day he was convicted, and has been  living  with  friends
         since his release from prison. He was represented at  his  original
         conviction and at the latest  court  appearance,  but  his  present
         solicitors had given him some  papers  which  he  produced  to  the
         court, whereas the previous solicitors had not given him papers."

    By contrast, it is apparent from paragraph 18 of Judge Myer's  decision
    (above) that the appellant had told the police he  did  not  intend  to
    call his wife at all, but had done so by accident and that it had  been
    his intention to call his uncle who had a similar telephone number.

 7. In my judgement, fairness did not require the judge to put  it  to  the
    appellant that he was  a  "liar",  as  is  suggested  by  Deputy  Judge
    Chamberlain. Indeed, it could be viewed as oppressive to do  so,  given
    that the appellant lacked the protection of a representative to  object
    to what would have amounted to little more than name-calling. The  most
    that can be said is that the appellant  might  have  been  afforded  an
    opportunity to comment upon the  discrepancy  between  his  conflicting
    explanations for breaching  the  Restraining  Order.   However,  it  is
    difficult to see how the appellant could possibly have  explained  away
    or reconciled those accounts. I therefore  consider  it  a  counsel  of
    perfection to suggest that he ought to have been given the  opportunity
    to do so. Further, and in any event, the appellant had  been  convicted
    of contravening the terms of the Order,  "without  reasonable  excuse".
    Thus, the possibility that he may have  had  a  reasonable  excuse  for
    acting has he did had already  been  adjudicated  upon  by  a  criminal
    court, which the appellant was now in  effect  seeking  to  go  behind.
    Moreover, it was the original conviction for  assault  the  formed  the
    basis  for  curtailment  rather  than  the  subsequent  conviction  for
    breaching the Restraining Order.

 8. I therefore turn to consider the appellant's complaint that  the  judge
    failed  to  demonstrate  that  she  had  considered  the  exercise   of
    discretion bestowed by paragraph 323 of the Rules.

 9.  It  is  right  to  say  that  the  original  decision-maker  did   not
    specifically consider the exercise of discretion under paragraph 323 of
    the Rules. He did however do so outside the Rules. Thus:

         'The  Secretary  of  State  has  had   regard   to   all   relevant
         circumstances appertaining to your case such as your character, age
         and known ties to the UK but it is not considered  that  these  are
         sufficient  to  warrant  a  grant  of  leave  outside  the  Rules.'
         [Emphasis added]

10. It is also clear, from the final sentence of her decision,  that  Judge
    Myers considered an exercise of discretion on this basis. Thus:

         "There are no circumstances warranting granting  of  leave  outside
         the Rules, and I dismiss the appeal" [Emphasis again added]

11. It was undoubtedly a technical error of law for both the decision-maker
    and the judge to fail  to  recognise  that  there  was  an  exercisable
    discretion under the Rules as well as outside them. However, this is in
    my judgement immaterial to the outcome of the appeal. It  seems  to  me
    that precisely the same factors fell to be considered in  the  exercise
    of discretion, whether that be within or outside the Rules.

12.  I  therefore  turn,  finally,  to  the  complaint  that  Judge  Myer's
    consideration  of  the  exercise  of  discretion  was  in   any   event
    inadequate.

13. There is force in Mr Haque's submission that, having apparently cut and
    pasted the legal principles that are relevant  to  the  application  of
    Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention into paragraphs 11  to  15  of
    her decision, the judge failed thereafter to demonstrate that  she  had
    applied those principles to the facts of  the  appeal.  That  complaint
    perhaps applies with particular force in respect of the application  of
    "the considerations listed in section  117"  [paragraph  14].  Although
    thus  acknowledged,  those  considerations  were  neither  quoted   nor
    considered by the judge within the specific context of the facts of the
    appeal.  I  have  nevertheless  concluded  that  this  error  was  also
    immaterial to the outcome of the appeal.  This  is  for  the  following
    reasons.

14. At paragraph 20 of her decision,  Judge  Myers  noted  that  there  was
    little evidence that the appellant had a son or that he was  a  British
    citizen. Moreover, even if both those things had been established,  she
    concluded that there was no evidence to show  that  the  appellant  had
    contact with him. (She also, somewhat  unnecessarily,  speculated  upon
    the effect that the appellant's criminal history might  have  upon  any
    application for contact he may/might make to the Family  Court).  Those
    findings have not been challenged. Thus,  had  the  judge  applied  the
    considerations in Section 117B(6) to her findings of  fact,  she  would
    have been bound to conclude that the appellant had not established that
    he had a son who was a "qualifying child" and/or that he had a "genuine
    and subsisting parental relationship" with that child. It would  follow
    from this that the appellant had failed to establish  that  the  public
    interest in his removal was outweighed  by  other  factors.  Thus,  the
    judge's failure to consider and  apply  the  statutory  provisions  was
    ultimately immaterial to the outcome of the appeal.

Notice of Decision

15. The appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity is not directed



Signed   Date

Judge Kelly
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

