
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                  Appeal
Number: IA/34572/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 22 November 2017                           |On 19 December 2017          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY

                                   Between

                            MD OMAR HARUNI SARKER
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Balroop
For the Respondent:    Mr Nath


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born  in  1988.   He  appeals
      against a decision of the Secretary of State made on 17 November  2015
      to refuse to issue a residence card as a confirmation of  a  right  to
      reside in the UK.  The decision was made under  Regulation  7  of  the
      Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006.   It   was
      considered that he had failed to provide evidence that he is dependent
      on his EEA national sponsor.

    2. He appealed.


   3. Following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 4 April 2017 Judge of the First-
      Tier RL Walker concluded that the appellant had no right of appeal.


   4. In summary, he noted  that  the  appellant's  wife  is  a  Bangladeshi
      citizen and that she is a family member of her father's household  the
      father being a Portuguese national.  The appellant's  relationship  to
      the EEA national is that of son-in-law and father-in-law.


   5. As such the appellant cannot  satisfy  the  requirements  of  being  a
      family member of the EEA national under Regulation 7.


   6. It was noted that the application was  made  on  the  basis  that  the
      appellant was an extended family member and that  the  respondent  had
      been in error in referring to Regulation 7.


    7. He concluded (at [23]):-


           "There is no right of appeal against refusal of a Residence Card
           as an extended family member in accordance with the decision of
           Sala (EFMs - Right of Appeal) [2016] UKUT 411".


   8. The appellant sought permission  to  appeal  which  was  refused.   On
      reapplication to the Upper  Tribunal  permission  was  granted  on  19
      September 2017.

   9. At the error of law hearing before me both  parties  agreed  that  the
      matter fell to be decided  under  Regulation  8.   Both  parties  also
      agreed that in light of the decision in Khan v Secretary of State  for
      the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 1755 the First-Tier  Tribunal  was
      wrong in law to conclude that it did not have jurisdiction to hear the
      appeal with the result that the decision be set aside.  I  agreed.  As
      evidence is to be led it is appropriate that  it  be  reheard  in  the
      First tier.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-Tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law.  It is  set  aside  and  in  terms  of  s  12  (2)(b)(i)  of
Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and of  Practice  Statement  7.2,
remitted to the First-Tier Tribunal for  a  fresh  hearing  before  a  judge
other than FtTJ  Walker.

No anonymity order made.




Signed                                             Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway
