
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34960/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 22nd June 2017                        |On 3rd July 2017                    |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                               miss Yuk Wa li
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Christopher Lane (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr David Mills (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Phull, promulgated on 20th October 2016, following a  hearing  at
    Birmingham on 13th September 2016.  In  the  determination,  the  judge
    allowed the appeal of the Appellant, whereupon the Respondent Secretary
    of State, subsequently applied for,  and  was  granted,  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Hong Kong, a female, and was born on  9th
    August 1987.  She appealed  against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State dated 3rd December 2015, whereby her application for
    leave to remain as a Tier 4 Student in the UK, was refused.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that she had come to the UK as  a  student  in
    2008, and had been granted further extensions of stay, until  she  gave
    birth to a son, [J], on [ ] 2013, when her last application  for  leave
    to remain was refused.  Her  appeal  was  then  successful  before  the
    Tribunal and the Home Office was ordered to make a new decision on 17th
    September 2014, allowing her a further 60 days to find  an  alternative
    college.  It took  the  Home  Office  a  further  year  to  decide  the
    application.  In that time, she could not seek an alternative place  of
    study and simply had to wait.

 4. On 3rd December 2015, her application was refused once again, and  this
    time on the basis of an allegation that she  had  obtained  an  English
    language test by deception.  The Appellant maintains that  she  did  on
    6th  March  2013  take  an  English  language  test  at  Eden   College
    International.  She has the ability to speak, read, and write  English.
    Judge Phull records that

         "She believes she is a victim of great injustice.   She  has  asked
         ETS for evidence to prove that she cheated in the  test.   She  has
         always complied with the visa requirements.  She should be given 60
         days to find a new college and get  a  CAS  to  continue  with  her
         studies". (Paragraph 8).

The Judge's Findings

 5. The judge started with  the  observation  that  Judge  Stokes,  in  the
    earlier appeal decision that was promulgated on  11th  September  2014,
    had found the Appellant "to be a credible witness" and had  also  ruled
    that the Secretary of State should grant the Appellant 60 days in which
    to identify a new college  and  to  make  a  further  application  (see
    paragraph 23).  This said, the Respondent reconsidered the  Appellant's
    application and alleged that she had submitted a  false  TOEIC  English
    language certificate in support of her application (paragraph 23).

 6. The judge went on to look at the evidence that had been levied  against
    the Appellant and observed that the evidence was general in nature  and
    that in SM and Qadir [2016] UKUT 00229, the Upper  Tribunal  held  that
    the onus rests on the Secretary of State to prove  that  the  Appellant
    was guilty of fraud in respect to the allegation raised.  However, what
    had been furnished was generic evidence in the form of two spreadsheets
    and two  witness  statements.   The  judge  held  that,  "I  found  the
    Appellant to be a credible witness.  The Appellant gave  oral  evidence
    in English.  I accept her evidence she could not sit the  English  test
    at her college and had to look at other colleges" (paragraph 26).   The
    judge went on to record that the Appellant had approached a college  in
    Bath to sit the English language test, but was refused because she  did
    not have her passport as proof of identity.  She  then  travelled  from
    Wales to London by bus, by underground, and then  walked  to  the  test
    centre in the East End of London  where  she  took  the  test  at  Eden
    College International (paragraph 26).

 7. The judge went on to refer to the English test certificates dated  17th
    June 2011 and the scores that the Appellant  obtained  (paragraph  27).
    Finally, the judge decided on the basis of the evidence, when taken  in
    the round, and on balance, she  found  that  the  detailed  explanation
    given  by  the  Appellant  in  her  oral  evidence,   with   supporting
    documentary evidence, satisfied her personally that the  speaking  test
    she had taken was genuinely taken by her (paragraph 28).

 8. The appeal was allowed.

Grounds of Application

 9. There are two Grounds of Appeal.  One by the Appellant and the other by
    the Respondent.  Both allege that there was an  error  of  law  by  the
    judge.  First, it is alleged by the Appellant that  the  appeal  should
    have been allowed outright rather than to the limited  extent,  whereby
    the judge had, (in the same way as Judge Stokes), remitted  the  matter
    back to the Secretary of State, to grant the  Appellant  a  further  60
    days to enable her to find a college that would issue her with  a  CAS.
    The Appellant takes the view, that this decision by Judge Phull is made
    in exactly the same way as was made by Judge  Stokes  in  her  previous
    appeal in 2014, and the result has been an unreasonable delay.

10. For the Respondent, it is stated that the  English  language  test  had
    been invalidated because of evidence of fraud in the test taken by  the
    Appellant, and the Tribunal had failed to analyse this evidence.  Since
    the Respondent had presented  this  evidence,  she  had  satisfied  the
    evidential burden and the burden now fell on the Appellant to offer  an
    innocent explanation and this was entirely in accordance with the  case
    of Shehzad [2016] EWCA Civ 615.  It does not matter that the  Appellant
    can display an English language ability.   What  matters  is  that  the
    Appellant had not been able to provide evidence  of  taking  the  test.
    She provided no credible evidence as to why, living in Wales,  she  had
    sat the test at Eden College in London.

11. On 28th March 2017, permission to appeal was granted.

Submissions

12. In his well-crafted and comprehensive skeleton argument, Mr  Lane  sets
    out the case for appeal for the Appellant.  He states, as  he  repeated
    in his oral submissions before me, that Judge  Stokes  had  already  on
    27th August 2014 decided that the Respondent should grant the Appellant
    the usual 60 days in which to identify a new college, obtain a CAS, and
    make a further application.  That was three years ago.  The  Respondent
    did not comply with that decision and did not grant  the  Appellant  60
    days as directed by the judge.

13. Second, instead, the Respondent took one year and nearly  three  months
    to make a decision on 3rd December 2014, and to  now  allege  that  the
    Appellant had used deception in her application by  using  a  proxy  to
    take her English language test with ETS.  It was additionally also said
    that the college itself had had its  licence  revoked.   This  was  the
    second main reason in the Appellant's  case  for  now  asking  for  the
    appeal to be allowed outright.

14. Third, when it came to a further appeal before another  judge,  namely,
    Judge Phull, she once  again  decided  that  the  Appellant  should  be
    granted the 60 days to identify a new college, but given that  she  had
    found that there was no deception exercised by the Appellant in sitting
    the ETS test, she ought to have allowed the appeal outright, because  a
    failure to do that simply caused an unnecessary delay to the Appellant,
    on a matter which had been ongoing for a number of years.

15. Fourth, the Respondent's Grounds of  Appeal  should  be  rejected  (see
    paragraph 6 of the skeleton), essentially because the ETS  provided  no
    evidence (see paragraph 63) but only general evidence, and there was no
    voice recording provided which would enable the Respondent Secretary of
    State to say that there was indeed a proxy used here.   This  was  very
    similar to the "multiple frailties" identified  in  Qadir  [2016]  UKUT
    00229 (at paragraph 100).  In that case the  Respondent  had  not  been
    able to satisfy the legal  burden  because  the  innocent  explanations
    given by the Appellants led to their being "clear  winners"  (paragraph
    101).  Moreover, that was the case where the  test  had  been  declared
    "invalid" and here it had not been  declared  invalid,  but  the  judge
    still in Qadir ruled that the Respondent did not  discharge  the  legal
    burden on her.  It is insufficient to say that the  disclosure  of  the
    voice recording is the property of the ETS, because no request has been
    made by the Respondent  to  the  ETS,  and  in  some  cases  the  voice
    recording has indeed been provided.

16. Fifth, the judge in this case found the Appellant  to  be  a  "credible
    witness" (see paragraphs 23 and 26 to 28).  All of the information that
    the Respondent stated had not been considered was set out in  the  oral
    evidence (see paragraphs 9 to 10 and paragraph 12).  It was also in the
    witness statement.  (See paragraph 28).

17. For his part, Mr Mills submitted that the Respondent's appeal should be
    allowed for the following reasons.  First, in  Shehzad,  the  Court  of
    Appeal decided that the declaration of a test as  being  "invalid"  was
    enough to shift the burden upon the Appellant, so that this was seen as
    the provision of sufficient evidence by the Secretary of  State.   Yet,
    in this case Judge Phull states that, "The  Respondent  has  failed  to
    produce any evidence ...".  This was untrue.  There  was  a  report  of
    Professor French.  He was the Employer (and  senior)  of  Dr  Harrison,
    whose report was before the Upper Tribunal in Qadir, and  whose  report
    could not be presented in time before the Upper Tribunal,  because  the
    Respondent Secretary of State had delayed in complying with directions,
    but had still wanted to make disclosure of his report.  In the  instant
    case Professor French's report was there for  the  judge  to  look  at.
    What he states is that the rate of false positives is less than  1%  in
    the ETS results.  Dr Harrison had simply said that he could not be sure
    on the information what the level of false  positives  were.   However,
    Professor French, in whose organisation Dr Harrison works, has now made
    it clear that it is less than 1%.  Judge Phull failed to take Professor
    French's report into account.  Third, if one looks at the  position  of
    Eden College International itself, on that day 73 tests were taken  and
    65 were invalidated, so that was a rate of 89% tests that were declared
    to be fraudulent.   A  report  into  Eden  College  International  also
    confirms that the college ran 2,500 ETS tests over two years,  and  77%
    of these were invalidated.

18. In his reply, Mr Lane submitted that the Grounds  of  Appeal  from  the
    Respondent state that the evidential burden was not considered  by  the
    judge, but one only has to look at the determination to see that it was
    considered and was treated as having been discharged by the  Appellant.
    It cannot reasonably be asserted that the burden upon the Secretary  of
    State had, on the other hand, been discharged, by the fact  that  there
    was a report from Dr French.  This is because the judge makes it  quite
    clear that the Respondent has failed to  file  any  material  facts  or
    evidence, the most important of which is the ETS recording.  The  judge
    could legitimately have regard  to  this  because  the  refusal  letter
    states that, "ETS has a record of the speaking test.  ETS ... confirmed
    to the SSHD that there was a significant evidence that your certificate
    was fraudulently obtained  by  using  a  proxy  test  taker  ..."  (see
    paragraph 25 of the determination).  That the judge  rightly  concluded
    from this that "The Respondent has not provided the  recording  of  the
    speaking test that they referred to in  the  refusal"  (paragraph  25).
    Accordingly, the legal burden had simply not  been  discharged  by  the
    Respondent Secretary of State.

No Error of Law

19. I am satisfied that the making of the decision of  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error of law (see Section  12  of  TCEA  2007)
    such that I should set aside the decision and remake the  decision.   I
    have not found this an easy case to determine.  The following  matters,
    however, are relevant.  On the one hand, Mr Mills is  entirely  correct
    in saying that it is not the case that only spreadsheet evidence  of  a
    generic nature has been provided, because what there  is  here  is  the
    expert report of Professor  French,  which  the  judge  has  failed  to
    consider, and this was  very  specific  evidence  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant.  On the other hand, Mr Lane is equally correct in  asserting
    that  the  refusal  letter  had  specifically  referred  to  the  voice
    recording test of the Appellant's speaking test, and if this  had  been
    disclosed to the Appellant,  this  indeed  would  be  specific  to  the
    Appellant, in a way that Professor French's expert report is not.

20. On top of both these considerations it remains the case that this is an
    appeal whereby the Appellant's test was specifically  invalidated,  and
    this was in the context of the majority of tests  on  that  day  having
    been invalidated, and against a background of some  77%  of  the  tests
    over a period of two years being invalidated.

21. It is also a feature of this case that  the  Appellant,  who  lives  in
    Wales, travelled to the East End of London to sit a test at  a  centre,
    which was not only so  far  away,  but  also  had  the  distinction  of
    undertaking a large number of fraudulent tests, such that it led to the
    centre's licence being eventually revoked.

22. On balance, I find that the judge did not err in law.  My  reasons  are
    as follows.

23. First, the judge heard an explanation, which she  accepted,  that  "She
    approached a college in Bath to sit the English language test  but  was
    refused because she did not have her passport  as  proof  of  identity"
    (paragraph 26).  That explains why she went to the East End  of  London
    from Wales.

24. Second, the judge found the Appellant to be credible, "because she  has
    previously studied English  in  the  UK  and  passed  the  IELTS  test"
    (paragraph 28).  Third, whereas it is  the  case  that  the  report  by
    Professor French has not been considered, in  order  to  discharge  the
    legal burden of proof upon the  Respondent  Secretary  of  State,  what
    would have been necessary in a case such as this was for the Respondent
    to have produced the ETS record of her speaking test, if  only  because
    the refusal letter relies so heavily upon the ETS record, because it is
    that which the Appellant has to rebut, given that her evidence in every
    other respect has been found by the judge to  have  been  credible  and
    plausible.  Accordingly, the judge  did  not  materially  err  in  law.



Notice of Decision

25. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

26. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 2nd July 2017

