








UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34913/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 20 October 2014                           |On: 5 November 2014          |
|Prepared: 2 November 2014                     |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER


                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         Miss Esther Isimeme Okoise
                         no anonymity direction made
                                                                  Respondent


Representation

For the Appellant:     Ms L Kenny, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr N Wray, counsel (KC Chambers)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. For the sake of convenience I shall refer to  the  appellant  as  "the
      secretary of state" and to the respondent as "the claimant."


   2. The claimant is a national of Nigeria, born on 14th  April  1980.  Her
      appeal against the decision of the respondent dated 13th  August  2013
      to refuse to vary her leave to remain in the UK and to remove  her  by
      way  of  directions  under  s.47  of  the  Immigration,   Asylum   and
      Nationality Act 2006 was allowed by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Bart-
      Stewart.


   3. It was not challenged at the hearing that the claimant  did  not  meet
      the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules,  and  in  particular  the
      requirement set out in Appendix FM - [19].


   4. It was common ground that the claimant entered the UK on  31st  August
      2004 with entry clearance. She obtained further extensions of leave to
      remain, the last of which expired on 24th November 2012. She  made  an
      in time application for further leave to remain on the basis of family
      life, contending that her  removal  would  violate  her  rights  under
      Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention. [2]


   5. She entered into a relationship with Mr  Olushol  Oluyemi,  a  British
      national, in December 2008. On 9th April 2013 she gave birth to  their
      daughter [4].


   6. After giving consideration to her application  under  Appendix  FM  as
      well as pursuant to paragraph 276 ADE of the  Immigration  Rules,  the
      secretary of state found that she was unable to meet the  requirements
      under the rules.


   7. There was further consideration given as to  whether  there  were  any
      exceptional circumstances warranting consideration by the secretary of
      state for a grant of leave to remain outside the rules. It was decided
      that there were not.


   8. The Judge found  the  claimant  entered  the  UK  lawfully  to  study,
      completed those studies and obtained various extensions until 2012. By
      that time she had met her partner. They  had  a  traditional  marriage
      ceremony in Nigeria in April 2012.


   9. There  was  a  letter  from  her  partner  dated  10th  November  2012
      confirming their relationship for four years, stating  that  they  had
      planned to marry on 16th February 2013. However, that was  delayed  as
      they were waiting for divorce  papers  which  would  be  finalised  in
      December 2012. The decree absolute was not produced at the hearing (it
      has subsequently been produced before the Upper-tier Tribunal).  There
      was also a birth certificate of their child, born on 9th  April  2013,
      confirming her partner as the father.


  10. The Judge noted an inconsistency between the  supporting  letter  from
      their solicitors dated November  2012  which  stated  that  they  were
      living together and the birth certificate showing that they  lived  at
      two different addresses.   She  found  that  the  "....inconsistencies
      undermine the suggestion of the relationship living together for  over
      two years" (sic) [25].


  11. The Judge considered whether there were any  insurmountable  obstacles
      to the relationship continuing in Nigeria.  She  found  there  was  no
      evidence of such obstacles to family  life  taking  place  in  Nigeria
      [26]. Her partner had spent a  significant  portion  of  his  life  in
      Nigeria. He had close family members resident  there  and  a  Nigerian
      passport. The claimant has family there,  including  siblings,  having
      spent the majority of her life in Nigeria as well [26].


  12. The Judge then went on to consider Article 8 under  the  Human  Rights
      Convention, and in particular whether it is reasonable to  expect  the
      claimant to relocate. In that respect, she had regard to the fact that
      "her husband" is a British national, as is her child.


  13. She had regard to the s.55 considerations as well as authorities  such
      as ZH (Tanzania) and Sanade and Others (British children - Zambrano  -
      Dereci) [2012] UKUT 00048 (IAC). She considered the submission that it
      would be unreasonable to expect her daughter and partner  to  relocate
      and that it is in the best interests of the child that she remains  in
      the care of both  parents,  "....and  in  the  light  of  her  British
      citizenship an entitlement to live in the UK that her  best  interests
      lie in the UK" [27].


  14. The Judge found merit in  that  submission.  The  claimant  has  lived
      lawfully in the UK for ten years; she has been self supporting; she is
      in an established relationship with her  partner;  her  partner  would
      have to start afresh in Nigeria with his young family and  he  already
      has a home and job in the UK and is able to support them.


  15. She found that the only purpose to be served in requiring the claimant
      to leave would be to apply for entry clearance from abroad. She  would
      then have to leave her child or separate the child  from  her  father.
      Accordingly,  she  found  that  the  removal   was   unnecessary   and
      disproportionate to the legitimate aim of immigration control [27].


  16. On 12th September 2014, First-tier Tribunal Judge Ransley granted  the
      secretary of state permission to appeal. Although he has  recorded  in
      the decision at paragraph 4 that "the determination has not been shown
      to involve an arguable error of law that might have  made  a  material
      difference to the outcome  of  the  appeal;  permission  is  therefore
      granted" the parties agreed that the word "not" should be deleted from
      that paragraph. It was accepted by the parties that the Judge  clearly
      intended to grant the secretary of state permission to appeal.


  17. The grounds contending that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  erred  in
      allowing the appeal were that she failed to apply Gulshan namely, that
      it is only if there are arguably good grounds for  granting  leave  to
      remain outside the rules would it be  necessary  to  consider  whether
      there are compelling circumstances not sufficiently  recognised  under
      the rules. The Judge  however  simply  proceeded  to  assess  "a  free
      standing Article 8 claim."


  18. Ms Kenny in line with the grounds submitted that  the  Judge  did  not
      consider the guidance from Gulshan [2013]. No findings in this  regard
      were made and the Judge simply proceeded to undertake a free  standing
      Article 8 assessment from paragraphs 20 onwards.


  19. She submitted that in the absence of any finding as to "arguably  good
      grounds and compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised under
      the rules" it was not permissible for the Judge to have  undertaken  a
      free standing Article 8 assessment as occurred in this appeal.


  20. She submitted that Gulshan is still  relevant  despite  the  Court  of
      Appeal's decision in MM [2014] EWCA Civ  985,  which  was  promulgated
      after the date of hearing but prior to the determination of the First-
      tier Tribunal Judge.


  21. She submitted that  the  Judge  in  fact  found  that  there  were  no
      insurmountable obstacles. Nevertheless, she found  that  it  would  be
      unreasonable  to  expect  the  claimant's  daughter  and  partner   to
      relocate.


  22. Although the Judge appeared to rely on Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40
      the decision was not identified in the determination itself.


  23. Ms Kenny did accept however that the issue of proportionality had been
      thoroughly addressed in the skeleton argument prepared  on  behalf  of
      the claimant, and in particular at paragraph 13 where  both  Chikwamba
      and Hayat [2012] EWCA Civ 1054 were set out. The Judge referred to the
      submissions made on behalf of the claimant, noting that counsel relied
      on her written skeleton argument [18].


  24. On behalf of the claimant, Mr Wray, who did not represent the claimant
      before the First-tier Tribunal, submitted  that  the  Judge  had  been
      "overly concise in giving reasons with regard to  the  proportionality
      test."


  25. He submitted that the "three stage test" had  been  superseded  by  MM
      which had "brought back a more traditional assessment of Article 8."


  26. It did not follow from the finding that there were  no  insurmountable
      obstacles  that  her  return  would  not  in  the   circumstances   be
      unreasonable.


  27. He referred to Appendix 4 of MM. That contained  IDIs  in  respect  of
      family members under the Immigration Rules. The process to be followed
      in considering exceptional circumstances is fully  set  out.  Even  if
      they are implicitly raised,  such  as  where  it  is  clear  that  the
      applicant has a child in the UK, there should be a consideration as to
      whether or not these factors might mean that a refusal would result in
      unjustifiably harsh consequences for the applicant or their family.


  28. He submitted that the Judge had engaged  with  these  issues,  and  in
      particular had regard to the "section 55 interests" of  the  child,  a
      British national. She considered  whether  even  temporary  separation
      would be reasonable in the circumstances. The Judge had "been  through
      the proper stages" in her assessment regarding proportionality and has
      given proper reasons why the decision would be  disproportionate.  The
      matters are properly collected and set out at paragraph 27.


  29. In reply, Ms Kenny submitted that there was nothing exceptional  about
      the claimant's circumstances. She had an  option  whether  or  not  to
      continue to live together.


     Assessment


  30. In MM, supra, Lord Justice Aikens had  regard  to  R  (Nagre)  v  SSHD
      [128]. The secretary of state had  issued  guidance  in  the  form  of
      instructions regarding the approach of officials in  deciding  whether
      to grant leave to remain outside the rules  in  the  exercise  of  the
      residual discretion that the secretary of  state  had  to  grant  such
      leave.


  31. It could be granted in "exceptional circumstances". He recognised that
      the new rules could not provide for all  possible  circumstances  that
      might arise under Article 8. The new rules would  guide  the  decision
      makers in most cases. In those cases not covered  by  the  new  rules,
      only if there is an "arguable case" that there may be good grounds for
      granting leave to remain outside the rules by reference to  Article  8
      would it be necessary for Article 8 purposes  to  go  on  to  consider
      whether there are compelling circumstances to grant leave.


  32. At paragraph 135, Lord Justice Aikens stated that where  the  relevant
      group of immigration rules, upon their proper construction, provide  a
      "complete code" for dealing with a person's Convention rights  in  the
      context of a particular immigration rule or statutory provision,  such
      as in the case of "foreign criminals", then the balancing exercise and
      the way the various factors  are  to  be  taken  into  account  in  an
      individual case must be done in accordance with  that  code,  although
      references  to  "exceptional  circumstances"   in   the   code   would
      nevertheless entail a proportionality exercise. If the relevant  group
      of rules is not such a "complete code" then the  proportionality  test
      will be more at large, albeit guided by the Huang tests and the UK and
      Strasbourg case law - MF (Nigeria), supra, at [45].


  33. In MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192, the judgment of the court
      was that the new rules are a complete code and  that  the  exceptional
      circumstances to be considered in the balancing exercise  involve  the
      application of a proportionality test as required  by  the  Strasbourg
      jurisprudence. Accordingly, it is not correct that the decision  maker
      is not "mandated or directed" to  take  all  the  relevant  Article  8
      criteria into account.


  34. Even if wrong about that, the court went on to hold that it  would  be
      necessary to apply a proportionality test outside the  new  rules,  as
      was done by the Upper Tribunal in MF. Either way, the result should be
      the same.


  35. Although the context of the decision in MF related to the  deportation
      of a foreign national criminal, said to have been contrary to  Article
      8 of the Human Rights Convention, the construction by the Court of the
      new rules applies equally to the present context.


  36. Ms Kenny accepted that the relevant group of rules applicable  in  the
      claimant's case is not such a "complete" code as for example,  in  the
      case of that  applicable  to  "foreign  criminals".  Accordingly,  the
      proportionality test will be more at large, albeit guided by the Huang
      tests and the UK and Strasbourg case law.


  37. I have also had regard to MF (Nigeria), supra.


  38. The Judge has properly engaged with the Article 8 claim. She  has  set
      out  in  some  detail  the  immigration  history  of  the   appellant.
      Furthermore,  although  not  referred  to  in   argument   by   either
      representative, it is evident from the documentation provided  to  the
      First-tier Tribunal that a statement of additional grounds pursuant to
      s.120 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  was  issued
      to the claimant. She  responded  to  it  and  in  terms  of  documents
      previously  served  and  by  a  skeleton  argument,  she  stated   her
      additional grounds, namely that she enjoys family life  with  her  one
      year old British daughter and her British partner.


  39. The Judge found with regard to the relationship between the  appellant
      and her partner, that while there would be some issue with  regard  to
      readjusting, there are no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life
      taking place in Nigeria. [26]


  40. In considering Article 8 she asked whether it would be  reasonable  to
      except her to relocate [27].  She had  regard  to  ZH  (Tanzania)  and
      Sanade, supra. She had regard to the  best  interests  of  the  child.
      Those were that she remains in the  care  of  both  parents.  In  that
      respect,  she  had  regard  to   the   child's   British   citizenship
      constituting an entitlement to live in the UK.  She  ultimately  found
      that the child's best interests "lie in the UK." [27]


  41. She had regard to  the  fact  that  the  claimant  herself  has  lived
      lawfully in the UK for ten years and has been self supporting[1].  She
      was referred to the authorities in Hayat, supra, and Chikwamba.


  42. Having applied Hayat, she upheld the submission that there would be no
      sensible reason to require the claimant to  return  and  re-apply  for
      entry clearance. Her requirement to relocate  even  temporarily  would
      result in disruption to the claimant. That would include separation of
      the child at a crucial early stage of her  development,  alternatively
      separation of the child from her father.


  43. Having regard to the evidence as a whole, she found that the  proposed
      removal would be unnecessary and disproportionate  to  the  legitimate
      aims of immigration control.


  44. Although the analysis, assessment and reasoning undertaken the  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge may have been somewhat sparse, I do not find  that
      the decision reached  is  in  any  way  irrational  or  perverse;  the
      findings are sustainable on the evidence before her.


     Decision


      The determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  involve  the
      making of any    material error on a point of law. The decision  shall
      accordingly stand.


     No anonymity direction made.









                               Signed                 Date 2/11/2014


                               C R Mailer
                               Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


-----------------------

[1] As a matter of fact it appears that as at the date of the decision, she
was less than three months from completing ten years' lawful  residence  in
the UK. Accordingly, she would arguably qualify  for  indefinite  leave  to
remain on the grounds of long residence pursuant to paragraph 276B  of  the
Immigration Rules.



