
                                    [pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34182/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 5th December 2016                      |On 10th January 2017             |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT

                                   Between

                           bernard kpabitey tetteh
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Ume-Ezeoke of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


 1. In a renewed application, Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer gave  permission
    to the appellant to appeal against the decision of Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Obhi who dismissed the appeal on the papers  against  the
    decision of the respondent to refuse a residence card to the  appellant
    as the family  member  of  an  EEA  national  in  accordance  with  the
    provisions of the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006.

 2. Judge Plimmer granted permission on the basis that it was arguable that
    the appellant had not received directions issued on 27th November  2015
    requiring him to file documents by 29th December 2015 and so  documents
    subsequently filed after the date of hearing  should  have  been  taken
    into consideration.

 3. At the initial hearing of this matter in the Upper Tribunal  before  me
    on 7th November 2016 (at which the respondent's representative  was  in
    attendance but not the appellant) I reached the initial view  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Judge did not show an error on  a  point  of
    law.  However, when later studying  the  information  on  the  Tribunal
    file, I reached a revised view on the basis that  it  was  possible  an
    administrative error had occurred within the Tribunal which meant  that
    the appellant had not received the directions dated 27th November  2015
    requiring him to file his evidence by 29th December 2015  in  readiness
    for the appeal to be decided on  the  papers.   That  was  because  the
    Tribunal file contains a partial copy of a notice of appeal  suggesting
    that the appellant had elected to have his case decided on  the  papers
    but a full copy of a notice of appeal in a different part of  the  file
    indicated the opposite.  The complete  notice  of  appeal  indicated  a
    request for an oral hearing with the attendance of  the  appellant  and
    witnesses and a representative.  Thus, even if the Tribunal notice  and
    directions of 27th November 2015 had been sent  to  the  appellant,  an
    erroneous state of affairs would have been indicated.  Having regard to
    the appellant's brief grounds of application suggesting that he  should
    have received a bundle of documents from the  respondent  and  had  not
    received any further notice of the progress of his appeal, I  concluded
    that the appellant's claims had substance and  the  matter  should  not
    have been dealt with on the papers on 1st February 2016.

 4. Following my discovery of the above matters, I arranged for a direction
    to be sent to the parties for  the  resumption  of  the  error  of  law
    hearing which then took place before me on 5th December 2016.  At  that
    hearing Mr Bates made no objection to my proposal to remit  the  matter
    for oral hearing afresh before the First-tier Tribunal because  of  the
    administrative error which I had identified and because  the  appellant
    had thereby been deprived of a fair hearing. That was  because  of  the
    failure of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  take  into  consideration  his
    bundle of documents submitted to the Tribunal on 29th January 2016.  Mr
    Ume-Ezeoke also had no objection to my proposal.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shows an error on  a  point  of  law
and is set aside.  The appeal is to be  re-made  afresh  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal.



DIRECTIONS

 1. The remitted hearing will take place at the Stoke Hearing Centre  on  a
    date to be specified by the Resident Judge.

 2. No interpreter will be provided for the hearing unless  representatives
    indicate to the contrary.

 3. The time estimate for the hearing is two hours.

 4. The hearing should not be before Judge Obhi.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt

