
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/34198/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 January 2018                            |On 22 February 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                           Mohammad Kabul Hussain
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Malik of counsel Mr Malik of counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow, a Home Office presenting officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh  born  on  31  December  1977.
    The appellant first applied for ten years' long residence in the UK  on
    9 October 2014 having originally come here  in  2004  and  had  various
    extensions to his leave to remain.  On 3 November 2015  the  respondent
    decided that the appellant fell for exclusion from the UK,  because  he
    had exercised fraud in relation to an English language test he had been
    taken some years earlier relying on paragraph 322  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

2.   The appellant appealed that decision. His  appeal  came  before  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Clarke sitting in the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  16
    March 2017.  Judge  Clarke  rejected  the  respondent's  case,  saying,
    incorrectly, that the two civil servants who  were  relied  on  by  the
    Secretary of State had been rejected by  the  Upper  Tribunal.  He  was
    therefore unable to accept their evidence in support of the claim  that
    the appellant  had  used  deception  in  support  of  his  application.
    However, the Immigration Judge went on to consider the  merits  of  the
    case for the appellant and accepted all the appellant's oral  evidence,
    including his explanation  as  to  the  circumstances  surrounding  the
    English language test in question.

3.   The current appeal to the Upper Tribunal is heard with  the  permission
    Upper Tribunal Judge Storey on 21 November 2017.  Judge Storey  decided
    it was arguable that Judge Clarke had  failed  to  consider  fully  the
    evidence produced by the respondent together with the guidance given by
    the Court of Appeal in the case of Secretary of State v Shehzad  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 615.

Discussion

4.   Before me, Mr Malik accepted the first ground of appeal raised  by  the
    respondent. This ground pointed out that the Immigration Judge had been
    wrong simply to reject the respondent's evidence of Mr  Millington  and
    Ms Collings without going on to consider whether or not that discharged
    the evidential burden on the Secretary  of  State.  That  evidence,  he
    accepted, at least raised a case which the appellant had to answer. The
    evidential burden on the Secretary of State required her only  to  show
    that there was an issue, as to the existence or non-existence of a fact
    in issue, which his client had to answer. Mr Malik accepted  that  that
    burden  had  at  least  potentially  been  discharged  by  the  witness
    statements of Ms Collings and Mr Millington.  However Mr Malik went  on
    to explain that in his submission based on recent  case  law  including
    the case of Shehzad and Chowdhury as well as Njunda, there was a  three
    stage  process.   He  said  that  the  second  stage,  given  that  the
    respondent had discharged the initial evidential burden,  required  the
    appellant to provide an innocent explanation for his conduct. If he did
    so the burden then shifted back to the Secretary of State to show  that
    the innocent explanation should be rejected.

5.   Mr Tarlow, who appeared for  the  respondent  in  the  Upper  Tribunal,
    candidly accepted that no questions have been asked of the appellant on
    behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  at  the   First-tier   Tribunal.
    Accordingly,  that  Tribunal  was  only  left  with   the   appellant's
    explanation  in  his  witness  statement.   As  the  judge  records  in
    paragraph 47 of his  decision  the  appellant  was  not  challenged  in
    respect of the contents of his witness statement and it was not put  to
    the appellant that he was dishonest or that the rest  of  his  evidence
    was untrue or contained lies.

Conclusion

6.   The correct analysis is contained in the case of Shezad. Given that  Mr
    Malik conceded that the respondent had discharged the burden of showing
    that there was at least a case to answer, the question is then  whether
    the First-tier Tribunal went on to consider the  explanation  given  by
    the appellant and whether that explore explanation was  plausible.  Did
    the appellant's apparently innocent explanation discharge the burden of
    proof to the ordinary scratch that the civil standard.

7.   I find that the appellant did raise sufficient evidence to support  the
    conclusion that he had an innocent  explanation  for  the  alleged.  It
    seems clear from paragraph 39 onwards in Judge Clarke's  decision  that
    he looked carefully at the evidence  before  him.  He  noted  that  the
    relevant English language test had been taken some years previously, in
    2011.   It  was  also  a  relevant  factor  that  the  appellant   was,
    apparently, able to speak adequate English at the time of  the  hearing
    as this enabled the Tribunal to conclude that he probably spoke English
    reasonably well at the date he took the test. He had undertaken various
    forms of English language test in the past in Bangladesh. It is also of
    note that that the appellant was not cross-examined as to his  evidence
    (see paragraph 47 of the decision).

8.   In the  circumstances  there  was  material  evidence  to  support  the
    appellant's case. I have concluded that the decision was one reasonably
    open to Judge Clarke based on the evidence he heard.  It is unfortunate
    that the First-tier appeared  to  give  an  erroneous  summary  of  the
    application of the burden and standard of proof. However, having regard
    to the comprehensive findings made in the paragraphs to  which  I  have
    referred and the acceptance of  the  appellant's  evidence,  I  do  not
    consider that the error that the First-tier Tribunal made was  material
    to the outcome.

Notice of Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed and the decision of the First-
tier Tribunal stands.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 21 February2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have decided to make no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 21 February2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury
