
[pic]


UPPER TRIBUNAL

IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER    Appeal No. IA/34994/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:  Birmingham                |Decision Promulgated                  |
|On: 4 September 2014                 |On: 5 September 2014                  |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                          Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Marcia Rutendo Muindisi
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Nwaiwu of RBM Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The claimant is a citizen of Zimbabwe and was born  on  24  September
       1987.

    2. For the purposes of this decision I refer to the Secretary  of  State
       as the respondent, her position before the First-tier Tribunal.

    3. This is the Secretary of State's  appeal  against  the  determination
       promulgated on 9 June 2014 of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Hawden-Beal
       which allowed the appeal under Article 8  ECHR  brought  against  the
       respondent's decision of 6 August 2013 to refuse leave.

    4. The respondent's summary at  paragraph  a)  of  the  grounds  of  the
       reasons why the First-tier Tribunal  judge found the decision to be a
       disproportionate interference with the claimant's family and  private
       life is inaccurate. The  appellant  was  found  at  [22]  to  have  a
       "strong" family life with her relatives  in  the  UK  and  was  still
       treated as a "child" of the family notwithstanding her age. She  also
       supported the family in  a  substantive  way,  both  financially  and
       practically. Her father could only work part-time as  he  had  health
       problems so her financial support was particularly important  to  the
       family in the UK.  The younger children in the family were  suffering
       because of the uncertainty in relation to the appellant's immigration
       status. She had  limited  contact  with  more  distant  relatives  in
       Zimbabwe. She had been in the UK lawfully for 9 years by the time  of
       the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.  These findings  are  not
       challenged. The appeal was not allowed because the Immigration  Rules
       had changed or the appellant had a legitimate expectation of  further
       leave in line with her family  members,  as  might  be  thought  from
       paragraph a) of the grounds.

    5. Paragraph b) of the grounds can have no merit where it relies on  the
       misstatement in paragraph a) of the judge's reasons for  finding  the
       decision disproportionate.

    6. In my judgement, paragraph c) of the grounds is merely a disagreement
       with the decision that was clearly open to the  First-tier  Tribunal,
       that the factors identified above were sufficient to  show  that  the
       decision was disproportionate.

    7. The case of MM and Others v SSHD [2013] EWHC 1900  (Admin)  reaffirms
       that the correct approach in an Article 8 assessment is that set down
       in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 and Huang [2007] UKHL 11 and indicates  that
       the "arguably good grounds test" arising from Gulshan  (Article  8  -
       new rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT  00640  and  Nagre  v  SSHD
       [2013] EWHC 720 is not good  law.  It  did  not  appear  to  me  that
       paragraph d) of the grounds had force, therefore. In  any  event,  as
       above, the First-tier Tribunal  judge  here  clearly  considered  the
       particular circumstances of this  appellant  and  her  family  to  be
       "compelling" having made a specific  and  correct  self-direction  to
       that effect at [21] and her reasons for so  finding,  as  above,  not
       being capable of being characterised as perverse.

    8. For these reasons, I did not find that  the  grounds  of  appeal  had
       merit.

DECISION

    9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain an error  on
       a point of law and shall stand.


Signed:     [pic]      Date: 4 September 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

