
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
ia/34458/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |          Decision & Reasons       |
|                                     |Promulgated                        |
|On 24th October 2017                 |          On 4th December 2017     |
|                                     |                                   |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD

                                   Between

                               MR Faisal HANIF
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent

                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Sharma of Counsel, Sky Solicitors Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The Secretary of State appeals with permission  against  the  decision
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Majid promulgated on 3rd March 2017.   For
    ease, I shall continue to refer to Mr Hanif as the  Appellant  although
    it is the Secretary of State who brings this  appeal.   The  judge  had
    allowed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision to refuse him a residence card as confirmation of a  right  to
    reside in the United Kingdom.

2.    The Secretary of State's decision is somewhat detailed,  but  in  part
    it made clear in saying as follows:

         "You have applied for a residence card as confirmation of  a  right
         of residence as the spouse of an  EEA  national  exercising  treaty
         rights  in  the  United  Kingdom.   However,  your   marriage   was
         identified as being potentially one of convenience and  you  failed
         to respond to a questionnaire."


    Various matters were set additionally in a reasons for  refusal  letter
    taking into account documentation which had been submitted.


3.    This morning, the Secretary of State raises several grounds  and  when
    permission was granted it was said as follows  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Ford,   "The  Respondent  seeks  permission  to  appeal.   It  is
    arguable that the Tribunal erred in demonstrating apparent bias in  its
    decision, in particular from paragraph 18 onwards and it was said  that
    there was an arguable material error of law".

4.    The Secretary of State's grounds, detailed as they  are,  really  need
    consideration  in my judgment of paragraph 5 which provides as follows:



      The judge has made no relevant findings in respect of  the  Secretary
         of State's case that the  marriage  is  one  of  convenience.   The
         Presenting Officer's hearing minute notes that the  spouse  of  the
         Appellant did not attend the  hearing  and  was  a  point  made  in
         respect of the overall allegation of deception.  The judge does not
         address this at all.

4.    In his submissions before me today Mr McVeety was concise but  to  the
    point and said  that  although  all  of  the  grounds  were  relied  on
    ultimately the judge did not make any proper decision  in  relation  to
    findings which were required, so that was the most important issue.  He
    said that perhaps the reason was connected to the political  statements
    being made by the judge.  But ultimately Mr McVeety had  said  that  he
    relied on the ground that there was a  fundamentally  flawed  decision.
    He  accepted  that  there  was  no  compliance  with  the  Presidential
    Directions  in  relation  to  the  filing  and  service  of  unreported
    decisions.

5.    Mr Sharma in his submissions said that all that he could on behalf  of
    the Appellant and  he  grouped  his  submissions  in  three  responses.
    Firstly, the issue of bias, secondly the issue in relation to the  2006
    Regulations and thirdly whether or not relevant findings or factors had
    been taken into account. Mr Sharma said that there  were  some  strange
    comments from the judge, but ultimately if one looked to  the  decision
    as a whole, where there were strange comments being made by  the  judge
    or even political comments they were  either  irrelevant,  for  example
    reference to the Human Rights Act and  a  Human  Rights  Act  claim  or
    alternatively it was clear the judge had made sufficient findings.

6.    Now, I am aware that there has been a reported decision of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in respect of this  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  but  I  have
    sought to look at the matter independently of that.   However,  despite
    doing that, in my  judgment,  the  real  difficulty  with  the  judge's
    decision is that there simply were not sufficient findings to deal with
    the issues which had been raised by the Respondent.   It  may  well  be
    that the judge heard sufficient evidence to deal  with  those  concerns
    but the problem is that the decision does not deal with them in  a  way
    which fairly sets out the Secretary of State's concerns and  in  a  way
    which adequately then  reasoned  why  the  decision  went  against  the
    Secretary of State.  Both parties are entitled to know why they won  or
    lost. In my judgment it is quite clear that in this instance there is a
    fundamental flaw in relation to the requirement to  ensure  justice  is
    done to both sides.

7.    In the circumstances, the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    has to be set aside.  None of the current findings  can  stand.   There
    will be a rehearing at the First-tier Tribunal  before  a  judge  other
    than Judge Majid and that will take place at Taylor House.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed
Abid Mahmood                                 Date: 24 October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood



