
[pic]

First-tier Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34913/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On  23rd April 2015                  |On 19th May 2015                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER Tribunal JUDGE KELLY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                MR STUART NEL
                          (anonymity not directed)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    S Tettey, Counsel instructed by Howells Solicitors.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. In this case the Secretary of State appealed, with permission,  against
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal Bircher to allow the appeal  of  Mr
    Stuart Nel against her decision (a) to refuse his application for leave
    to remain as the child of  a  person  who  is  settled  in  the  United
    Kingdom,  and  (b)  to  remove  him  from  the  United   Kingdom.   For
    convenience, I shall hereafter make reference to the parties  according
    to their status in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal challenged Judge  Bircher's
    findings that the appellant met the requirements of Appendix FM of  the
    Immigration Rules and the alternative decision that his  removal  would
    be incompatible with his rights under Article 8 of  the  1950  European
    Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.



 3. In granting permission to appeal, however, Judge Robertson  noted  that
    the application ought to have been considered by the  respondent  under
    Part 8 of the Rules, with specific reference to paragraph  297,  rather
    than under the provisions of Appendix FM [the grant  of  permission  to
    appeal in fact refers to paragraph 287, but this is clearly a  clerical
    error].

 4. Having noted the terms of paragraph A280 of the Rules, I concluded that
    Judge Robertson was correct and, when I  drew  this  provision  to  her
    attention, Mrs Pettersen agreed. She  therefore  sought  permission  to
    withdraw the decision under Rule 17(2) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008. Having established that Mr Tettey did not  object
    to this course of action, I decided that it would be in  the  interests
    of justice to grant the application.

Notice of Decision

 5. Permission is granted  to  the  Secretary  of  State  to  withdraw  the
    decision that is the subject of this appeal.

Anonymity is not directed



Signed        Date

Judge Kelly
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
