
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
IA/34777/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated |
|On 12 November 2014                      |On 12 November 2014       |
|                                         |                          |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

             THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENTMISS
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Miss SAKINE KARTAL
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Sreeraman, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B Ali, Counsel
      (instructed by Ahmed Rahman Carr Solicitors)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS







      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant (the Secretary of State) appealed with  permission
           granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grant-Hutchison  on  1
           October 2014 against the determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
           Judge Howard who  had  allowed  the  Respondent's  appeal  in  a
           determination promulgated on 19 August 2014.


      2.    The Respondent is a national of Turkey, born on 10 August  1985,
           who had applied for a variation of her existing leave  to  enter
           the United Kingdom as a visitor so as to obtain leave  to  enter
           to establish a business in reliance on the Ankara Agreement  and
           paragraph 21 of the Immigration Rules HC510.   That  application
           was refused by the Secretary of State on 21 June 2013.   Amongst
           other  matters  the  veracity  of  the  Respondent's  supporting
           documents  had  been  challenged.   The  judge  found  that  the
           Respondent was credible and was genuinely intending to set up  a
           potentially viable catering business specialising in meze  style
           Turkish cuisine.


      3.    Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted by First-
           tier Tribunal TRP Hollingworth because he considered that it was
           arguable that the judge's findings were altogether too brief and
           had not addressed the issues raised in the reasons  for  refusal
           letter.


      4.    The Respondent indicated by a rule 24 notice  that  the  onwards
           appeal was opposed.  Standard directions were made.




      Submissions - error of law


      5.    Ms Sreeraman for the Appellant relied  on  the  application  for
           permission to appeal and grant of permission to  appeal.   There
           was nothing specific which she wished to add.


      6.    Mr Ali for the Respondent relied on the rule 24  notice  earlier
           filed.




      No material error of law finding


      7.    The tribunal indicated that it found  that  the  judge  had  not
           fallen into material error of law.  The grant of  permission  to
           appeal must be seen as overly generous.  The  experienced  judge
           had heard and seen the Respondent, and reached conclusions which
           were open to him.    The  tribunal  reserved  its  determination
           which now follows.


      8.    The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  determination  is  succinct.
           There was no requirement to set out the evidence in any  detail,
           as the judge had identified the key  issues  and  described  the
           relevant evidence in the course of his findings.   At  [11]  and
           [17] of his determination the judge addressed the concerns which
           the Secretary of State had raised, including the veracity of the
           Respondent's documents.  The judge  explained  why  he  resolved
           those doubts in the Respondent's favour.  The judge was entitled
           to  give  weight  to  the  evidence  which  the  Respondent  had
           produced, which included actual samples of  her  provender.   He
           was satisfied, as he explained, that  the  Respondent  was  well
           informed and had identified a potential market for her  catering
           business.  By inference  that  included  at  least  an  adequate
           degree of sales ability  and  "push".   The  judge  gave  proper
           reasons for being impressed with the Respondent's enthusiasm and
           knowledge,  as  both  factors  were  directly  relevant  to  the
           substance of the Ankara Agreement application.


      9.    In all it was plain that the  judge  had  properly  weighed  and
           considered  all  of  the  evidence  produced,  and   had   given
           sufficient reasons to support his findings and decision.


      10.   There was no material error of  law  in  the  determination  and
           there is no basis for interfering with the judge's decision.


      DECISION


      The making of the previous decision did not involve the making  of  an
error on a point of law and stands unchanged

      Signed                                  Dated




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell     12 November 2014




