

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: IA/34934/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                      |       Decision & Reasons           |
|                                       |Promulgated                         |
|On 27 September 2017                   |       On 13 October 2017           |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                MRS EDNA BOYE
                       (Anonymity DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Cleghorn    (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz     (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                                                            DECISION AND
REASONS

1.    This is  the  claimant's  appeal,  brought  with  permission,  to  the
Upper Tribunal from a decision of the First-tier Tribunal (hereinafter "the
tribunal") whereupon it  dismissed  her  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of
State's decision of 22 April 2015 refusing to grant her indefinite leave to
remain under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR).

2.    For the reasons set out below, I have decided to allow the  claimant's
appeal to the Upper Tribunal, to set aside the tribunal's decision  and  to
remake the decision myself in the claimant's favour.

3.    The claimant is a national of Ghana.  She says that  she  was  brought
to the United Kingdom when she was an 11 year old child and that  she  has
been here, without any break, ever since.  She sought  indefinite  leave  to
remain  on  the  basis  of  her  claimed  long  residence  but  relying,  in
particular, on paragraph 276 ADE of the Immigration Rules,  asserting  in
that context that she has lived continuously in the United Kingdom  for  at
least 20 years.

4.    The Secretary of State did not  dispute  that  she  had  been  in  the
United Kingdom since a date in 1997 (see paragraph 36 of the "Reasons  for
Decision" letter) but that was not  sufficient  to  give  her  the  required
20 years residence which  has  to  be  assessed  as  at  the  date  of  the
application.  The Secretary of State  also  concluded  that  she  could  not
establish entitlement under Article 8 of the ECHR outside of the rules.

5.    As to the claimant's personal circumstances, she  is  married  to  one
Richard Tsenoukpor, a national of Ghana.  That marriage took place  in  the
United Kingdom in 2005.  The couple  are  still  together  and  have  three
children who are aged two years, five years and seven years respectively.
None of the children are British citizens.

6.    The  tribunal,  like  the  Secretary  of  State,  concluded  that  the
claimant had demonstrated that she had been  in  the  United Kingdom  since
1997 but not before.  It heard evidence from her, from one Doris Blavo with
whom she had lived for a period of seven  years  from  1998,  and  from  her
brother Dennis Boye.  It found her not to be credible and did  not  believe
she had told the truth about having been in the United Kingdom at any stage
prior to 1997. The tribunal explained all of that in this way:

      "How Long Has the Appellant Been Continuously in the United Kingdom?

      17.   The appellant's case is that she arrived in the  United Kingdom
      in 1992 with her brother Dennis and sister Nina when she was 11 years
      old.  She had lived in Ghana until then.  Her  father  died.   Someone
      arranged for her to be brought to the United Kingdom.  She  travelled
      with a lady called Mavis who was her aunt.  The  respondent  does  not
      accept that the appellant was in the United Kingdom  before  1997  or
      1998.

      18.   The appellant relied upon her  own  evidence,  the  evidence  of
      Mrs Doris Blavo, and of her brother Dennis.   She  produced  written
      statements made by number of witnesses who  did  not  attend  to  give
      evidence.  She also produced  documents  in  support  of  her  appeal.
      There were problems with all of these areas of evidence.

      19.   None of the documents which the appellant produced shows her  to
      be  in  the  United Kingdom  earlier  than  1997.   A  letter  dated
      11 April 2011 from South Thames  College.   Is  indicated  that  the
      appellant was enrolled as a student there between 8 September 1997 and
      26 June 1998.  A document from the DVLA showed that she had  applied
      for  a  provisional  driving  licence  which  had   been   issued   on
      28 August 1997.  It gave the appellant's address at that time  as  [
                              ].  The appellant had provided copies  of  her
      GP medical notes.  The earliest date in them was 20 January 1999.  The
      notes showed the appellant to be registered with a GP in Leeds.

      20.   People leave documentary evidence of their presence.   I  accept
      that for someone recently in the United Kingdom there may  be  little
      documentation especially if as the appellant says she arrived  in  the
      United Kingdom as an 11-year-old.   The  obvious  records  one  would
      expect for an 11-year-old are those from a school and from a GP.  None
      of this is available.  The appellant's explanation is that she did not
      go to school apart from three months at school called St Mark's.  She
      had registered there using a false name.  She stopped  going  to  that
      school.  She  did  not  see  a  doctor  between  her  arrival  in  the
      United Kingdom in 1992 and 1999.

      21.   It is difficult to believe that an 11-year-old could  remain  in
      the United Kingdom for five years and not see or be registered with a
      GP or attend school.  It would  be  remarkable  if  she  had  attended
      school under a false name for three months  and  then  stopped  going.
      This would be bound to attract attention.

      22.   The appellant and her brother gave evidence.  I am  entitled  to
      regard anything they say on the matter  of  their  immigration  status
      with circumspection.  Both of them have been  in  the  United Kingdom
      illegally for a long periods although the appellant's brother has  now
      been granted discretionary leave.  The appellant has made a number  of
      applications for leave all of which have been refused.

      23.   The appellant's case is that she initially moved  to  Shrewsbury
      in  1992.   In  1993  she   moved   to   London   and   lived   at   [
                           ],  Battersea  with  her   grandmother's   sister
      Phyllis Vanderpuje.  She then moved in with Mrs Doris Blavo in 1998.
      She lived with her at [                           ], London for  seven
      years until she moved to Leeds in 2005.  The medical notes would  seem
      to indicate that she had  been  in  Leeds  in  1999.   They  refer  to
      attendances at the York Road Surgery.  The appellant was not able  to
      give any explanation for this.  I accept however that  some  of  these
      entries were shown to have been entered later and it may be that  they
      refer to earlier attendances at a different GP.

       24.    The  same  GP  notes   refer   to   her   as   living   at   [
                                     ] before moving to Leeds.  This is  not
      an address which the appellant said that she had lived  at.   She  was
      asked about this.  She said  that  this  was  the  address  which  the
      appellant said that she had lived at.  She was asked about this.   She
      said that this was  the  address  of  Mrs Blavo's  daughter  Roberta.
      Another address had been given in  the  application  for  the  driving
      licence referred to above.  This is not an address that the  appellant
      gave evidence she had lived at.  She was asked about this.   She  said
      that Mrs Blavo's husband lived there and  that  she  sometimes  lived
      there as well.

      25.   Mrs  Blavo gave evidence.   She  initially  said  that  she  had
      first met the appellant in 1998 or 1999.  She then said that  she  had
      met her in 1996.  She then said that the appellant used to come to her
      house she thought in 1999.  The appellant had lived with her  for  two
      or three years before moving to  Leeds.   Her  evidence  was  at  best
      vague.  She had a brain injury in 2015 which  may  account  for  this.
      Her account of the appellant moving in with her in  1998  for  two  or
      three years is clearly inconsistent with what the appellant says.  The
      appellant says that she was there between 1998 and 2005 when she moved
      to Leeds.

      26.   A number of other witnesses provided statements  or  letters  to
      confirm the date of the appellant's presence in  the  United Kingdom.
      These  are  Phyllis Vanderpuje,  Irene Adams,  Roberta Hassan,  and
      Deborah Akrong.  None of these witnesses attended to give evidence or
      be cross examined.  It was not possible  for  their  evidence  to  be
      tested.  I consequently put little weight upon what they say.

      27.   The appellant has known since at least 2006  that  there  was  a
      dispute about the date that she arrived in the  United Kingdom.   She
      might have been expected to make further efforts to establish when she
      came here.  She arrived by plane.  She must have travelled  with  some
      documentation.  The Ghanaian authorities could have been contacted  to
      ask about the date of issue of a passport.  The appellant  claims  not
      to have been in school in the United Kingdom.  She will have been  in
      school in Ghana until the age of 11.   Her  school  could  have  been
      contacted to see if they had records of when she left.  This  has  not
      been done.  Her case is that she came to the  United Kingdom  because
      her father had died.  A copy  of  his  death  certificate  would  have
      established when he died.

      28.   Ultimately the responsibility of proving that she  had  been  in
      the United Kingdom for 20 years prior to the application is  on  the
      appellant.  The absence  of  documentary  evidence  before  1997,  the
      failure to make reasonable attempts  to  obtain  other  evidence,  the
      inconsistencies in the documentary evidence she has produced, and  the
      inconsistencies in the oral testimony leave me to find  that  she  has
      not done so.  I do not find that she entered the United Kingdom as she
      claims in 1992.  I find that the earliest she can establish  that  she
      was in the United Kingdom was when she started her college course  on
      8 September 1997.   The   appellant   does   not   succeed   under
      paragraph 276 ADE(1)(iii) of the Immigration Rules."

7.    The tribunal then went on to reject some further arguments  concerning
the best interests of the children and  concerning  article  8  outside  the
scope of the Immigration Rules but it is not necessary, for the purposes of
this decision, for me to set out what it had to say about  those  particular
aspects.

8.    The claimant's appeal having been dismissed, she sought  and  obtained
permission to appeal to  the  Upper Tribunal.   There  were  four  separate
grounds of appeal but I have found it necessary only  to  focus  upon  those
which relate to her credibility and to the reasoning of the  tribunal  which
I have just set out above.

9.    Having heard from the representatives I indicated that I  had  decided
that the tribunal had erred in law. I shall now explain why I  have  reached
that view.

10.    The  tribunal,  at  paragraph 21  of   its   written   reasons   of
13 December 2016, observed that it  was  "difficult  to  believe  that  an
11 year old could remain in the United Kingdom for five years and not see
or be registered with a GP or attend school".  Another way of looking at  it
might be to think that, as is said to be the position here,  adults  looking
after a young child who was in the United Kingdom illegally, would not wish
that child to have very much contact with authorities such that there  might
not be very much  in  the  way  of  a  paper  trail  created  at  all.   The
claimant's evidence was to the effect that she had not  attended  school  in
the United Kingdom except for a very brief period and under a  false  name.
Of course, I cannot find an  error  of  law  simply  because  I  might  have
perceived things somewhat differently to the  tribunal.   But  the  tribunal
did not, at any stage, consider the obvious possibility that  those  looking
after an unlawfully present child might not want that  child  to  have  very
much in the way of  contact  with  medical  practitioners  or  providers  of
education or indeed other branches of officialdom.

11.   At paragraph 22 of the written reasons the tribunal observed that  it
was "entitled to regard anything" which the  claimant  or  her  brother  had
said regarding their respective immigration  status  "with  circumspection".
Ms Cleghorn was heavily critical of that passage.  It seems to me, however,
that the tribunal was entitled  to  exercise  some  caution  when  receiving
evidence from knowing overstayers.  The claimant was, of course,  a  knowing
overstayer at some point after her arrival.  But what the tribunal  did  not
do was consider the possibility that, in  all  the  circumstances  including
the circumstance (the claimant says) of being brought to the United Kingdom
as a child, that a reluctance to approach  the  Home Office  to  regularise
status might be in some respects understandable if not  excusable.   It  did
not consider the possibility that, against that background, her  credibility
might not be seriously damaged on that account alone.

12.   The tribunal, at  paragraph 27  of  the  written  reasons,  expressed
concern and took a point against the claimant for what it perceived to be  a
failure to obtain or at least try to obtain documentary evidence from  Ghana
which might support her account of having come to the United Kingdom at the
age of eleven.  Whilst, in general terms, a tribunal is perfectly  entitled
to draw adverse inferences  from  a  failure  to  obtain  easily  obtainable
corroborative  evidence,  its  apparent  expectation  that  there  might  be
records kept of her attending a school in Ghana up to the age of eleven  and
then ceasing to attend seems to me to have  been  significantly  optimistic.
There was no material before the tribunal suggesting  it  likely  that  such
records might be kept and indeed, what material there was rather  seemed  to
point the other way. I would make  a  similar  point  with  respect  to  the
tribunal's apparent belief that a copy of  her  father's  death  certificate
would also have been readily obtainable.

13.   The tribunal, at paragraph 28, referred to what it described as  "the
inconsistencies in the  oral  testimony".   I  am  not  entirely  sure  what
inconsistencies it had in  mind  though  both  representatives  appeared  to
think it related to differences between her recollection of  where  she  had
lived at various times when compared with that  of  Doris Blavo.   But  the
tribunal itself recognised  that  a  brain  injury  which  Doris Blavo  had
suffered might account for any confusion.  Further, I am not able to  detect
any particular inconsistencies which might reasonably have been  thought  to
be of any real significance bearing in mind  any  understandable  difficulty
in recollecting precise detail of  matters  which  occurred  a  considerable
number of years ago.

14.   I do not think that any one of the above  considerations,  when  taken
in isolation, would be sufficient to justify setting  aside  the  tribunal's
decision.  However, those points when taken together gain cumulative  force.
 I am satisfied that the credibility assessment is inadequate or, at  least,
that the negative credibility conclusion has  been  inadequately  explained.
In truth, Mr Diwnycz did not seek to strenuously persuade me otherwise.

15.   So, it was on the basis of the above reasoning that I decided  to  set
aside the tribunal's decision.   It  was  then  agreed  that  matters  could
immediately proceed to the remaking of the decision.

16.   After it was verified that I had before me all  of  the  documentation
which had been before the tribunal, I heard oral evidence from the  claimant
only.  In evidence in chief she simply adopted the content  of  her  witness
statements of 24 September 2013 and 1 December 2016.  In response to cross-
examination and some questions put by me, she said that she had  tried  very
hard to find documentary evidence of her  presence  in  the  United Kingdom
prior to 1997 but had been unsuccessful.  She had come to the  UK  in  1992.
She  had  arrived  some  time  before  her  birthday  (she   was   born   on
23 September 1980).  It had been difficult to  get  all  of  the  required
documentation together because she had resided at  different  places  during
different times.  She has lived in Shrewsbury, London and Leeds.  She  could
recall starting to ask questions as to why she was not going to school  when
other children were.  She did not understand at the time why she  could  not
go to school.  She had not been in the United Kingdom very long before  she
started asking such questions but she  did  not  get  satisfactory  answers.
She would say that she used to be a very healthy child.   She  had  gone  to
school in Ghana but did not know if there might still be any record of  that
now.

17.   I then heard submissions from  the  two  representatives  albeit  that
both were very brief.  Mr Diwnycz said that he would rely upon the  content
of the "reasons for decision" letter.  It was  accepted  that  the  claimant
had  been  in  the  United Kingdom  during  1997  and  since.   No  further
submissions were made by him.  Ms Cleghorn simply said she would rely  upon
the evidence before me.

18.   It is common ground between the parties that if the claimant  is  able
to demonstrate she has lived continuously  in  the  United Kingdom  for  at
least 20 years as at the date of the relevant application, she will succeed
under paragraph 276 ADE of the Immigration Rules.  The relevant application
was made, as I understand it, on 4 April 2014.

19.   The claimant gave oral evidence, barely challenged before me,  to  the
effect that she had come to the United Kingdom in 1992.  That is consistent
with what she has always asserted.   Although  she  has  not  been  able  to
provide documentation spanning the years 1992-1996, she  has  been  able  to
provide documentation from 1997 so has, at least, been able  to  corroborate
her residence since that time.

20.   In my judgment it is credible that she  would  have  been  here  since
1992 yet would be unable to provide documentary evidence of it.  I think  it
is entirely plausible that those looking after her  might  not  have  wanted
her to come into contact with officialdom of any sort.  I find  her  account
of not having been able to go to school  (save  for  three  months  under  a
false name) and her  account  of  becoming  concerned  by  that  and  asking
questions about it to be credible.  I find  her  assertion  that  she  never
received any satisfactory answers to the questions she posed about  this  to
be entirely credible too.

21.   In general terms  it  is  understandable  that  anybody,  including  a
child, present in the United Kingdom illegally is less likely than a person
present here lawfully to generate  and  be  able  to  produce  corroborative
documentary evidence of presence.   An  illegal  immigrant  would  plausibly
wish to remain below the radar as far as  possible  and  those  assisting  a
child illegal immigrant would wish for that child to do  so  too.   That  is
for obvious reasons with respect to the risk of detection.

22.   In the above circumstances I conclude it is more likely than not  that
the claimant has been in the United Kingdom for a continuous  period  since
1992 and that, therefore, she had clocked up the requisite  20 year  period
by the time her application was made.  Accordingly, her appeal  against  the
Secretary of State's decision succeeds.

Decision

23.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved  the  making  of  an
error of law.  That decision is set  aside.   In  remaking  the  decision  I
allow the claimant's appeal against the Secretary  of  State's  decision  of
10 September 2015 under the Immigration Rules.





Signed:                           Date: 12 October 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway


Anonymity

I make no anonymity direction.  None was sought.

Signed:                           Date: 12 October 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.



Signed:                           Date:  8 October 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway


