
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34841/2015
                                                               IA/34842/2015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 January 2018                    |On 26 January 2018                   |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                     JN
                                     CU
                          (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellants:    Ms N Nnamani, Counsel, instructed by Samuel Louis
                    Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. These are appeals against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal O'Brien (the judge), promulgated  on  23  March  2017,  in
        which he dismissed the appellants' appeals against the respondent's
        decision  dated  19  June  2015   refusing   their   human   rights
        applications.

   Factual Background


     2. The appellants are nationals of Nigeria. The 1st appellant was born
        on [ ] 1980, and the 2nd appellant, who is the daughter of the  1st
        appellant, was born in the UK on [ ] 2008. The father  of  the  2nd
        appellant is a Nigerian national but has no continuing relationship
        with either appellant. At the date of the judge's decision the  2nd
        appellant was 9 years old.


     3. The 1st appellant claimed to have entered the UK in  January  2004.
        On 31 March 2011, the appellants made their human rights claim. The
        respondent considered the application under the  immigration  rules
        giving effect to private life considerations (paragraph 276ADE  and
        Appendix FM), and then outside the immigration rules in  line  with
        article 8. The respondent was not satisfied that the appellants met
        the requirements of paragraph 276ADE or Appendix FM,  and  was  not
        satisfied there were any  compelling  circumstances  sufficient  to
        warrant a grant of leave on article 8 grounds.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

     4. The appeal was heard on 3 March 17. The judge considered  a  number
        of documents including a witness statement from the  1st  appellant
        and an NHS letter and school documents, including  school  reports,
        in respect of the 2nd  appellant.  The  judge  summarised  the  1st
        appellant's oral evidence. In addition  to  a  description  of  the
        circumstances in which the 1st appellant came to enter the  UK  and
        the conditions in which she lived before and  after  entering,  the
        1st appellant stated that she spoke Ibo, that the 2nd appellant did
        not want to learn that language, and that  the  1st  appellant  had
        shared with the 2nd appellant some of  her  Nigerian  culture.  The
        judge noted that the 2nd appellant  had  flat  feet  and  bilateral
        hallux Valgus (bunions on both feet) but no learning difficulties.


     5. The judge set out the requirements of paragraph 276ADE  and  of  E-
        LTRPT and EX.1. of Appendix FM. The judge additionally set out  the
        5-stage test for assessing  article  8  claims  as  established  in
        Razgar [2004] UKHL 27. The judge referred to  the  public  interest
        factors detailed in s.117B  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
        Asylum Act 2002 and case  law  considering  those  provisions.  The
        judge additionally directed himself in respect  of  the  duties  to
        safeguard and promote the welfare of children in the UK pursuant to
        s.55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009.  The
        judge directed himself in accordance with authorities dealing  with
        the best interests of children and the relevance of a child  having
        resided in the UK for at least 7 years (EV (Philippines)  &  Ors  v
        Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874  and
        MA (Pakistan) & Ors, R (on the application  of)  v  Upper  Tribunal
        (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) & Anor [2016] EWCA Civ 705.


     6. In paragraphs 50 to 53 the judge rejected the 1st appellant's claim
        to have been seriously mistreated while in Nigeria and to have been
        trafficked to  the  UK.  The  judge  supported  his  conclusion  by
        reference to inconsistencies in the 1st appellant's  evidence,  and
        found, in any event, that it would be reasonable for the appellants
        to relocate in Nigeria to avoid any ill-treatment.


     7. The judge then considered the position of  the  2nd  appellant.  At
        paragraph 55 the judge stated,


             "... turning, thus, to the question of  whether  it  would  be
             reasonable to expect the Second Appellant to leave the  United
             Kingdom, I recognise that she has lived in this country  since
             birth, and will soon celebrate her 9th birthday. It  is  clear
             also that the  Second  Appellant  is  doing  well  at  school.
             However, she is not presently  at  a  critical  stage  of  her
             education. The Second Appellant would be able to continue  her
             education in Nigeria, at state expense until aged  15.  Whilst
             she would suffer some disruption  to  her  private  life,  the
             Second Appellant would be moving  together  with  her  mother,
             from whom she has already been exposed  to  her  cultural  and
             linguistic heritage. She has never had any  contact  with  her
             father. There was no  evidence  that  the  Second  Appellant's
             medical  conditions  could  not  adequately  be   treated   in
             Nigeria."


     8. And at paragraph 56 the judge stated,


             "All in all,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  Second  Appellant's
             removal with her mother to Nigeria would not  be  contrary  to
             her best interests nor would it be unreasonable."


     9. The judge then noted, at  paragraph  57,  the  public  interest  in
        maintaining effective immigration control, that the appellants were
        not  financially  independent,  and  that  the  2nd  appellant  had
        benefited from state healthcare and education.  Having  found  that
        the appellants' removal would breach their respective private  life
        rights, the judge  then  concluded  that  their  removal  would  be
        proportionate noting that their private lives had been  established
        when they were in the UK unlawfully and that the 2nd appellant, who
        had lived in the UK for more than  7  continuous  years,  would  be
        returning to the country of her cultural  heritage  with  the  only
        parent she has known and was still relatively young and adaptable.

The grounds of appeal and the error of law hearing

    10. The grounds of appeal content that the judge's adverse  credibility
        findings in respect  of  the  1st  appellant  were  not  adequately
        reasoned and that his conclusion that the appellants would be  able
        to avail themselves  of  continued  support  from  the  church  was
        unreasonable and perverse and not supported by  any  evidence.  The
        grounds further contend that the 2nd appellant was  at  a  critical
        stage of her emotional development and that there was  no  evidence
        to support the  judge's  conclusion  that  she  would  be  able  to
        continue her education in Nigeria. The grounds finally contend that
        the judge misapplied SSHD v SS (Congo) & Ors [2015] EWCA  Civ  387,
        but fail  to  identify  what  "patently  compelling  circumstances"
        merited consideration outside of the immigration rules.


    11. Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  P  J  M  Hollingworth  granted
        permission to appeal on the basis that the judge arguably failed to
        undertake  a  sufficient  analysis  of  the  degree  of   the   2nd
        appellant's integration, that the judge arguably  fell  into  legal
        error by concluding that the 2nd appellant was not  at  a  critical
        stage of her  education,  that  the  judge  failed  to  set  out  a
        sufficient analysis in considering the degree of integration across
        the social and cultural part of the spectrum  in  contradistinction
        to that to which the 2nd appellant would go,  and  that  the  judge
        should have set  out  an  analysis  of  the  2nd  appellant's  best
        interests before reaching a conclusion on reasonableness.


    12. Ms Nnamani expanded upon the grounds and the grant  of  permission.
        She focused on 2 main errors of  law.  Firstly,  the  judge  failed
        consider the best interests of the 2nd appellant before  concluding
        that it would be reasonable for her to leave  the  UK.  There  were
        said to be a failure to consider the best interests of the child in
        terms of her social and cultural integration into the UK community.
        Secondly, the judge accorded insufficient weight to the  length  of
        the 2nd appellant's residence in the UK. There were said to  be  no
        indication that the judge took into account the fact that  the  2nd
        appellant was born in the UK and would  have  spent  the  formative
        years of her life here.

Discussion

    13. I find, for the following  reasons,  that  the  decision  does  not
        contain any material legal error.


    14. The grounds of appeal contended that the judge  failed  to  provide
        any  clear  reasons  for  his  adverse  credibility   findings   in
        paragraphs 50 to 53. I find this ground  is  wholly  meritless.  At
        paragraphs 50 to 53 the judge gave legally sustainable reasons  for
        finding the 1st appellant's account of her circumstances in Nigeria
        and her journey to  the  UK  to  be  incredible.  The  judge  noted
        inconsistencies relating to the circumstances surrounding the death
        of the 1st appellant's parents, an inconsistency in respect of  the
        length of time that she allegedly lived with a friend following her
        escape from Ms Okafor, and the fact that in her  witness  statement
        she claimed to have strong family ties  in  the  UK  including  and
        aunt, uncle and cousins, but indicated at the hearing that  she  in
        fact had no family members in the UK other than her  daughter.  The
        judge was unarguably entitled to hold these factors against the 1st
        appellant and to reject her account of having been trafficked  into
        the UK.


    15. The grounds additionally contend that the judge was not entitled to
        find it unlikely that financial support received by the  appellants
        over a period of 8 years from her church would stop  if  they  were
        returned to Nigeria. The judge noted the absence  of  any  evidence
        from any church elder in support of this aspect of the  appellants'
        claim. It is for the appellants to prove their case and  the  judge
        was fully entitled  to  note  the  absence  of  any  evidence  that
        financial support would  not  continue  if  they  were  removed  to
        Nigeria. Such evidence could reasonably be expected to be provided.
        The judge was unarguably entitled to reject the  appellants'  claim
        that financial support would not continue.


    16. There is no merit in the submission that the judge was not entitled
        to conclude that the 2nd appellant had not reached a critical stage
        of her education. At the date of the decision the 2nd appellant was
        8 years of  age  and  in  year  5  of  primary  school.  The  judge
        demonstrably had regard to the school reports which indicated  that
        the 2nd appellant was doing well at school (see paragraph 55),  but
        there was simply no evidence that the  2nd  appellant  had  reached
        what on any reasonable view could be regarded as a  critical  stage
        of her education (contrary to Ms Nnamani's submission  relating  to
        the 11 Plus exams, there was no evidence that the 2nd appellant was
        planning to sit any such exams). The FtJ was entitled  to  conclude
        that the 2nd appellant would be able to continue her  education  in
        Nigeria until the age of 15 as evidence  for  the  proposition  was
        contained in the Reasons For Refusal Letter.


    17. I accept that the judge should have identified the 2nd  appellant's
        best interests pursuant to s.55 of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
        Immigration Act 2009 before assessing whether it was reasonable  to
        expect her to relocate to Nigeria (Kaur (children's best  interests
        / public interest interface) [2017] UKUT 00014  (IAC)).  I  am  not
        however satisfied that this error is in any  way  material  on  the
        particular facts of this case. There was very limited  evidence  of
        the nature and degree of the 2nd appellant's integration  into  the
        UK. The appellants' main bundle only contained a statement from the
        1st appellant, a copy of the 2nd appellant's birth certificate  and
        an NHS letter relating to an appointment at a  children's  hospital
        to see a specialist physiotherapist. The 1st appellant's  statement
        asserted that the 2nd appellant was not familiar  with  the  socio-
        cultural norms of Nigeria, but this appears to have been undermined
        somewhat by her oral evidence that  she  had  shared  some  of  her
        Nigerian culture with the 2nd appellant. The  statement  maintained
        that the 2nd appellant was making progress at school and  it  would
        not be in  her  best  interests  to  arrest  her  development.  The
        statement  also  asserted  that  the  2nd  appellant   was   wholly
        integrated into British  society  and  could  not  be  expected  to
        readily  adapt  to  a  foreign  society.  A  supplementary   bundle
        contained a further NHS letter, dated 18 January  2017,  diagnosing
        the 2nd appellant with the bilateral marked hallux valgus and  flat
        feet, and several school reports in addition  to  certificates  and
        awards received by the 2nd appellant. There  was  no  impartial  or
        independent  evidence  in  respect  of  the  degree  of   the   2nd
        appellant's integration into UK society or the impact upon  her  of
        having to relocate with her mother to Nigeria. In his assessment at
        paragraph 55 the judge took account of all relevant  considerations
        relating to the 2nd appellant's best interests including  her  age,
        her length of residence in the UK, the stage of her education,  her
        exposure to her cultural and linguistic heritage, and  her  medical
        conditions (EV (Philippines) & Ors v Secretary  of  State  for  the
        Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874 (at [35])).  He  conducted  his
        assessment on the limited evidence presented by the  appellants  in
        respect of the degree of the 2nd appellant's integration. The judge
        was unarguably aware that the 2nd appellant was born in the UK  and
        would soon be celebrating her 9th birthday.  Although  the  judge's
        consideration at paragraph 55 was stated to be in  respect  of  the
        reasonableness of expecting the 2nd appellant to leave the UK,  all
        relevant  factors  in   determining   her   best   interests   were
        nevertheless  considered.  In  any  event,  it  is  apparent   from
        paragraph 56 that the judge did consider that the  2nd  appellant's
        best interests were to remain with her mother even if it meant that
        the family unit was removed to Nigeria. This conclusion is entirely
        consistent  with  Azimi-Moayed  and  others  (decisions   affecting
        children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197.


    18. Nor is it arguable that the judge failed to consider or  apply  the
        principles established in  the  Court  of  Appeal  decision  in  MA
        (Pakistan. The judge was clearly aware of this  authority  and  was
        aware that, as a starting point, leaves  should  be  granted  to  a
        child who has lived in the UK  for  at  least  7  continuous  years
        unless there were powerful reasons to the contrary (paragraph  45).
        The  judge  did  identify  powerful  public  interest  factors   in
        paragraph 57 and took into account the 2nd  appellant's  relatively
        young age and adaptability and the best interests considerations in
        paragraph 55. The judge's decision was one that he  was  rationally
        entitled to reach for the reasons given.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal's decision did not contain a material error of  law.
The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellants  in
this appeal are granted anonymity. No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellants and to the Respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]                               24 January 2018
Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
