
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: Ia/34342/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Determination issued                 |
|on 2 June and 7 July 2015            |On 8 July 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                JING YUN LIU
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Stevenson, of McGill & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of China, born on 10 December 1984.   On  20
    December 2013 she sought leave to remain as a spouse or person  present
    and settled in the UK, Mr Chun Man Lee.

 2. The appellant is employed in a business started by her husband not long
    before the application was made.  The respondent's reasons for  refusal
    letter dated 16 August 2014 explains that the  application  is  refused
    primarily because the evidence provided did not meet  the  requirements
    of Appendix FM and Appendix FM-SE of the Immigration Rules  in  respect
    of the minimum income threshold.  The letter goes on  in  terms  of  no
    insurmountable obstacles to family life being continued outside the  UK
    under paragraph FM:EX.1, in terms of paragraph  276ADE  as  to  private
    life, and lastly finds no  exceptional  circumstances  to  grant  leave
    outside the Rules.  The letter is accompanied by a notice of  the  same
    date which contains both a decision to  refuse  to  vary  leave  and  a
    decision to remove.

 3. Judge Blair heard the appellant's appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  on
    28  November  2014.   The  appellant  presented  evidence   which   the
    respondent accepted would be likely, if submitted again,  to  meet  the
    terms of Appendix FM.  The respondent  argued  that  as  the  appellant
    could submit a fresh application the  case  should  not  succeed  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR.

 4. The appellant argued that a fresh  application  was  not  a  sufficient
    answer, and that in  those  circumstances  there  was  no  real  public
    interest in removal.

 5. In  his  determination  promulgated  on  17  December  2014  the  judge
    (correctly) found that post-decision evidence  was  irrelevant  to  the
    outcome under the Rules (which require submission of evidence with  the
    application).  He did not think that the fact that the appellant  could
    now show that she met the Rules meant that there was  a  good  arguable
    case for finding a breach of Article 8.  He said that it  was  open  to
    her to make a further application and that "whilst  Mr  Vassiliou  [her
    representative in the FtT] sought to argue that the appellant would  be
    breaking the law if she remained in the UK  while  an  application  was
    made and that this would be unreasonable  and  could  in  itself  be  a
    breach of Article 8 rights, I did not consider that to be so.   It  did
    seem to me that a requirement to complete  a  further  application  for
    leave to remain would represent a very minimal interference with  those
    rights, if interference there was."

 6. It is not quite clear from that passage whether the judge thought  that
    it was reasonable to expect the appellant to leave the UK, or that  she
    would not have to do so, or that she would not be breaking the  law  if
    she remained, or that it was reasonable for  her  to  be  put  in  that
    position.  Certainly a requirement to apply again without  leaving,  if
    that is what was meant, does not seem on the face of it, without  more,
    to be conceivably a disproportionate interference.

 7. The appellant's grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal  say  that  the
    appeal was against the decision not only to refuse leave  but  also  to
    remove; that it was a misdirection to consider the threshold test of  a
    "good arguable case"; that  paragraph  EX1  is  directed  only  to  the
    difficulty of family life continuing abroad and  so  is  not  itself  a
    proportionate disposal in a case where the Immigration Rules  would  be
    satisfied at the date of the hearing; that section 19 of the  2014  Act
    [part 5 of the 2002 Act] required the Tribunal to have regard to public
    interest considerations, which were not rendered otiose by  failure  to
    meet the precise terms of Appendix FM; that overstaying is  a  criminal
    offence under section 24(1)(b)(i) of the 1971 Act; and that the ability
    of an illegal overstayer to make a further application should not weigh
    in the balance when deciding if her rights under Article 8 are breached
    by a decision to remove her.

 8. In oral submissions Mr Stevenson  argued  that  if  the  appellant  had
    proceeded no further with her appeal and had reapplied without  leaving
    the country that would have put her in the position of  an  overstayer.
    That engaged the principle in JM [2006] EWCA Civ 1402 at  paragraph  17
    that a person in such a position should be able to  ventilate  a  human
    rights claim before the Tribunal.  If the scheme of immigration law was
    genuinely intended to give a 28  day  opportunity  for  a  further  (in
    country) application, that should have been reflected by  amendment  of
    statutes including the 1971 Act at section 24(1)(b) which  creates  the
    criminal offence.  If the appellant remained and continued  working  in
    the business both she and her husband  would  be  subject  to  criminal
    sanctions for illegal working and employment.  She would remain legally
    liable to removal.  The respondent  might  be  likely  in  practice  to
    remain from enforcement but that was  not  a  sufficient  answer.   The
    respondent had written to the appellant  on  26  March  2014  (page  I1
    respondent's bundle) suggesting that she might withdraw her application
    and make a fresh one,  but  that  blandly  ignored  the  serious  legal
    disadvantages of doing so.   The  judge  erred  in  thinking  that  the
    ability to make a fresh application was a  sufficient  answer  when  it
    lacked legal protection.  Such a situation was stronger than JM,  where
    no removal direction was in place.  If the Secretary of State  intended
    a further application to be a real remedy, then a removal decision need
    not have been made.  The judge should have looked at the evidence  that
    the Rules were satisfied as at the date of hearing for purposes of  the
    Article 8 decision.  It did not make sense in respect of the legitimate
    aims of immigration control to confine consideration  to  the  date  of
    application.  Article 8 was to be decided at the date of  decision  and
    the provisions of the Rules were the starting  point.   There  were  no
    guarantees to the appellant that she would  not  be  removed.   In  the
    sense of Chikwamba and of Chen IJR [2015] UKUT 00189 this  was  a  case
    where there would be no point in requiring an application  to  be  made
    from abroad.

 9. It was identified in course of submissions that the "28 day  provision"
    is in Appendix FM, immigration status requirements, E-LTRP.2.2  :-  the
    applicant must not be in the UK  ... (b) in breach of immigration  laws
    (disregarding any period of overstaying for a  period  of  28  days  or
    less, unless paragraph EX.1 applies.

10. Mrs O'Brien accepted that the 28 day provision was not  intended  as  a
    blanket provision to cover  all  Article  8  arguments.   She  did  not
    concede all points made by Mr Stevenson, but she said  that  Article  8
    had to be approached  on  the  facts  of  each  case.   The  particular
    significance of proceeding by way  of  a  new  application  had  to  be
    analysed.  The ability to meet the Rules at the  date  of  the  hearing
    might be significant in the overall proportionality exercise.  The test
    in EX1 was not exhaustive.  The judge over-concentrated on one relevant
    factor.  She accepted that the decision required to be set aside.

11. By agreement, the remaking of the decision was adjourned.

12. On 7 July 2015, further documentary evidence was filed,  the  appellant
    and her husband adopted updated statements and were cross-examined, and
    further submissions were made.

13. It was common ground again that an application made to  the  respondent
    on the evidence before  the  tribunal  would  be  likely  to  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.  I therefore need  not  consider
    the specific requirements of the Rules.

14. It was also agreed that an appeal cannot succeed under  the  Rules,  no
    matter how strong the evidence to show that their requirements are met,
    when that evidence was not submitted with and did not apply at the date
    of the application; and that if a further in country  application  were
    to be refused, there would be a right of appeal, although on Article  8
    grounds only, exercisable from  within  the  UK  (unless  certified  as
    clearly unfounded, which Mrs O'Brien said appeared to be unlikely).

15. Mrs O'Brien argued that the original application was  always  bound  to
    fail under the  Immigration  Rules,  which  are  designed  to  fix  the
    circumstances at the date of application,  and  not  to  give  rise  to
    appeals which present an ever moving target; and that Article 8  should
    not be used a vehicle to succeed on the basis of hopeless applications.
      She further argued that the appellant has the reasonable  options  of
    applying again in or out of country.  The in country  option  did  have
    the disadvantage that it invited overstaying and forfeited the right to
    work but there was effective protection from  prosecution  and  removal
    and a right of appeal.  The out of country  option  did  not  have  the
    drastic consequences for the business which the appellants claimed  and
    was not a disproportionate outcome.  This was not  a  "Chikwamba  case"
    because there was an in country alternative.

16.  Ms Stevenson did not concede that there  would  be  no  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life being carried on in China, but he did not push
    the point.  One minor matter raised was that  the  appellant's  husband
    speaks Cantonese but not Mandarin (she speaks both).  I  was  satisfied
    that the case shows no significant  difficulties  in  the  way  of  the
    appellant and her husband carrying on their family  life  in  China  if
    they had to, or if they chose to do so.   I  do  not  think  any  other
    conclusion could reasonably be reached.

17. The appellant's husband works in the business 7 days a week, around  50
    to 60 hours.  She works around 24 hours a week.  A delivery  driver  is
    employed at busy times.  Her husband  primarily  cooks,  and  sometimes
    delivers.  They both  answer  the  telephone,  take  orders  and  serve
    customers.  She primarily deals with accounting and  ordering.   I  did
    not think their evidence was anything less than honest,  but  they  did
    tend to  exaggerate  the  possible  impact  of  her  absence  from  the
    business.  She is not indispensable or  irreplaceable,  short  or  long
    term.  Her husband is capable of taking responsibility for her area  of
    work if need be.  I was not persuaded that the business would be ruined
    by her absence from work, either because she was legally unable to work
    pending decision of an in country application,  or  while  she  applied
    from abroad.

18. I indicated that having taken that view of the facts I was also of  the
    opinion that in those particular  circumstances  and  for  the  reasons
    advanced by Mr Stevenson the  outcome  represented  a  disproportionate
    outcome with the private and family  life  of  the  appellant  and  her
    husband.

19. The in country option suggested by the respondent in the letter  of  26
    March 2014 and in submissions is unattractive.  While inability to work
    is simply an aspect of immigration control  with  which  the  appellant
    must comply if necessary, it is  anomalous  to  expect  her  to  remain
    legally  liable  to  removal  and  prosecution  while  the   respondent
    processes an application.   The respondent in my view could  only  rely
    on the availability of that option if it was a lawfully structured safe
    alternative.

20. I see the force of the respondent's point that a  hopeless  application
    under the Rules should not be turned over  time  into  a  good  one  by
    Article 8.  To do so undermines the clear  (if  complex)  structure  of
    deciding applications by the evidence presented with them.   However  I
    think that the point loses its strength  when  the  respondent  herself
    suggests such an unsatisfactory alternative way of proceeding,  without
    acknowledging the difficulties attached.

21. The  out  of  country  alternative  is  disproportionate  in  terms  of
    Chikwamba.   There is no great difficulty about the appellant returning
    to China, but there is nothing adverse in her immigration  history  and
    no significant public interest in requiring her  to  comply  with  that
    formality.

22. The appeal, as  originally  brought  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  is
    allowed under Article 8 of the ECHR.






           [pic]


           8 July 2015
           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


