
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34964/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On:11th September 2015               |On: 24th September 2015              |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

                              Mr Hussain AHmed
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Biggs of counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms E Savage, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. In this appeal, the appellant appeals against a decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing the  appellant's  appeal  against  a  decision
    taken on 5th September 2013 to refuse to grant further leave to  remain
    in the United Kingdom and a decision to remove him by way of directions
    issued under section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality  Act
    2006.

Background Facts

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who was born on 1 January  1989.
    He entered the United Kingdom on 12 August 2009  with  entry  clearance
    valid to 28 February 2012. This leave was subsequently extended  to  30
    August 2013. He applied for further leave to remain on 4th  March  2013
    as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant under Paragraph 245ZX(c)  of  the
    Immigration Rules HC395 (as amended) ('the Immigration  Rules').   That
    application was refused because the Secretary of State did  not  accept
    that that the  Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies ('CAS') confirmed
    that the course that the appellant intended to study, which  was  at  a
    lower level to the course that the  appellant  was  previously  granted
    leave to study, represented academic progress from previous studies.

The Appeal

 3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    promulgated on 17 March 2015, Judge Bennett dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal. The First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  the  Appellant  did  not
    satisfy para 120A of  the  Immigration  Rules.  Although  there  was  a
    discretion to make a decision outside the Immigration Rules the refusal
    to exercise a discretion was not a matter that could be considered on a
    statutory appeal pursuant to s86(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and
    Asylum Act 2002 ('the 2002 Act').  The  judge  considered  the  Tier  4
    Sponsors' Guidance ('the Sponsors' Guidance') and  concluded  that  the
    explanation of academic progression in the CAS was not adequate and the
    application fell to be rejected.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 4. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.   The
    grounds of appeal assert that, i) the  appellant's  CAS  did  expressly
    confirm there had been academic progress and that the  judge  erred  in
    failing to hold that the Secretary of State was bound to accept the CAS
    did confirm academic progress, ii) the Rules have changed and paragraph
    120A(b) of appendix A now fails to identify courses at a lower level as
    being capable of amounting to academic progress  but  even  if  ii)  is
    correct this is not dispositive, the Tier 4  sponsor  guidance  is  the
    determinative document, and iii) the Tribunal has jurisdiction pursuant
    to 84(1)(e) (c) (g) and 86(3) of the 2002 Act to determine  whether the
    respondent ought to have departed from the Immigration Rules, the Judge
    wrong to consider there was no jurisdiction by virtue of 86(6)  of  the
    2002 Act. On 18 May  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Shimmin  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal.  Thus, the appeal came before me.

Summary of the Submissions

 5. Mr Biggs handed up a version of the Tier 4 Sponsors' Guidance issued by
    the Home Office. The  numbering  in  this  document  differs  from  the
    version considered by the judge. However the wording is either the same
    or has the same requirements  in  the  relevant  paragraphs.  To  avoid
    confusion I will refer to both paragraph numberings. Mr Biggs submitted
    that the analysis of the judge does not conform to the narrow exception
    identified in paragraph 47 of the case of  Pokhriyal  [2013]  EWCA  Civ
    1568 which states that the Secretary  of  State  in  the  ordinary  way
    cannot go behind an assessment of academic  progress.  He  acknowledged
    that there was an  exception  if  it  was  plainly  inappropriate.  The
    language of the rule is that the requirement is that  the  sponsor  has
    confirmed the course represents progress. In  this  case  the  CAS  did
    confirm academic progression setting out that these  subjects  are  not
    covered in the previous  course,  it  helps  improve  skills  and  gain
    knowledge. The Secretary of State was bound by the principles  set  out
    in Pokhyrial and confirmed in Kaur [2015] EWCA Civ  13.  The  judge  at
    paragraph 22 says that it is impossible to interpret  the  CAS  as  any
    form of confirmation - this finding is not sustainable. Confirmation is
    the assertion of a conclusion. The test is that the CAS  confirms  that
    the study is complementary. The test must be the same  in  the  various
    permutations of the test for progress. The judge doesn't consider  what
    progress is or whether the course is complimentary. It is not right  to
    say that the only benign interpretation is that the words provide  some
    explanation for him taking the course. What the text on the CAS does is
    show  that  the  course  is   complimentary.   The   policy   considers
    'complimentary' to be the  relevant  test.  The  judge's  reasoning  is
    irrational as it is possible to construe the text as complimentary  and
    therefore the determination is unsafe.

 6. Mr Biggs accepted that the appellant could not succeed under  Paragraph
    120A of the 2002 Act. The best the appellant can hope for is a decision
    on the  basis  that  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  is  not  in
    accordance with the law and therefore she acted  unlawfully.  Mr  Biggs
    relied on the case of Walumba Lumba  (previously  referred  to  as  WL)
    (Congo) 1 and 2 (Appellant) and Kadian Mighty (previously  referred  to
    as KM)  (Jamaica)  (Appellant)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department (Respondent) [2011] UKSC 12 submitting that the Secretary of
    State should apply its published policy, not to do  so  is  unfair  and
    unlawful. The policy has not  changed  following  the  introduction  of
    section 120A.

 7. The role of the judge was to decide whether the decision letter was  in
    accordance with the law. The judge wrongly concluded that the  Tribunal
    cannot do so. There was no regard to  Pokhriyal  in  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision. The judge wrongly said that s86(6) of  the  2002  Act
    deprives the Tribunal  of  the  jurisdiction  to  consider  the  point.
    Section 86(6) does not oblige the Tribunal to allow an appeal but  does
    not deprive the tribunal of the power  to  consider  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision whether or not to exercise the discretion.  The  judge
    applied the wrong approach. The only issue was whether the grounds were
    made out, section 84(1)(e) 2002 Act, which were that the  Secretary  of
    State had not applied Pokhriyal and Kaur. The judge erred in making his
    own assessment. The correct remedy is for a re-making of  the  decision
    by the Secretary of State.

 8. Ms Savage submitted that the grounds of appeal essentially amount to  a
    disagreement with the judge's findings. The judge explicitly considered
    the guidance set out in Pokhriyal and Kaur and took  into  account  the
    relevant expectation set out in Kaur that a CAS represents progress. It
    is clear from Kaur and Pokhriyal that justification is necessary.  That
    is completely lacking in this case. The statement in the CAS  does  not
    represent justification. In Kaur the course was on the same  level  but
    the court found that the explanation did not amount  to  justification.
    The Tribunal has considered all the matters required.

Discussion

 9. I will consider the second and  third  grounds  of  appeal  first.  The
    appellant argues that the judge was wrong to consider that there was no
    jurisdiction by virtue of section 86(6) of the 2002 Act to consider the
    question as to whether the respondent should  have  departed  from  the
    Immigration Rules. Although the judge records (at  paragraph  15)  that
    Section 86(6) prevents the Tribunal from  reviewing  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision not to depart from the  Immigration  Rules  the  judge
    considered that the Secretary of State had considered  the  application
    under paragraph 415 (430) of the Sponsors' Guidance  (i.e.  outside  of
    the Immigration Rules). The judge  considered  that  the  Secretary  of
    State 'did not refuse the application merely because it  fell  foul  of
    paragraph 120A'. As the judge proceeded on the basis that the Secretary
    of State had exercised a discretion (rather than refusing to do so) the
    ground of appeal in respect of the jurisdiction under section 86(6)  is
    academic and I do not need to decide the point.

10. The appellant asserts that he has a  legitimate  expectation  that  the
    Secretary of State will abide by the guidance issued to Tier 4 Sponsors
    and  that  the  test  for  academic  progression  is  that  the  course
    complements a previous course of study. It was submitted  that  section
    86(3) of the 2002 Act provides a clear jurisdiction for a  Tribunal  to
    determine the issue as to whether the Secretary of State must abide  by
    her policy. Section 86(3)(b) of the 2002 Act  (as  it  applied  at  the
    relevant time to this case) provides:

         (3)  [The Tribunal] must allow the appeal in so far as [it]  thinks
         that-

         ...

             (b)  a discretion exercised in making a decision against which
             the appeal is brought or is treated as  being  brought  should
             have been exercised differently.

11. When the judge undertook a consideration of the Sponsors' Guidance  and
    its application to this case what the judge  was  doing  was  precisely
    what the appellant argues for:  that  is,  the  judge  was  considering
    whether the discretion should have been exercised differently.

12. Undertaking an assessment as to whether the discretion should have been
    exercised differently will necessarily require  an  assessment  by  the
    judge of all the factors relevant to the exercise of  that  discretion.
    This will require an evaluation of the evidence by the judge.   As  set
    out above the judge was of the view that the  Secretary  of  State  had
    considered the Tier 4 Guidance.  The  judge  set  out  in  some  detail
    matters that the  Secretary  of  State  took  into  consideration  when
    determining whether the course  represented  academic  progression.  At
    paragraph 20 the judge noted that the Secretary of  State  referred  to
    other aspects of the application such as:

         i)   the CAS stated that the Appellant  intended  to  study  for  a
         diploma in Management and Leadership at NQF level 6,  ii)  that  he
         was previously granted leave to study for a  postgraduate  diplomas
         in management and leadership at NQF level 7, iii) that he had  been
         a student here since  2009,  and  iv)  that,  as  evidence  of  his
         progression, he had submitted his secondary  certificate  which  he
         obtained in Pakistan in 2007.

13. The judge then went on to consider the  cases  of  Pokhriyal  and  Kaur
    setting out that those cases make it clear that the Appellant's college
    was required to confirm in the CAS that the proposed course represented
    academic progression and that there was an  expectation  that  the  CAS
    should  not  be  assigned  unless  the  new  course  confirms  academic
    progress. The judge then took paragraph  416  (432)  of  the  Sponsors'
    Guidance into account, namely that a course at a lower level would only
    represent progress in rare cases.  Additionally  the  judge  considered
    that the need for an explanation was emphasised by the  fact  that  the
    appellant  did  not  appear  to  have   achieved   any   qualifications
    representing academic progress (as he had only submitted his  secondary
    education certificate to the Sponsor)

14. The judge considered the wording of the CAS and specifically took  into
    consideration the guidance in Kaur. The wording on the CAS was:

         'These subjects are  not  covered  in  previous  course.  It  helps
         improve skills and gain  knowledge  in  leadership  and  management
         industry'.

15. The judge adopted a benign construction of the words and found that  it
    was  impossible  to  construe  them  as  constituting   any   form   of
    confirmation that the proposed course represents  academic  progression
    and therefore that the application fell to be  rejected  in  accordance
    with paragraph 418 (433)  of  the  Sponsors'  Guidance.  The  appellant
    asserted that the judge erred in making his own assessment.  As  I  set
    out above in order to consider whether the discretion should have  been
    exercised differently  the  judge  would  also  need  to  consider  the
    application of the Sponsors' Guidance to the evidence. The Secretary of
    State had set out the evidence that she had taken into consideration in
    reaching her decision (as set out by the judge). It is difficult to see
    how a judge could decide  that  the  Secretary  of  State  should  have
    exercised her discretion differently if there is no  consideration  and
    evaluation of the evidence that was before the Secretary of  State  and
    the relevant guidance (policy) that was  to  be  applied  to  determine
    whether the discretion should have been exercised differently. Although
    the reasons for refusal letter does not refer to the cases of Pokhriyal
    and Kaur, in this case the judge (having considered the requirements of
    those  cases)  concluded  that  the  CAS  did  not   confirm   academic
    progression and that the application fell to be rejected in  accordance
    with paragraph 418  (433)  of  the  guidance.  The  judge's  conclusion
    therefore is effectively that the  Secretary  of  State  exercised  her
    discretion appropriately.

16. With regard to the first ground of appeal in paragraph 47 of  Pokhriyal
    the court of appeal specifically refers to the potential for exceptions
    to the general principle that the Secretary of State cannot go behind a
    college's assessment of academic progress. One of these  was  suggested
    to be:

         '...  if  the  college  made  an  assessment  which   was   plainly
         inappropriate on the face of the documents'.

17. The appellant's argument is that the judge's analysis does not  conform
    to that narrow exception. Further, the test is that  the  CAS  confirms
    that the proposed course of study is complementary to previous studies.
    The Sponsors'  Guidance  sets  out  three  different  situations  where
    academic progression must be confirmed.  At  paragraph  414  (430)  the
    guidance sets out:

         'However academic progression may involve study at the same  level.
         In these cases, you must confirm that the  new  course  compliments
         the previous course...'

18. At paragraph  415 (431) which applies in this case  the  Guidance  sets
    out:

         'Sometimes the further study may be at a lower level but  we  would
         expect these cases to be rare. Again you must justify this  on  the
         CAS...'

19. The two requirements are differently worded. There is no suggestion  in
    paragraph 415 (431) that the sponsor must confirm that the  new  course
    compliments the previous higher level course. The guidance requires, in
    these rare cases, that  the  sponsor  must  'justify'  why  the  course
    represents academic progression. If the requirement  to  show  academic
    progression was the same for both study at a lower  level  and  at  the
    same level the guidance would have been worded in the same way in  both
    paragraphs. The wording is very different. The test is not whether  the
    course compliments the previous course. There is no reason why the test
    must be the same in all  the  various  permutations  of  the  test  for
    progress. The starting point is very different. It  is  fairly  obvious
    that study at a lower level will not, in the vast  majority  of  cases,
    represent academic progress hence the  reference  to  the  cases  being
    rare.

20. The judge applied the expectation arising from the issuing of  the  CAS
    and gave the words in the  CAS  the  most  benign  interpretation.  The
    appellant  in  this  case  was  proposing  to  study   for   the   same
    qualification but at a  lower  level.  Convincing  reasoning  would  be
    required to justify the lower level of the same course as  representing
    academic progress particularly in  this  case  where  the  evidence  of
    academic progression submitted to the sponsor was a secondary education
    certificate from 2008. In this case the wording in the CAS was  plainly
    inappropriate. The judge's conclusion  was  well  reasoned  and  was  a
    conclusion entirely open to him to reach.

21. It follows from the above that the appellant  has  not  discharged  the
    burden upon him of showing that there is any material error of  law  in
    the First-tier Tribunal decision, without which that  decision  is  not
    susceptible to being set aside or remade.

22. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously. Having
    considered all the circumstances and evidence  I  do  not  consider  it
    necessary to make an anonymity direction.

Decision

23. The appellant's appeal is dismissed. The decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal stands.


Signed   P M Ramshaw   Date 22 September 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw

