


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA341402015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Manchester                      |Decision Promulgated             |
|On: 3 May 2017                            |On: 8 May 2017                   |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     TO
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)


                                                                  Respondent


For the appellant:     Mr A McVeety (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the respondent:    Mr B Adewusi (Crown & Law solicitors)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the Appellant.

 1. I have made an anonymity order because  this  decision  refers  to  the
    circumstances of the respondent's minor child.  The  respondent  ('TO')
    is a citizen of Nigeria.  Her child was born in the United  Kingdom  in
    2014 and is a British citizen.


 2. The SSHD has appealed against a decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dated 12 February 2016 in which it allowed the appeal on  human  rights
    grounds.  The appeal before the First-tier Tribunal  proceeded  on  the
    basis of the papers alone, at TO's request.

First-tier Tribunal findings

 3. The First-tier Tribunal made the following material findings of fact:


       i) TO arrived in the United Kingdom  in  2011  as  a  student.   She
          remained as a student until May 2014 [5].
      ii) In January 2014 TO made an application to remain on the basis  of
          her relationship with her British citizen partner [6].
     iii) As part of that application TO relied upon a  TOEIC  certificate,
          provided after a test taken at Burnley Training College  in  2013
          [11].  When taking that English test, TO used a proxy and as such
          has taken part in fraud, such behaviour is not conducive  to  the
          public good [27], there is a strong public interest  in  removing
          an individual whose presence is not conducive to the public  good
          [43];
      iv) TO has a British citizen son, who was born in 2014 [6];
       v) TO is no longer with her  British  citizen  partner  and  is  the
          primary carer for her son [33].  This appears to be based upon an
          acceptance of TO's evidence that her  partner  abandoned  herself
          and her son immediately after her application for leave to remain
          was refused on 30 October 2015 and that  she  had  not  seen  her
          partner since the middle of November [21].
      vi) It is in the son's best interests to remain with mother [37]  but
          TO and her son  could  adapt  to  life  in  Nigeria  without  any
          significant difficulty [39].


 4. The First-tier Tribunal made it clear that if TO did not have a British
    citizen child she could not succeed with her appeal [33] and  that  the
    issue in the appeal turned upon the  reasonableness  of  expecting  the
    British citizen child to leave the United Kingdom [48].  The First-tier
    Tribunal directed itself to ZH Zambrano v SSHD [2011] UKSC  4  and  the
    importance attached to the child's British citizenship, which would  be
    lost if he left the United Kingdom [49-52].   At  [53]  the  First-tier
    Tribunal turned its attention to Sanade (British children - Zambrano  -
    Derici) [2012] UKUT 00048 (IAC) and quoted from [95] of that  judgment.
    This emphasises that it is not possible to require  a  British  citizen
    and therefore an EU citizen to relocate outside the EU or  submit  that
    it is reasonable to do so.


 5. The First-tier Tribunal then concluded at [54]:

        "Based upon the case law to which I have  referred,  and  the  fact
        that [TO] has a poor immigration history, but  is  not  subject  to
        deportation, I conclude that because her child is British, it would
        not be reasonable  to  require  that  child  to  leave  the  United
        Kingdom.  Therefore pursuant to section 117(6) the public  interest
        does not require [TO's] removal, and she succeeds with  her  appeal
        in respect of Article 8 of the 1950 Convention."


Alleged error of law


 6. In a decision dated 9 February 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge JM Holmes
    considered it arguable that the decision discloses a flawed approach to
    best interests and section 177B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 ('the 2002 Act') and fails to follow  the  guidance  in
    Kaur [2017] UKUT 14 or MA (Pakistan) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 705 (7 July
    2016).  In the  latter  case  the  Court  of  Appeal  found  that  when
    assessing section 117B(6), where the  child  has  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom for seven years and is therefore a 'qualifying child', this  is
    a factor which must be given significant weight when carrying  out  the
    proportionality exercise.


 7. Mr McVeety invited me to find that the First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to
    consider all the relevant factors, including the strong public interest
    in removing TO, when assessing reasonableness.


 8. In reply, Mr Adewusi submitted that this was not a  material  error  of
    law because the case turned on the First-tier Tribunal's  finding  that
    it would not be reasonable to require  the  EEA  citizen  child  to  be
    deprived of his EU nationality rights, by leaving the  United  Kingdom,
    and that this finding  was  in  accordance  with  Sanade  (supra).   Mr
    McVeety directed my attention to VM (Jamaica) v SSHD [2017] Civ 255 and
    submitted that Sanade was no longer good law.


 9. After hearing from both representatives, I reserved my decision which I
    now provide with reasons.

Discussion

10. Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act provides as follows:


           "In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,  the
           public interest does not require the person's removal where -
           (a)  the  person  has  a   genuine   and   subsisting   parental
           relationship with a qualifying child; and
           (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave  the
           United Kingdom."


11. There are two routes by which a child can be a "qualifying  child":  by
    virtue of  his  length  of  residence  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a
    continuous  period  of  at  least  seven  years  or  by   his   British
    citizenship.  The instant case involves a British  citizen  child.   By
    contrast MA (Pakistan) addressed "how the test of reasonableness should
    be applied when determining whether to remove a child from  the  United
    Kingdom once he or she has been resident here for seven  years"  -  see
    [1] of MA (Pakistan).  At [45] Elias LJ concluded that  when  assessing
    reasonableness the wider public interest considerations must  be  taken
    into account, but that significant weight must be given  to  the  seven
    years  length  of  residence  when  carrying  out  the  proportionality
    exercise [46].


12. It is important to note in the instant  case  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    predicated its finding upon the child being a  British  citizen.   When
    [33],  [53]  and  54]  are  read  together  the   First-tier   Tribunal
    effectively concluded that it would not be reasonable to expect the son
    to leave the United Kingdom, because to do so would deprive him of  his
    EU citizenship.

13. The representatives agreed that the question for me is whether  or  not
    the First-tier Tribunal was entitled to adopt that approach.


14. The correct approach to the assessment of deprivation of EU citizenship
    of a child caused by the removal of a third party national has recently
    been revisited in VM  (Jamaica)  (supra).   Sales  LJ  [52]  considered
    Sanade to be based on "an ill-advised concession made by the  Secretary
    of State" accepted to be correct in that case,  "that  where  a  person
    enjoys family life as an engaged parent with a child who is  a  British
    citizen, then in terms of Article 8 it is not possible to argue that  a
    third country national's removal may be proportionate  on  the  footing
    that the family unit could move together to a country outside  the  EU:
    see Sanade at [93]-[95]. In other words, in that case it was  conceded,
    in effect, that a British child's location in the UK was to be  treated
    as a fixed point, and the Article 8 analysis had to be moulded  in  the
    light of  that."   Sales  LJ  reviewed  the  relevant  authorities  and
    reconsidered the Sanade issue in the following way:

           "54. I begin with the relevant principles of EU law derived from
           Ruiz Zambrano; Dereci; Cases C-356/11 and C.357/11 O, S and L  v
           Maahanmuuttovirasto [2013] Fam  203;  and,  more  recently,  the
           judgments of the CJEU of 13  September  2016  in  Case  C-165/14
           Rendon Marin and Case C-304/14 Secretary of State for  the  Home
           Department v CS. For present purposes,  the  most  important  of
           these judgments is  that  in  Dereci,  dealing  with  the  first
           question referred to the CJEU in that case at paras. [37]-[74].
           55. To recap, the facts in the  case  before  us  are  that  the
           father, VM, is a third country national facing deportation;  the
           mother, KB, is a British citizen who can remain in the UK if she
           so chooses; the  three  dependent  young  children  are  British
           citizens who enjoy an active family life with  both  the  father
           and the mother, but could remain in the UK if the mother chooses
           to stay here.
           56. In these circumstances, the deportation of the  father  does
           not automatically entail that the children would have  to  leave
           the UK (and EU) with him, on the footing that there would be  no
           family member with a legal right to be in the UK  who  would  be
           able to care for them in the UK. So the situation  is  different
           from that in Ruiz Zambrano.
           57. Rather than a legal impossibility of remaining  in  the  UK,
           the family would face a difficult practical  choice  whether  to
           separate (with the mother and children remaining in the  UK,  in
           which  case  there  would  be  no  infringement  of   their   EU
           citizenship rights) or to leave and go to Jamaica  as  a  family
           unit. This is the situation addressed in Dereci and in  domestic
           authority.
           58. The facts in Dereci concerned a Turkish national who entered
           Austria illegally and married an Austrian national  by  whom  he
           had three children who were also  Austrian  nationals  and  were
           minors; Mr Dereci had his application for a residence permit  in
           Austria rejected and was made subject to  orders  for  expulsion
           and removal from Austria: see [24] and [27]. The question arose,
           amongst others, whether Mr Dereci was entitled to be  granted  a
           residence permit in Austria by reason of his  relationship  with
           his wife and children, who were all Austrian nationals  with  EU
           citizenship, by virtue of Article 20 TFEU and the  principle  in
           Ruiz Zambrano. In its judgment the CJEU said this at [63]-[68]:
                 "63 As nationals of a Member State, family members  of  the
                 applicants in the main  proceedings  enjoy  the  status  of
                 Union citizens under art.20(1) TFEU and may therefore  rely
                 on the rights pertaining to that status, including  against
                 their Member State of origin (see McCarthy [2011] 3 CMLR 10
                 at [48]).
                 64 On this basis, the  Court  has  held  that  art.20  TFEU
                 precludes  national  measures  which  have  the  effect  of
                 depriving Union citizens of the genuine  enjoyment  of  the
                 substance of the rights conferred by virtue of that  status
                 (see Ruiz Zambrano [2011] 2 CMLR 46 at [42]).
                 65 Indeed, in  the  case  leading  to  that  judgment,  the
                 question arose as to whether a refusal to grant a right  of
                 residence to a third country national with dependent  minor
                 children in the  Member  State  where  those  children  are
                 nationals and reside and a refusal to grant such a person a
                 work permit have such an effect. The  Court  considered  in
                 particular that such a refusal would lead  to  a  situation
                 where those children, who are citizens of the Union,  would
                 have to leave the  territory  of  the  Union  in  order  to
                 accompany their  parents.  In  those  circumstances,  those
                 citizens of the Union would, in fact, be unable to exercise
                 the substance of the rights conferred on them by virtue  of
                 their status as citizens of the Union  (see  Ruiz  Zambrano
                 [2011] 2 CMLR 46 at [43] and [44]).
                 66 It follows that the criterion relating to the denial  of
                 the genuine  enjoyment  of  the  substance  of  the  rights
                 conferred  by  virtue  of  EU  citizen  status  refers   to
                 situations in which the Union  citizen  has,  in  fact,  to
                 leave not only the territory of the Member State  of  which
                 he is a national but also the territory of the Union  as  a
                 whole.
                 67 That criterion is specific in character inasmuch  as  it
                 relates  to  situations  in  which,  although   subordinate
                 legislation on the right  of  residence  of  third  country
                 nationals is not applicable, a right of residence may  not,
                 exceptionally, be refused to a third country national,  who
                 is a family member of  a  Member  State  national,  as  the
                 effectiveness of Union citizenship enjoyed by that national
                 would otherwise be undermined.
                 68  Consequently,  the  mere  fact  that  it  might  appear
                 desirable to a national of a  Member  State,  for  economic
                 reasons or in order to keep  his  family  together  in  the
                 territory of the Union, for the members of his  family  who
                 do not have the nationality of a Member State to be able to
                 reside with him in the  territory  of  the  Union,  is  not
                 sufficient in itself to support the  view  that  the  Union
                 citizen will be forced to leave Union territory if  such  a
                 right is not granted."
           59. Thus the CJEU ruled that the facts that the family wished to
           stay together in Austria and otherwise faced a difficult  choice
           of either leaving Austria (and the  EU)  together  in  order  to
           preserve the family unit or splitting up (with  the  mother  and
           children remaining in Austria, as they were entitled to do)  was
           not sufficient to generate a right under EU law for  the  father
           to remain in Austria, parasitic upon the rights of his  wife  or
           children as  EU  citizens.  Clearly,  depending  on  the  family
           circumstances and the strength of the  ties  between  them,  the
           practical outcome might well be that the wife and children would
           decide to accompany Mr Dereci to live in Turkey.
           60. On this reasoning, VM has no claim to remain in the UK as  a
           result of the citizenship rights in  EU  law  of  his  wife  and
           children. If he is deported to  Jamaica,  KB  and  the  children
           (with KB deciding for them) will face a difficult choice whether
           to relocate there with him or remain in the UK without him.  But
           the fact that they will be  confronted  with  that  choice,  and
           might in practice feel compelled to go with him, does not engage
           EU rights in a way which creates a right under EU law for VM  to
           remain in the UK. As this court held in FZ (China)  v  Secretary
           of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 550,  following
           Dereci and the decision in O, S and L (at  paras.  [42]-[44]  of
           the Advocate General's Opinion and para. [56] of the  judgment),
           "the critical question is whether there is an entire  dependency
           of the relevant child on the person who is refused  a  residence
           permit or who is  being  deported"  (see  paras.  [14]-[19],  in
           particular at [19]). In the present case  there  is  no  "entire
           dependency" of AB, KSM and KDM on VM, in  the  requisite  sense,
           because they could remain in the UK with their mother,  KB,  who
           as a British citizen herself has a right to be here.
           61. The analysis in FZ (China) is consistent with  the  guidance
           given by the Supreme Court in  respect  of  the  application  of
           Dereci in  R  (Agyarko)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
           Department [2017] UKSC  11,  at  [61]-[67].  The  Supreme  Court
           distinguished the situation in Ruiz Zambrano -  which  concerned
           the refusal of a right of residence  and  a  work  permit  in  a
           member state to the third-country  parents  of  dependent  minor
           children who  were  citizens  of  that  state,  which  had  "the
           inevitable consequence" that the parents would have to leave the
           EU and the children would have to accompany their parents - from
           that in Dereci, in which  "the  same  relationship  of  complete
           dependence" between the EU citizen (the wife and children in the
           Dereci case) and the third country national (Mr Dereci) was  not
           present, where the argument based on Article 20 TFEU and the  EU
           citizenship rights of the wife and children  was  rejected:  see
           [64]-[67] (emphasis added).
           62. In FZ (China), as in  the  present  case,  a  third  country
           national was married to a British wife by whom he had a  British
           daughter, who was a minor dependent on her parents. Although the
           wife would face a difficult choice if her husband were deported,
           whether to go with him to keep the family together or to  remain
           in the UK with her daughter, that situation did not  engage  the
           principle in Ruiz Zambrano so as to generate  a  right  for  the
           husband to be allowed to remain. The wife might  feel  compelled
           by circumstances to  leave  with  her  husband  and  take  their
           daughter with her, but she was not compelled by law  to  do  so.
           The wife could choose to remain. There was therefore no  "entire
           dependency" of the daughter on the person being deported, namely
           the father. See also S1, T1, U1 & V1 v Secretary  of  State  for
           the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 560 at [46]-[51],  which  is
           to similar effect.
           63. In my view, the reasoning in FZ (China) covers  the  present
           case and shows that, contrary to the view of  the  UT  at  para.
           [16] of the UT appeal decision, the possibility that KB and  the
           children will choose to go to Jamaica with VM does not  "violate
           the fundamental precepts of EU law."
           64. It follows that the presence of the children in the UK  does
           not, as a result of the operation of EU law, have to be  treated
           as a  fixed  point  for  the  purposes  of  the  proportionality
           analysis under Article 8. It was legitimate for the FTT  in  the
           2015 FTT decision to consider for the purposes of its Article  8
           proportionality  analysis  whether  the  family  unit  could  be
           expected to take the option, which EU law allows  the  Secretary
           of State to present to KB and the  children,  of  relocating  to
           Jamaica with VM."


15. In the instant case, the First-tier Tribunal made a  clear  finding  of
    fact that TO is no longer with her British citizen partner and  is  the
    primary carer for her child.  This is predicated upon an acceptance  of
    TO's evidence that she and her son have been abandoned by  her  partner
    in November 2015.  Although the First-tier  Tribunal  described  TO  as
    being the primary carer for her son, it appears from the evidence  that
    there was no other carer and in effect the First-tier Tribunal accepted
    that she was the sole carer, and the son was "entirely dependent"  upon
    TO.


16. The facts of this case are therefore readily distinguishable  from  VM:
    VM was a third country national facing deportation, the  mother  was  a
    British citizen who could remain in the United Kingdom if she so chose;
    the three dependent young children were British citizens who enjoyed an
    active family life with both the  father  and  the  mother,  but  could
    remain in the United Kingdom if the mother  chose  to  stay  here.   In
    those  circumstances,  the  deportation   of   the   father   did   not
    automatically entail that the children would have to leave  the  United
    Kingdom (and EU) with him, on the footing that there would be no family
    member with a legal right to be in the United Kingdom who would be able
    to care for them in the UK.


17. Contrast the position of VM with the instant case.  The son is entirely
    dependent upon TO.  The First-tier Tribunal  effectively  accepted  the
    evidence that there would be no family member  in  the  United  Kingdom
    able to care for him.  This means that the refusal of leave to TO would
    lead to a situation where her son, an EU citizen, would have  to  leave
    the territory of the EU in order to  accompany  his  mother.  In  those
    circumstances, the son would,  in  fact,  be  unable  to  exercise  the
    substance of the rights conferred on him by virtue of his status as  an
    EU citizen of the Union.  In many cases it will be  necessary  for  the
    First-tier Tribunal to consider for the purposes of its  assessment  of
    reasonableness and the Article 8 proportionality analysis  whether  the
    family unit could be expected to take the option  of  relocating  to  a
    third country together.  To do otherwise would  erroneously  treat  the
    presence of the British children in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  fixed
    point.  However in this case it was not  necessary  to  undertake  that
    analysis.  The son in this case would not be taking an option,  because
    there was no choice to make - he has to follow his mother,  who  he  is
    entirely dependent upon.

18. It follows that the First-tier Tribunal was entitled to  conclude  that
    the  impact  of  Zambrano  (supra)  (which  Sanade  did  no  more  than
    interpret) is such that it would not be reasonable to expect the son to
    leave the United Kingdom (and the EU).  The First-tier Tribunal may not
    have spelled out its reasoning as clearly as it might but the reasoning
    it provided is adequate.  To recap: the  First-tier  Tribunal  accepted
    the evidence that the son was entirely  dependent  upon  TO;  in  these
    circumstances it was entitled to find that it would be unreasonable  to
    expect him to be deprived of his EU citizenship by leaving  the  United
    Kingdom with his mother, his only carer.


19. In these circumstances, the First-tier Tribunal  was  entitled  to  the
    conclusion at [54] that for the purposes of section 117B(6), in a  case
    such as this which does not involve criminal offending or  deportation,
    it would be unreasonable to expect the son to leave the United  Kingdom
    and relinquish his EU nationality rights.


20. In any event, the First-tier Tribunal was well aware that TO  had  been
    involved in fraud and had a poor immigration history.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal reminded itself that TO's conduct was  not  conducive  to  the
    public  good  twice  [27  and  43].   When  determining  the  issue  of
    reasonableness at [54] the First-tier Tribunal applied  the  principles
    relevant to the role of the child's British / EU citizenship  but  also
    expressly took into account "the fact that [TO] has a poor  immigration
    history".   When  assessing  reasonableness  the  First-tier   Tribunal
    therefore took into account the relevant wider considerations including
    TO's behaviour and immigration history.

Final points

21. At the hearing Mr Adewusi indicated that TO sat  at  the  back  of  the
    hearing room with the son referred to above and two  younger  children,
    who he said all had the same father.  This  may  well  be  inconsistent
    with  the  evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  concerning  the
    whereabouts of the son's father.  However,  my  task  is  to  determine
    whether the First-tier Tribunal made a material error  of  law  on  the
    material before it.  For the reasons I have provided above I do not  so
    find.  The SSHD may however wish to explore the  current  circumstances
    of the son's father when considering what leave is appropriate in  this
    case.

Decision

22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does  not  contain  a  material
    error of law and is not set aside.




Signed: Ms Melanie Plimmer                             Dated: 4 May 2017
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
