
[pic]
IAC-AH-LEM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34179/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 2 October 2014                             |On 24 October 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          MR SAMY FANOS FAHMY FANOS
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Shilliday, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Smith, Counsel, Danielle Cohen Immigration Law
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The respondent in these proceedings is Mr Samy  Fanos  Fahmy  Fanos.  I
    shall refer to him as the appellant as he  was  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The appellant is a citizen of Egypt and his date of birth is
    11 April 1978.

2.   The appellant was granted leave to enter the UK  as  a  visitor  on  14
    March 2009 which expired on 14 September 2012.  In  2010  in  Egypt  he
    married a British citizen, Nivin Samuel Aneis (hereinafter referred  to
    as the sponsor).  He made an application for leave to remain on 2  July
    2012 and the application was refused by the Secretary  of  State  in  a
    decision of 6 August 2013.

3.   The decision maker acknowledged that the appellant had  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with Ms Aneis,  but  it  was  asserted  in  the
    decision letter that the appellant did not meet the requirements of the
    Immigration Rules under Appendix FM because he could not satisfy E-LTRP
    2.2 and in these circumstances EX1.1 did not apply.  The decision maker
    considered the appellant's private life and whether or not  there  were
    exceptional grounds outside the Immigration Rules and found that  there
    were not.

4.   The appellant appealed against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    and his appeal was allowed by Judge Doran in a decision of 4 July  2014
    following a hearing on 30 June 2014.   The  appeal  was  allowed  under
    Article 8 of the 1950 Convention on Human  Rights.   The  Secretary  of
    State was granted permission to appeal against that decision  by  Judge
    Parkes on 28 August 2014.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

5.   The appellant's evidence is that he did not want  his  wife  and  their
    unborn child (the appellant's wife is expecting a child at the  end  of
    October 2014) to live in Egypt as they are Coptic  Christians  and  are
    discriminated against.  His wife needs to remain  in  the  UK  to  look
    after her elderly and unwell parents.  The sponsor's father has serious
    health problems and needs 24 hour care.  He has a part-time  carer  and
    he lives with the sponsor's brother but he is also unwell.  Ms Aneis is
    depressed and has back problems and is as a result unable to work.  She
    has dual nationality (Sudanese and British).  She came  to  the  UK  in
    1995 and was granted British citizenship in 2005.

6.   The Judge accepted the evidence of both the appellant and  the  sponsor
    and allowed the appeal outside the Rules under Article 8.  He made  the
    following observations and findings: -

         "11. At the outset of the hearing, I clarified with Ms.  Smith  (on
             behalf of the appellant) that she  was  no  longer  suggesting
             that the  decision  reached  by  the  respondent  was  not  in
             accordance with the Immigration Rules based on the  fact  that
             the appellant made his application on 2nd July 2012 i.e. prior
             to the introduction of the amendments to the Immigration Rules
             introduced on the 9th July 2012 following the Court of  Appeal
             decision in Edgehill &  Another-v-SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  402
             which decided that the new Human Rights  Rules  introduced  on
             the 9th July 2012 did not apply  to  application  made  before
             that date.  She confirmed that this was the case and that  the
             only basis for the appellant's appeal was that under Article 8
             of the European Convention  on  Human  Rights  as  it  applied
             before the introduction of the new Human Rights Rules into the
             Immigration Rules on the 9th July 2012.


         ...


         40.  The appellant's wife herself suffers from a number  of  health
             problems which are set out in a report from  Dr.  Isis  Neoman
             dated the 16th August 2013 (pages 402 - 3 of  the  appellant's
             bundle) which include Scoliosis of the spine giving  her  back
             and shoulder pain, depression, dizziness and asthma.   She  is
             in  receipt  of  employment  support  allowance  (ESA)   which
             prevents her from working and  thus  would  prevent  her  from
             sponsoring her husband in an entry clearance application under
             the Rules.  She is currently five months pregnant and  due  to
             give birth in October 2014 from which it follows given her own
             medical problems it would not be reasonable to expect  her  to
             contemplate removing herself from the UK at this time to  give
             birth to this child in Egypt.


         41.  The appellant's wife is also very involved in  supporting  her
             elderly parents.  Her 82 year old father has multiple  complex
             health problems  having  had  a  severe  stroke  in  2009  and
             additionally  suffering  from   Advanced   (End-Stage)   Mixed
             Vascular and Parkinsons Dementia, COPD and heart problems  and
             borderline glaucoma (which are outlined in  letters  from  the
             Redcliff Surgery dated the 20th June 2014 at pages 363  -  365
             of the appellant's bundle).  Her mother, whilst designated  as
             his primary carer has herself health problems  with  diabetes,
             osteoarthritis, high blood pressure  and  borderline  glaucoma
             (as outlined in a further letter  from  the  Redcliff  Surgery
             dated the 20th June 2014 at pages 366 - 367 of the appellant's
             bundle where the GP says she finds it difficult to  attend  to
             her own health problems  let  alone  those  of  her  husband).
             Whilst the brother of the appellant's wife  resides  with  his
             parents he too has health problems including  heart  problems,
             high blood pressure, gout and diabetes as outlined in a report
             from Dr. Christopher Cook of Hammersmith  Hospital  dated  the
             24th April 2014 (pages 374 -  5  of  the  appellant's  bundle)
             indicating that he will  require  surgical  intervention  this
             year.  The Care  and  Support  Plan  for  the  father  of  the
             appellant's wife prepared by the Royal Borough  of  Kensington
             and Chelsea and the Care Assessment (pages 378 - 88 and 389  -
             94 of the  appellant's  bundle  set  out  the  extent  of  the
             dependence of the father  on  the  appellant's  wife  for  his
             essential care needs, which are confirmed in a letter from the
             Independent Living Assessor dated the 14th August  2013  (page
             408 of the appellant's bundle) where Social Services recognise
             her caring role and the level of support she provides as  well
             as in a letter from the Redcliff Surgery itself dated the 20th
             June 2014 (pages 363 - 5  of  the  appellant's  bundle)  which
             indicates that she is  extremely  supportive  and  caring  and
             spends a great deal of time providing  emotional  support  for
             her mother and physical support for her father.


         42.  Whilst I acknowledge that the wife of the appellant  does  not
             live with her parents she does sleep at their address on three
             nights a week.  In addition she  does  act  as  the  key  link
             person for her parents (who speak little English) in attending
             all medical appointments and dealing with correspondence.  She
             is therefore, without doubt, an integral part in their day  to
             day living and in her absence there would be a major  upheaval
             with  significant  repercussions  both  of  an  emotional  and
             practical nature in their living  arrangements  and  emotional
             wellbeing which  are  factors  that  need  to  be  taken  into
             consideration in the overall Article 8 assessment.


         43.  The final factor that needs to be considered is  the  position
             for Orthodox Coptic Christians in  Egypt.   I  note  from  the
             legal representatives letter of the appellant  dated  the  2nd
             July 2012 (pages 1 - 4 of the appellant's  bundle)  that  some
             information was referred to the respondent  in  this  respect,
             including references to the US  State  Department  Report  for
             September 2011 which records that  the  Egyptian  Government's
             respect  for  religious  freedom  remained  poor  during   the
             reporting period and that Christians faced personal collective
             discrimination  and  the  government   failed   to   prosecute
             perpetrators of violence against Coptic Christians in a number
             of cases, together  with  the  fact  that  violence  targeting
             Coptic Orthodox Christians increased significantly during  the
             reporting period and  that  the  transitional  government  had
             failed to protect religious minorities from violent attacks at
             a  time  when  minority  communities  had  been   increasingly
             vulnerable.   Whilst  this  may  not  amount  to  a  situation
             reaching  levels  entitling  an  individual  to  international
             protection it is further background  information  relating  to
             the country conditions facing the appellant and  his  wife  in
             Egypt against which this appeal has to be assessed.


         44.  Whilst I acknowledge that the  appellant  entered  the  United
             Kingdom on  a  visit  visa  and  was  not  able  to  meet  the
             requirements of the Immigration Rules to be granted  leave  to
             remain at the date of his application I  do  not  accept  that
             when coming to the UK he entered without any intention at that
             time of returning within the visa period granted  to  him.   I
             accept that he genuinely believed when he came to the UK  that
             he could legalise his position whilst he was  in  the  UK.   I
             note that he did not deceive the Entry  Clearance  Officer  in
             the details in his application in that he clearly stated  that
             he had a wife in the UK.  He didn't remain in  the  UK  beyond
             the period of his leave  before  making  his  application  for
             leave to remain.  On the other hand however  when  he  married
             his wife in 2010 both were aware of his immigration status and
             that there was no entitlement for them to live  as  a  married
             couple in the UK without more.


         45.  Taking account therefore of those factors weighing against the
             appellant  in  maintaining  a  fair  and  orderly  system   of
             immigration control with the combination of  factors  weighing
             in  his  favour  I  am  satisfied,  taking  all  factors  into
             consideration (including the fact that he is  unlikely  to  be
             able to make a settlement application because of his inability
             to meet the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  having
             regard to his wife's financial  circumstances  but  conversely
             his ability to find work in the UK as indicated at pages 415-6
             of the appellant's bundle) that in the circumstances the  life
             of this family cannot reasonably be  expected  to  be  enjoyed
             elsewhere and that as a consequence  the  appellant's  removal
             would amount to a  disproportionate  interference  with  their
             family life within the terms of Article 8 of the ECHR."

The Grounds of Appeal and Oral Submissions

7.   The grounds of appeal assert that the Judge erred because  he  did  not
    consider  the  Immigration  Rules  in  the  Article  8  proportionality
    exercise.   It  is  asserted  that  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the
    requirement of the relevant Rules namely those in force before  9  July
    2012 and paragraph 284 of the Immigration Rules applies.  The appellant
    had leave as a visitor before making  his  application  and  could  not
    satisfy the requirement in paragraph 284(i).  In addition the Judge did
    not make a finding in relation to maintenance or the  English  language
    requirement of the Rules (viii and ix of paragraph  284  respectively).
    These are all relevant considerations pertaining to the public interest
    in firm immigration control and the interests of the economic wellbeing
    of the UK.   The Judge made a "freewheeling  analysis  unencumbered  by
    the Rules" and this was not the correct approach to take in  accordance
    with Gulshan [2014] UKUT 640 (IAC).

8.   I heard oral submissions from Mr Shilliday who argued that in his  view
    the grounds of appeal can only be  interpreted  as  an  attack  on  the
    decision in that the new rules applied (Appendix FM).  He asserted that
    the grounds seeking leave to appeal were in his view wrong because they
    do not directly challenge the Judge's decision to determine the  matter
    under the pre 9 July Rules, but this ground is  made  out  because  the
    grounds as drafted raise Gulshan. In the event that I was not with him,
    he indicated that he would make an application to amend the grounds  of
    appeal to raise the Edgehill point (Edgehill and  Anor  v  SSHD  [2014]
    EWCA CIV 402.

9.   Miss Smith objected to the amendment of the grounds  arguing  that  the
    Secretary of State had had plenty of time in order to raise  the  issue
    and in support of her submission she referred me to  Nixon  (Permission
    to appeal: grounds) [2014] UKUT 00368 (IAC).

10.  I took into account the oral submissions  made  by  both  parties.   Ms
    Smith's oral submissions were in the context of her skeleton  argument.






Conclusions

11.  The Judge followed the reasoning in Edgehill and decided that  as  this
    was an application made before 9 July 2012 the approach  to  Article  8
    before the changes applied. The grounds seeking permission to appeal do
    not challenge this and indeed they agree with the approach.  The  Judge
    was of the view that the decision maker had considered the  application
    under the wrong rule. It does not appear that there was  any  objection
    to the Judge proceeding on this basis by  the  representative  for  the
    Secretary of State at the hearing. It is expected that grounds  seeking
    permission specify clearly and coherently the  areas  of  law  said  to
    contaminate the decision or at least make a timely application to amend
    the grounds. I do not accept Mr Shilliday's submissions in relation  to
    the interpretation of the grounds. I refused to allow the grounds to be
    amended at such a late stage.

12.  The First-tier Tribunal  set  out  the  evidence  in  detail  and  made
    findings in the appellant's favour.  The appellant's wife is a  British
    citizen and she has health problems as well as caring for  her  elderly
    father.  There was also the issue of violence against Coptic Christians
    in Egypt.  The issue for me is whether or not  the  balancing  exercise
    conducted by the Judge (article 8 outside  the  rules)  was  ultimately
    flawed for reasons identified in the grounds seeking leave. In my  view
    it was not.  The Judge was mindful of the public interest and the  fact
    that the appellant was  not  able  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  I refer specifically  to  paragraph  45  where  the
    Judge refers to the appellant's  wife's  financial  circumstances.   In
    addition the Judge found the appellant and  his  wife  to  be  credible
    witnesses  and  accepted  the  appellant's  evidence  relating  to  his
    intention when he entered the UK as a visitor.

13.   The appellant's wife and her parents are all  British  citizens.   The
    Judge concluded at paragraph 45 that in the circumstances the  life  of
    the family cannot reasonably be expected to be enjoyed  elsewhere.   In
    my view he applied the appropriate test. I refer to Izuazu (Article 8 -
    new Rules) [2013] UKUT 45 (IAC) (paragraphs 53-58)  from  which  it  is
    clear that insurmountable obstacles is not a  test  for  engagement  of
    Article 8 (outside the Rules) in accordance with Huang [2007] UKHL  11,
    EB (Kosovo) [2008] UKHL 41.  The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    was before the further change in the rules  and  the  2014  Immigration
    Act.

14.  The grounds of appeal do not identify a material error of  law  in  the
    decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   In  these  circumstances  the
    decision to allow the appellant's appeal under Article 8 is maintained.






Signed        Joanna McWilliam                        Date 22 October 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
