
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/34793/2015
     IA/34795/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29th November 2017                         |On 17th January 2018          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI


                                   Between

                                    K-RL
                                    S-RL
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr J Plowright, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Devittie dismissing their appeals  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision to refuse their applications for  leave  to  remain  on  human
    rights grounds.  The decision of Judge Devittie was promulgated on 14th
    March 2017.  The Appellants appealed against  that  decision  and  were
    granted permission to appeal by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Boyes.   The
    grounds upon which permission was granted may be summarised as follows:

         "The grounds assert that the judge  made  numerous  errors  in  the
         assessment of both the legal and factual position.

         The grounds are arguable and permission to appeal is granted."

 2. I was provided with a Rule 24 response from the  Respondent  which  was
    considered by all parties before the hearing commenced.

    Error of Law

 3. At the close of submissions, I indicated I found an error of  law  such
    that the decision should be  set  aside,  but  that  my  reasons  would
    follow, which I shall now give.

 4. The parties accepted before me that Ground 1 of the Grounds  of  Appeal
    challenging the decision of Judge Devittie was  correct.   That  ground
    states that the judge arguably factored  irrelevant  matters  into  his
    consideration which were incorrect, namely that:

 1) Appellant 1 did not meet the suitability criteria on the basis that she
    had failed to pay charges in accordance with NHS Regulations applicable
    to overseas visitors, and

 2)  Appellant  1  had  not  provided  any  maintenance   and   undertaking
    requirement that had been requested under the Rules.

 5. Given that acceptance it is clear that the decision  contains  mistakes
    of fact which taken with the  other  grounds,  which  I  shall  discuss
    shortly, point towards a material error of law in the decision.

 6. In terms of Ground 2 the ground alleges that the judge failed  to  take
    into account any of the evidence that was contained in the  Appellant's
    bundle and the skeleton argument.  These documents included inter  alia
    letters from the second Appellant's school  confirming  her  attendance
    since  26th  September  2005  as  well  as  letters  from  the   second
    Appellant's academy which she currently  attends  since  4th  September
    2012 including a letter from her teacher and the principal, as well  as
    school reports and her educational certificates.  It is true  that  the
    decision of Judge Devittie unfortunately does not make mention of these
    documents on its face in terms of his findings of fact.  As such  I  do
    find that the ground is made out and that the judge has failed to  take
    into account the evidence referred to in  the  Appellant's  bundle  and
    also in counsel's skeleton argument.

 7. In respect of Ground 3, this ground argues that the  judge  found  that
    the first Appellant did not have sole  responsibility  for  the  second
    Appellant, which contradicted the face of the evidence that the  second
    Appellant's father had last attended the second Appellant's  school  in
    2007, a decade ago.  The ground also argues that the  judge  failed  to
    take into account the letter of Dr Hughes,  which  confirmed  that  the
    first Appellant was indeed  a  single  parent  and  as  such  had  sole
    responsibility.

 8. Paragraph 5 does make mention of the father  of  the  second  Appellant
    last attending the school in 2007.  As such the complaint in respect of
    the contact between the father and the second Appellant is not one that
    the judge was necessarily precluded  from  reaching.   However,  it  is
    difficult to see any evidence on which the finding that the  father  is
    still involved could be based.  More  importantly  in  respect  of  the
    letter from Dr Hughes, that letter does not find mention in the judge's
    findings from paragraphs 5 through to 11 and  as  such  is  a  material
    omission to the consideration of the issue of sole responsibility which
    the letter purports to confirm.

 9. In terms of Ground 3 there is a nuance to the  argument  raised  by  Mr
    Plowright which I covered with the parties and is touched upon  in  the
    conclusion of the Grounds of Appeal, namely  that  even  if  the  first
    Appellant did not have sole responsibility for  the  second  Appellant,
    that  did  not  preclude  the  judge  from  considering  the  "parental
    responsibility" which the first Appellant  may  or  may  not  enjoy  in
    respect of Section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 that being an obvious basis  upon  which  a  person  can  have
    "parental   responsibility",   even   in   the   absence    of    "sole
    responsibility".  Although that subsection is mentioned at paragraph 11
    of the decision there is no  consideration  as  to  whether  the  first
    Appellant enjoys parental  responsibility  for  the  second  Appellant,
    which is a material omission in my view.

10. Turning to Ground 4, the ground in essence argues that the judge failed
    to take into account the binding authority of  the  Court  of  Appeal's
    judgment in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA  Civ  705  wherein  at  [46],  in
    considering the reasonableness test for a child who had resided in  the
    United Kingdom for seven years continuously, Lord Justice Elias  stated
    this involved consideration of whether there were "strong reasons"  for
    refusing leave.  The ground also argues that there is no  consideration
    of the IDI governing family migration, namely Appendix FM Section 1.0b,
    published in August 2015, which  remains  in  force,  which  states  at
    paragraph 11.2.4 that "strong reasons will  be  required  in  order  to
    refuse a case with continuous UK residence of more than  seven  years".
    It is true that neither the authority of MA (Pakistan) nor the IDI find
    any mention in the  judge's  consideration  of  the  reasonableness  of
    refusing leave to the child in respect of his consideration  under  the
    Rules or outside the Rules.

11. Given that the starting point in  the  Respondent's  guidance  is  that
    there need to be strong reasons for refusing leave to a child  who  has
    attained seven years' continuous residence, it is in my view a material
    error to fail to commence from that starting point and  enquire  as  to
    whether strong reasons have been put forward by the Respondent or  not,
    in accordance and harmony with her IDI.

12. The fourth ground further argued that the judge  failed  to  take  into
    account the fact that the second Appellant will be returning to Nigeria
    with the first Appellant, who was a single  mother  and  was  suffering
    from an aggressive illness.  This last  submission  is  one  that  only
    carries moderate weight whereas the complaints concerning the  omission
    to consider MA (Pakistan) and the IDI do carry great weight and I  find
    reveal a material error of law in the decision.

13. In respect of Ground 5 the parties agreed that if I was persuaded  that
    errors of law were revealed in Grounds 1 to 4 I did not need to  go  on
    to consider Ground 5, which, given my findings above, I shall not do.

14. In light of the above findings, I set aside the decision  and  findings
    of the judge entirely.

Notice of Decision

15. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

16. The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law and is set aside.

17. The appeal is to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  by
    a differently constituted bench.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

18. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants
    are granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings  shall  directly
    or indirectly identify them  or  any  member  of  their  family.   This
    direction applies  both  to  the  Appellants  and  to  the  Respondent.
    Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of  court
    proceedings.





Signed                                  Date: 17 January 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini
