
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34684/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 24 January 2017                         |On 25 January 2017               |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK



                                   Between

                                 ERIC BOADI

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Adewole, Solicitor, Ansong Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr P. Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This appeal comes back before me for the  re-making  of  the  decision,
    following a hearing before me on 17 October 2016 at which I found  that
    the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") had erred in law in its decision on the
    appellant's appeal, and whereby I set aside the decision of the FtT.

 2. The further background to the appeal, and my reasons for  having  found
    an error of law in the FtT's decision, are set out in the error of  law
    decision which I reproduce in full as follows:

    "1.  The appellant is a citizen of Ghana born on  25  April  1980.   He
         made an application on 16 June 2015  for  a  residence  card.   The
         respondent decided on 19 November 2015 to refuse  that  application
         and indeed to revoke the residence card that he presently had.

    2.   The respondent's decision in terms of revocation and refusal of  a
         residence card identified the issue as being that the documents  in
         relation to the appellant's former spouse's employment do not cover
         the date of the divorce which was 20 May 2014.  It is said  in  the
         respondent's decision that the period only  covered  from  27  July
         2012 up to 28 March 2014.

    3.   It is accepted by both parties that  in  order  to  establish  his
         right to a  residence  card  in  these  circumstances  pursuant  to
         regulation  10(5)  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
         Regulations 2006 ("the  EEA  Regulations")  the  appellant  has  to
         establish that his former spouse was exercising  Treaty  rights  at
         the date  of  the  divorce.  The  respondent's  conclusion  in  the
         decision letter was that that had not been established.

    4.   The appeal against the respondent's decisions came  before  First-
         tier Tribunal Judge Fox on 23 February 2016.  Materially, Judge Fox
         in dismissing the appeal said at [10] that it was  clear  from  the
         documents that the period of employment covered by the evidence  in
         relation to the appellant's former spouse was 27 July  2012  to  28
         March 2014. He noted that the date of  divorce  was  20  May  2014.
         Accordingly, he concluded  that  the  appellant  was  not  able  to
         establish that his former wife was exercising Treaty rights at  the
         date of the divorce.

    5.   In the grounds of appeal against Judge Fox's decision it is argued
         that documents were in fact before him which established  that  the
         former spouse was  in  employment  at  the  date  of  the  divorce.
         Reference is made in the grounds to payslips and P45s  which  cover
         May and June 2014.

    6.   A perusal of the Tribunal's file  indicates  that  some  documents
         were returned to the appellant's solicitors as indeed  the  grounds
         suggest. Those were returned on  31  March  2016.  Those  documents
         consist of a covering letter from the  appellant's  representatives
         dated 14 January 2016 enclosing P45s for April  2014  and  payslips
         for May and June 2014.   Copies  of  those  documents  are  on  the
         Tribunal's file.

    7.   It seems clear to me therefore, that there  was  on  the  Tribunal
         file documents which, at least on the face it, indicate that  there
         was a period of employment  at  the  date  of  the  divorce.  Those
         documents were not taken into account by Judge Fox, perhaps because
         he was not aware of their existence.  It does seem that  there  was
         no dedicated bundle of documents prepared for  the  hearing  before
         the First-tier Tribunal and  the  appeal  was  dealt  with  on  the
         papers.

    8.    In  submissions  with  reference  to  various  aspects  of  those
         documents, Ms Isherwood sought to persuade me that any error of law
         in  the  judge's  failure  to  take  into  account  documents   was
         immaterial because of anomalies in them. For example, the  payslips
         were said not to match the dates of  employment  as  shown  on  the
         payslips.  It was also said that the P45s indicate that no pay  was
         actually received, which it is contended was another anomaly.

    9.   In response, Mr Adewole explained, again  with  reference  to  the
         dates on the P45s,  why  it  is  the  case  that  the  respondent's
         submissions are not tenable in terms of materiality.

    10.   In  response  to  Ms  Isherwood's  further  contention  that  the
         application for a residence card says  nothing  at  all  about  any
         employment by the appellant's former spouse, Mr  Adewole  contended
         that even if that is the case, which it seems  to  be,  there  were
         nevertheless documents before the First-tier Tribunal which  needed
         to be considered.

    My assessment

    11.  I am satisfied that Judge Fox erred in law in failing to take into
         account the documents to which I have  referred.   I  am  satisfied
         that the error of law is material, thus requiring the  decision  to
         be set aside so that the decision needs to be re-made in the  Upper
         Tribunal, this not being a case requiring the matter to be remitted
         to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  accordance   with   the   Senior
         President's Practice Statement at paragraph 7.2.

    12.  There was in fact no bundle of documents before me  on  behalf  of
         the appellant although it was said it was sent  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal and to the respondent.  Ms Isherwood did not have  a  copy
         of that bundle either.  In those circumstances, the decision  could
         not be re-made on the day of the hearing before me. There will have
         to be a further hearing.

    13.  It is necessary to make directions  for  the  forthcoming  resumed
         hearing. Those directions are as follows:

         (i)  there must be a comprehensive, indexed  and  paginated  bundle
         submitted on behalf of the appellant, filed  and  served  no  later
         than 7 days before the next date of hearing.

         (ii) the  bundle  is  to  include  a  witness  statement  from  the
         appellant drawn in sufficient detail to stand as evidence-in-chief,
         such that there is no need for any further examination in chief.

    14.  Needless to say, evidence served on behalf of the  appellant  must
         deal with all relevant issues."

 3. For the resumed hearing, on behalf of the appellant there was a further
    bundle of documents which was  relied  on,  consisting  of  317  pages.
    However, Mr Nath had not has sight of it before the  hearing.  After  a
    short adjournment to allow him time to consider it, and to discuss  the
    documents with Mr Adewole, he was able to proceed.

 4. It was agreed between the  parties  that  in  order  to  establish  his
    entitlement to a residence card as confirmation of a retained right  of
    residence, the appellant needs to meet the requirements  of  regulation
    10(5) of the Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006
    ("the EEA Regulations"). Reg 10, as it  applied  at  the  date  of  the
    respondent's decision, and so far as material, provides as follows:

    " '10.-Family member who has retained the right of residence'

    (1) In these Regulations, 'family member who has retained the right  of
    residence' means, subject to paragraph (8), a person who satisfies  the
    conditions in paragraph (2), (3), (4) or (5).

    ...

    (5) A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if-

    (a) he ceased to be a family member of a qualified person or of an  EEA
    national with a

    permanent right of residence on the  termination  of  the  marriage  or
    civil partnership of that

    person;

    (b) he was residing in the United  Kingdom  in  accordance  with  these
    Regulations at the

    date of the termination;

    (c) he satisfies the condition in paragraph (6); and

    (d) either-

    (i) prior to the initiation of the proceedings for the  termination  of
    the marriage or

    the civil partnership the marriage or civil partnership had lasted  for
    at least three

    years and the parties to the marriage or civil partnership had  resided
    in the United

    Kingdom for at least one year during its duration;

    ...

    (6) The condition in this paragraph is that the person-

    (a) is not an EEA national but would, if he were an EEA national, be  a
    worker, a

    self-employed person or a self-sufficient person under regulation 6; or

    (b) is the family member of a person who falls within paragraph (a)."

 5. Reg 15 is also relevant. Materially, it provides as follows:

    "15.- Permanent right of residence

    (1) The following persons shall acquire the  right  to  reside  in  the
    United Kingdom permanently-

    ...

    (f) a person who-

    (i) has  resided  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  accordance  with  these
    Regulations for a

    continuous period of five years; and

    (ii) was, at the end of that period, a family member who  has  retained
    the right of

    residence."

 6. As can be seen from the error of law decision, the matter in  issue  is
    the extent to which the appellant's spouse was exercising Treaty rights
    at the date of the divorce from the appellant. It is uncontentious that
    the divorce occurred on 20 May 2014.

 7. Initially, with reference to the documents in the bundle  produced  for
    this, the resumed hearing, Mr Nath submitted that the evidence did  not
    establish  that  the  appellant  met  this  requirement  of   the   EEA
    Regulations, because  the  appellant's  ex-wife's  payslips  that  were
    relied on only went up to 28 March 2014.  That  was  exactly  the  same
    position as applied at the date of the hearing before the FtT.

 8. However, what was omitted from the bundle relied on were the  documents
    to which I referred in the error of law decision and which resulted  in
    my setting aside the decision of  the  FtT.  Those  documents  included
    payslips for the appellant's wife dated 30 May 2014 and 30 June 2014.

 9. Having considered those documents, it was then conceded  on  behalf  of
    the respondent that the appellant had established that his ex-wife  was
    employed as at the date of their divorce on 20 May 2014.

10. None of the other requirements of the EEA Regulations were in  dispute,
    that is in terms of his residence in the UK before and at the  date  of
    termination of the marriage, and the duration of the  marriage  for  at
    least three years in the UK. There was also undisputed evidence of  the
    appellant's employment up to the date of hearing.

11. Mr Nath conceded therefore, that the appellant had established that  he
    met the requirements of the EEA Regulations in terms of his entitlement
    to a residence card as a family member who has retained  the  right  of
    residence. The  appellant  has  thus  acquired  a  permanent  right  of
    residence in the UK in accordance with reg 15(1)(f).

12. Mr Adewole confirmed that he did not advance any argument  in  relation
    to Article 8 of the ECHR.

13. I am satisfied therefore, that the appellant's appeal is to be  allowed
    under the EEA Regulations.







    Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law. Its decision having been set aside,  I  re-make  the
    decision, allowing the appeal under the EEA Regulations.











Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            24/01/17


