
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
IA/34408/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|Heard at Field House                      |Decision Promulgated        |
|On 3 December 2014                        |On 9 December 2014          |
|                                          |                            |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between

                              MONINCA FRIMPONG
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr M Blundell counsel instructed by Malik and Malik
solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr C Avery Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal but  in
   order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in  the
   First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against
   a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Steer promulgated on 27 July 2014
   which allowed  the  Appellant's  appeal  'as  the  decision  was  not  in
   accordance with the law.'

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 7 July 1962 and is a citizen of Ghana.
4. On 25 November 2008 the Appellant  applied  for  leave  to  remain  under
   Article 8 ECHR. On 15 May 2009 that application  was  refused  without  a
   right of appeal. The decision was the subject of a Judicial Review and on
   26 July 2010 the Respondent consented to reconsider the Article  8  claim
   and if the claim was refused to issue an in country right of appeal.
5. On 14 August 2013 the Secretary of  State  reconsidered  the  application
   and refused it.  The  refusal  letter  gave  a  number  of  reasons:  the
   Respondent considered the application by reference  to  Appendix  FM  and
   paragraph 276ADE of  the  Immigration  Rules  HC  395  as  amended  ('The
   Rules'); there were no insurmountable obstacles to family life  with  her
   partner continuing in Ghana who was of Ghanaian origin;  the  Appellant's
   partner has an adult daughter  but  there  are  no  special  elements  of
   dependency over and above normal  emotional  ties;  in  relation  to  the
   private life requirements the Appellant  had  not  lived  in  the  United
   Kingdom for more than 20 years; the Appellant had  social  .cultural  and
   family ties to  Ghana;  there  were  no  exceptional  circumstances  that
   warranted a grant of discretionary leave outside the Rules.


The Judge's Decision
6. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Steer ("the Judge") allowed the appeal finding  that  the  decision
   was not in accordance with the law. He relied on  Edgehill  &  Another  v
   SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 40 and found that reliance by the Respondent on  the
   new Rules materially affected the decision and it was  therefore  invalid
   and not in accordance with the law.
7. Grounds of appeal were lodged on the basis that there had  been  a  wrong
   application of Edgehill  because  in  order  to  benefit  from  that  the
   Appellant would have had to have been able to utilise the old 10  and  14
   year rules in place of the 20 years that  applied  under  276ADE  of  the
   Rules which she was unable to do. On 4 November 2014 First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Frankish gave permission to appeal stating that  'with  no  express
   finding as to the length of residence and entitlement thereby arising, an
   arguable error of law arises in the application of Edgehill.'

8. At the hearing I heard  submissions  from  Mr  Avery  on  behalf  of  the
   Appellant that he relied on the grounds of appeal. He had  discussed  the
   matter with Mr Blundell who confirmed that the Appellant had also  sought
   permission to appeal this decision  on  the  basis  that  the  Judge  had
   misapplied the decision in Edgehill and they both agreed that what should
   have happened in this case was an  assessment  of  the  Appellant's  case
   under Article 8.

9. On behalf of the Respondent  Mr Blundell submitted that ;

   a) It was conceded that the Judge had failed to apply Edgehill properly.

   b) Both he and Mr Avery were in agreement  that  the  Judge  should  have
      carried out an assessment under Article 8 ECHR as it was conceded that
      the Appellant could not succeed under the long residence Rules  either
      before or after 9 July 2012 and therefore the application of  the  new
      Rules did not have a material effect on the decision .

Finding on Material Error

10. Having heard  those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made material errors of law.

11. The Appellant in this case made an application for leave  to  remain  on
   25 November 2008 under Article 8 and that application was refused  on  15
   May 2009 without a right of appeal  as  she  had  no  extant  leave.  The
   decision was made the subject of a  Judicial  Review  and  the  case  was
   settled on 26 July 2010 in a Consent order in which the Respondent agreed
   to reconsider the Article 8 claim. The Respondent refused the application
   in a decision dated 14 August 2013 and considered the Appellant's private
   and family life claims by reference to the Article 8 provisions found  in
   the current Rules in Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE.

12. The Appellant appealed that decision. The Judge heard evidence from  the
   Appellant and her unmarried partner and had a letter before her from  the
   Appellant's partner's daughter.  The Judge was referred to Edgehill . The
   Judge set out the ratio of  that  decision  in  paragraph  27  that  'the
   decision only becomes unlawful if the decision  maker  relies  upon  rule
   276ADE (iii) as a consideration materially affecting the decision.'   She
   then went on to state in paragraph 28 that:

   "In the decision that is the  basis  of  this  appeal  ,  the  Respondent
   expressly stated under the heading "Private  Life-Rules  consideration.",
   "the Home Office is satisfied that your  client  has  only  been  in  the
   United Kingdom since 2003 and therefore does not qualify for leave on the
   basis of 20 years continuous residence at i) above." The reliance on  the
   new rules invalidated the decision making it not in accordance  with  the
   law."

13. Both Mr Avery and Mr Blundell rightly conceded  in  my  view  that  this
   represents a misunderstanding of the ratio of Edgehill. It was clear from
   the evidence before the Judge that the Appellant could  not  satisfy  the
   long residence Rules that applied prior to July  2012,  10  years  lawful
   residence or 14 years  continuous  residence,  and  therefore  the  Judge
   failed to assess whether the application of the 20 year Rule in paragraph
   276ADE was material to the decision as required  in  Edgehill  .I  remind
   myself that this was precisely the same conclusion reached by  the  Court
   of Appeal in paragraph 38 of Edgehill in relation to the appeal of HB.  I
   am satisfied that what  was  then  required  was  an  assessment  of  the
   Appellant's claim under Article 8.

14. The failure of the First-tier Tribunal to address and determine  whether
   the application of the new Rules was  material  to  the  outcome  of  the
   decision   and then whether the Appellant's  claim  could  succeed  under
   Article 8 constitutes a clear error of law. This error I consider  to  be
   material since had the Tribunal conducted this exercise the outcome could
   have been different. That in my view is the  correct  test  to  apply.  I
   therefore set aside the Judges decision for the case to be reheard.

15. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
   of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be remitted to the First  Tier
   Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:
    (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal."

16. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
   the Appellant did not have a fair hearing due to the failure of the Judge
   to engage with the  relevant  issues  in  the  case  namely  whether  the
   Appellant's claim should succeed under Article 8. Given that no  findings
   were made by the Judge this will be a rehearing as there are no  findings
   to preserve.

17. I consequently remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal  sitting
   at Hatton Cross to be heard on the 20 May  2015,  before  any  First-tier
   Immigration Judge other than Judge Steer or Mr Blundell who sits as a fee
   paid judge in Hatton Cross. A Twi interpreter is required.

Signed                                                              Date
5.12.2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
