
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34356/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 29 January 2016                       |On 9 March 2016                   |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN

                                   Between

                           JAYESH SURESHBHAI PATEL
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Arayn, Farani-Javid-Taylor Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal brought by the Appellant who is a national  of  India
    who had appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against a decision taken by
    the Respondent dated 29 August 2014 refusing to grant him  a  residence
    card under Regulation 17(1) of the Immigration (European Economic Area)
    Regulations 2006. The Appellant had applied for such a  residence  card
    on the basis that he was the family member of Miss Ana- Maria Ramona, a
    citizen of Romania, they having married on 14 February 2014.

2.   In respect of the Appellant's application for a residence card  he  and
    Miss Ramona were interviewed by the Respondent on 29 August 2014.  As a
    result of that interview the decision refusing to grant the Appellant a
    residence card was made giving reasons as follows for the refusal.

         "On 29 August 2014 you and your Sponsor were interviewed separately
         by the Home Office interviewers at the Liverpool Capital  Building.
         The interviewing officer noted that there many  inconsistencies  in
         your accounts of events and discrepancies in the answers that  both
         you and your Sponsor gave relating to:


         !   Meeting your Sponsor's mother
             # Your recollection of how many times you met her differ  from
    your              Sponsor.


         !   Your sponsor's ex-husband
             # Your Sponsor said she is in good contact with her ex-husband


             # You claim that they do not speak


         !   Trips to Romania
             # The time your Sponsor spent in Romania and  how  many  trips
    she has       been     on


         !   Sightseeing
             # Your spouse claimed to have been on the London Eye ride with
    you
             # You stated that you have never been on the ride


         !   Cooking
             # You claim that your Sponsor had not cooked a meal since your
    marriage
             # Your Sponsor states that you cook on alternate nights


         !   Friends
             # You state that you did not know who your wife  went  to  the
    carnival          with on the Sunday  prior  to  the  interview,  which
    would be basic             knowledge  of  a     partner  in  a  genuine
    relationship


         !   When you first went to a restaurant
             # Your Sponsor could not give an answer
                  # You stated that it was on your wedding day. A person in
             a genuine     relationship would be able to recall if they had
             been to a restaurant   with     their partner if it was on any
             other day than their wedding day.





             On  the  balance  of  probabilities  the  reasons   for   your
             conflicting answers is because there has been a large  element
             of deception used when you  presented  yourself  to  the  Home
             Office."

3.   The Respondent's conclusion in that letter  was  that  the  Appellant's
    marriage was one of convenience and therefore that he did not meet  the
    definition of spouse in accordance with the 2006 Regulations.

4.   The Appellant appealed against that decision, electing to have a  paper
    only appeal.  There was a bundle of evidence prepared and submitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal in support  of  that  appeal.  There  was  also
    naturally a bundle of documents prepared by the  Respondent.   I  shall
    specify  the  evidence  that  was  contained  in  both   bundles.   The
    Respondent's bundle contained a copy of the EEA2  application  form,  a
    copy of the Appellant's passport and of  the  Sponsor's  passport,  the
    marriage certificate, some photographs of the wedding and at Annex G  a
    document on form ICD.4604  entitled  "Interview  record  sheet".   This
    appears to be the record of the interview which took place on 29 August
    2014.

5.   The copy of this document appearing within the Respondent's  bundle  is
    clearly incomplete.  Questions 1 to 19 on the first page are  completed
    but those merely identify the persons being interviewed. There is  then
    some further pro forma information as to the interviewees  set  out  on
    the second page and signatures on the third page.   There are then  two
    blank pages in landscape format setting out a table in which there  are
    columns for questions,  the applicant's reply and Sponsor's reply.  But
    the two landscape pages contained within the Respondent's bundle do not
    contain any questions or answers at all.  There is then a final page at
    G7 of concluding questions  which  does  not  contain  any  substantive
    questions in relation to the genuineness of the marriage.

6.   There is then a copy of the notice of decision  to  the  Appellant  and
    the Reasons for Refusal Letter together with the notice of  appeal  and
    grounds of appeal to the First-tier.  The Appellant's bundle which  was
    filed with the First-tier Tribunal under cover  of  13  May  2015  from
    Farani-Javid-Taylor Solicitors  contains  representations  which  inter
    alia make  reference  to  the  reported  cases  of  Miah  (Interviewers
    comments - disclosure - fairness) [2014] UKUT  00515,  Papajorgji  (EEA
    spouse marriage of convenience )  Greece  [2012]  UKUT  38  and  Goudey
    (Subsisting  marriage  evidence)  Sudan  [2012]  UKUT   00041.    Those
    submissions at paragraph 4 state as follows:

         "4.  It is submitted that in light of the above cases the burden to
             demonstrate that the marriage  is  one  of  convenience  falls
             squarely on the Respondent and that the burden  has  not  been
             discharged by the Respondent.  The Tribunal is asked  to  note
             that the refusal contains merely allegations on pages 1 and 2.
              There is no interview record.  There are no  officer's  notes
             which conclude the interview. It is therefore  submitted  that
             the Respondent has not discharged her burden.  The Tribunal is
             asked not to give the refusal letter any weight as the refusal
             letter is not evidence.
              ...


         8.   It is therefore respectfully submitted that the appeal  should
             be allowed as the decision is not in accordance with the  law.
             The Appellant relies on the evidence  within  the  Appellant's
             and the Respondent's  bundle  and  submits  that  despite  the
             Respondent not being able to meet the standard  of  proof  the
             Appellant has evidence  to  show  that  he  is  in  a  genuine
             relationship.


         9.   If the Tribunal does not deem fit to allow the appeal outright
             it is submitted that the  appeal  should  be  allowed  to  the
             limited  extent  that  it  should  be  remitted  back  to  the
             Respondent."

7.   In addition  to  the  representations  I  have  just  quoted  from  the
    Appellant's bundle  contained a witness statement  from  the  Appellant
    dated 11 May 2015, who remained in the United Kingdom and  the  witness
    statement from Miss Ramona also dated 11  May  2015  but  who  in  that
    witness statement explained that she had herself filed notice of appeal
    which was pending.  She stated that she had returned back to  her  home
    country to visit her father who was extremely sick.  When she  returned
    back to the United Kingdom she was stopped at  the  airport.   She  was
    told that she could not enter as her application had been  refused  and
    they wanted to send her back. "I tried  to  explain  to  them  that  my
    appeal had been submitted but they would not listen to me."

8.   From that it seems (although it was not clear until today),  that  Miss
    Ramona herself had received an  adverse  immigration  decision.  As  is
    sometimes the case when a third country national receives a refusal  of
    a residence card, the EU national can also receive a removal notice  on
    the basis that  s/he has engaged in an  'abuse  of  rights'  under  the
    Citizens Directive.

9.   Thus Miss Ramona was not present in the  United  Kingdom  at  the  time
    that the judge heard the appeal.

10.  Also in the Appellant's bundle were a series of further photographs.

11.  In his decision  at  paragraphs  7  and  8  the  judge  summarises  the
    contents of the witness statements of the Appellant and  sponsor.   The
    judge records that both witnesses accepted that  there  had  been  some
    inconsistencies and discrepancies in the marriage interview,  but  that
    they asserted that the marriage was not one of convenience.  He set out
    in summary the explanations that they gave for apparent differences  in
    their account.

12.  The judge went on in his findings from paragraph 15 to  direct  himself
    as follows:

          "The burden of proving that a marriage  was  not  a  marriage  of
         convenience for the purposes of the EEA Regulations  rests  on  the
         Appellant: but he is not required to discharge it in the absence of
         evidence of matters supporting suspicion that the marriage  is  one
         of  convenience  (i.e.  there  is  an  evidential  burden  on   the
         Respondent); see IS (Marriages of convenience) Serbia [2008]  UKIAT
         00031."

13.  At paragraph 16 the judge stated:

         "Papajorgji (EEA spouse - marriage of  convenience)  Greece  [2012]
         UKUT  00038 (IAC) reminds me that there is no burden at the  outset
         of an application on a claimant to discharge that the  marriage  to
         an EEA national  is  not  one  of  convenience.  IS  (Marriages  of
         convenience) Serbia establishes only that there  is  an  evidential
         burden on the claimant to address  evidence  justifying  reasonable
         suspicion that the marriage is entered  into  for  the  predominant
         purpose of securing residence rights."


14.  The judge then provides as follows at paragraphs 17 to 18 which  it  is
    appropriate to set out in full:

         "17.  Clearly in this case the Respondent has provided evidence  in
             the form of the interview record supporting the suspicion that
             the marriage is one of convenience. I find  that  this  is  so
             given the number of the discrepancies that arose  in  the  two
             accounts of the Appellant and the sponsor and also  given  the
             nature of those discrepancies  which  included  matters  which
             touch upon ordinary aspects of daily life such as cooking  and
             trips out and to knowledge of and  contract  with  family  and
             close friends.


         18.  Given the above evidence I find that the burden  to  establish
             that the marriage  is  not  one  convenience  now  effectively
             shifts to the Appellant.  I therefore considered what  if  any
             evidence has been produced by the Appellant to  discharge  the
             burden now upon him.  I find that the Appellant  has  produced
             little evidence."

15.  It suffices  to  say  that  the  judge  then  held  that  the  evidence
    contained in the Appellant's and sponsor's witness statements were  not
    in his view sufficient to discharge the evidential burden which he said
    now fell upon the Appellant to demonstrate that his  marriage  was  not
    one of convenience. Accordingly the judge dismissed the appeal.

16.  The Appellant sought permission to  appeal  against  that  decision  in
    grounds dated 24 July 2015, arguing that there had been an error of law
    in the finding that the Respondent had  produced  an  interview  record
    whereas she had clearly not done so. The Appellant refers to  the  case
    of Papajorgji highlighting that the Respondent bore the burden of proof
    and the IJ had referred to that at his paragraph 16.

17.  The Appellant then complains that at paragraph 17 of his  decision  the
    judge had quoted "clearly in this  case  the  Respondent  has  provided
    evidence in the form the interview record supporting the suspicion that
    the marriage is one of convenience."

18.  It was then pointed out as I have already above that  Annex  G  of  the
    Respondent's bundle  which  is  entitled  "Marriage  interview  record"
    actually contains no information whatsoever about  what  questions  and
    answers were given at that interview of 29 August  2014.  It  was  then
    asserted that  in  accordance  with  the  case  of  Miah  (Interviewers
    comments - disclosure - fairness)  the  Appellant  had  also  not  been
    provided with any copy of the interviewer's comments, on form  ICD4605.
    It was submitted that the judge had procedurally erred and had erred in
    finding that the burden of proof  had been discharged.   Permission  to
    appeal was granted by Judge Osborne in an undated grant  of  permission
    to appeal acknowledging the merit of those grounds.

19.  In a Rule 24 response dated 17 November 2015

         "The Respondent resists the appeal asserting  that  the  Respondent
         opposes the appeal.  In summary the Respondent will submit that the
         judge directed himself appropriately and that the judge  also  took
         into account the witness statements provided by the  Appellant  and
         Sponsor when considering the evidence.  The  judge  gives  adequate
         reasons for finding that there were discrepancies in the statement.
         This is set out at paragraph 18 of the decision."

20.  I have heard submissions from Mr  Arayn  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant
    today and from Miss Isherwood for the Respondent.  Mr Arayn adopts  and
    amplifies upon grounds of appeal.  It is also appropriate to note  that
    Miss Ramona attended the hearing today notwithstanding the  information
    within her own witness statement of May 2015 that she was at that  time
    excluded from the United Kingdom.

21.  I am informed that she returned to the United Kingdom in January  2016.
     It also became clear from a document on the Respondent's file that  on
    29 August 2015 Miss Ramona  herself  had  indeed  been  served  with  a
    removal notice by the Secretary of State on  form  IS151B  on  grounds,
    contained within form IS151A, that she was a person suspected of  being
    guilty of abuse of rights and who is therefore a person removable under
    Regulation 21B(2) of the 2006 Regulations.

22.  I understand that she filed a notice of appeal  against  that  decision
    but left the United Kingdom in the circumstances set out in her witness
    statement.

23.  The IS151B informed her that she would  be  excluded  from  the  United
    Kingdom for a period of twelve months. A period of greater than  twelve
    months has clearly passed since the date of that notice of decision and
    she is now present again in the UK.



Discussion

24.  My decision in this matter is informed by two authorities  familiar  to
    those involved in marriage of convenience cases.  Those are the case of
    Miah and Papajorgji.  The President of the Upper Tribunal,  Mr  Justice
    McCloskey, provides the following guidance in the case of Miah

         "    Conduct of pre-decision interviews


         (i)  A decision that a marriage is a marriage  of  convenience  for
             the purposes of Regulation 2(1) of the  Immigration  (European
             Economic Area) Regulations 2006 is a matter  of  some  moment.
             Fairness requires that the affected person must be alerted  to
             the essential elements of the case against him.


         (ii)     In addition, those involved must be alert to the  question
             of whether,  in  an  unusual  or  exceptional  case,  anything
             further is required in the interests of fairness. There may be
             difficult, borderline cases in  which  fairness  will  require
             identification of the third  party.  These  do  not  admit  of
             general guidance or resolution and will have to  be  addressed
             on a case by case basis, guided by the overarching requirement
             of fairness and balancing all interests in play.

             The making of the decision on the application


         (iii) The Secretary of State's decision making process  includes  a
             process whereby comments,  or  opinions,  of  an  interviewing
             officer are conveyed to the decision maker. In the  generality
             of cases, this practice will not contaminate the  fairness  of
             the decision making process. The duty of the decision maker is
             to approach and consider all of the  materials  with  an  open
             mind and with circumspection. The due discharge of this  duty,
             coupled with the statutory right of appeal, will  provide  the
             subject with adequate protection.

             Disclosure


         (iv)      However,  the  document  enshrining   the   interviewer's
             comments  -  Form  ICV.4605  [in  fact  the  President   there
             misquotes the title of the document - it is  called  ICD.4605]
             must be disclosed as a matter of course. An Appellant's  right
             to a fair hearing dictates  this  course.  If,  exceptionally,
             some legitimate concern about  disclosure,  for  example,  the
             protection of a third party,  should  arise,  this  should  be
             proactively brought to the attention of the  Tribunal,  for  a
             ruling  and  directions.  In  this  way   the   principle   of
             independent  judicial  adjudication  will   provide   adequate
             safeguards for the Appellant. This will also enable mechanisms
             such as redaction, which in practice one would expect to arise
             with extreme rarity, to be considered."

25.  The judge also considered in the body of that decision  that  not  only
    was it procedurally necessary to provide a copy  of  the  interviewer's
    comments on form ICD4605, but that it is equally if not more  important
    to provide the interview transcript itself (which is on form  ICD4604).
    See:

         "13.  These  features  of  the  context  point  decisively  to  the
             proposition that the affected person must be  alerted  to  the
             essential elements of the case against him.  This  places  the
             spotlight firmly on the pre-decision interview which, it would
             appear, is an established part of the process in cases of this
             nature.  The interview  is  the  vehicle  through  which  this
             discrete duty of disclosure will, in practice,  be  typically,
             though not invariably  or  exclusively,  discharged.  In  this
             forum, the suspicions  relating  to  the  genuineness  of  the
             marriage must be fully ventilated. ...


         15.  The analysis above demonstrates that,  in  the  context  of  a
             marriage of convenience enquiry under  the  2006  Regulations,
             the key requirement of  a  fair  decision  making  process  is
             disclosure to the 'suspect'  of  the  substance  of  the  case
             against him. This means, in practice, that the interview  will
             invariably occupy a position  of  pivotal  importance  in  the
             process.


         16.  In the present case, there is no complaint about disclosure."

26.  For my part I find it readily apparent that disclosure was an issue  in
    the  present  appeal.   The  Appellant's  representations  provided  in
    support of his paper appeal complained about the absence of the ICD4604
    interview transcript and any interview's comments thereon. It seems  to
    me that the judge should have been alive to  the  potential  procedural
    unfairness which  might  be  experienced  by  the  Appellant  in  those
    circumstances.

27.  It is to be acknowledged that  the  Appellant  and  Sponsor  accept  in
    their witness statements that some of their answers in their  interview
    contained inconsistencies or discrepancies. However a consideration  of
    both of those witness statements  establishes  that  at  least  in  two
    respects they make a positive assertion that there was  no  discrepancy
    in their evidence: in relation to the frequency with which the  Sponsor
    saw her mother, and in relation to the occasion  on  which  they  first
    attended a  restaurant   -  they  assert  that  they  gave   consistent
    evidence and that the discrepancy alleged in the notice of decision had
    not arisen.

28.  I am also conscious of the guidance in Papajorgji which is  effectively
    approved in the recent Court of Appeal case of Rosa [2016] EWCA Civ  14
    which confirms that the legal burden of  establishing  that  there  are
    grounds for suspecting an individual to have engaged in a  marriage  of
    convenience is one faced by the Secretary of State. If the Secretary of
    State provides evidence which  meets  that  legal  burden  then  it  is
    recorded that the evidential burden to counter that allegation may then
    fall on the Appellant.

29.  I find that the judge  erred  procedurally.   Given  that  the  witness
    evidence before him  specifically  asserted  that  the  Respondent  was
    incorrect in her notice of decision by alleging inconsistencies, then I
    do not see how the judge could have properly resolved the  conflict  of
    evidence before him other than  by  requiring  the  transcript  of  the
    interview to be filed with the Tribunal.  It had  not.   It  was,  with
    respect to the judge, clearly not the case as he asserted at  paragraph
    17 that the Respondent  had  provided  evidence  in  the  form  of  the
    interview record.  I find that that interview record was not  contained
    at Annex G of the Home Office bundle and I have examined  the  Tribunal
    file and there is no copy of  any  interview  transcript  to  be  found
    there.

30.  It is also to be noted that Miss Isherwood cannot find a  copy  of  the
    interview transcript on her own file aside from the incomplete  version
    at Annex G of the Home Office bundle.

31.  I find that it was procedurally unfair  for  the  judge  to  have  held
    against the Appellant a matter which was in  dispute  in  circumstances
    where the Respondent had not in fact provided the evidence  in  support
    of her case.

32.  That is the fundamental error which I find is material in the way  that
    this appeal was dealt with by the judge.  I find that it  is  necessary
    for this decision to be set aside and for the decision  to  be  remade.
    Both parties agree that that should take place in the  First  tier,  as
    all relevant findings of fact will need to be re-made in this appeal.

     Notice of Decision

33.  The making of the decision by the  First  tier  Tribunal  involved  the
         making of an error of law.

     I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

     I remit the appeal to be heard by the First-tier Tribunal Judge,  other
         than Judge Monaghan.

I also issue the following directions

Directions

(1)  The appeal is not to be listed for hearing by the First  tier  Tribunal
    prior to 29 April 2016.

(2)  The Respondent do file and serve  a  complete  copy  of  the  interview
    record sheet of the interview of 29 August 2014, on form ICD.4604,  and
    any interviewer's comments on form ICD.4605,  not  less  than  28  days
    prior to the date of hearing




No anonymity direction.



Signed                     Date 4.3.16

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan

