
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34496/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          | Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                   |
|On 27th November 2015                         | On 22nd December 2015        |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

                               mr asad mehmood
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Iqbal of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan  born  on  5th  September  1989.
    His appeal against a decision of the Respondent dated 19th August  2014
    to refuse leave to remain in the United Kingdom and to  remove  him  by
    way of directions under Section  47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006 was allowed at first  instance  by  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Perry sitting at  Richmond  Magistrates'  Court  on
    12th January 2015.  The Respondent  appeals  with  leave  against  that
    decision and for the reasons which I have set out below at paragraph  9
    I have set the decision of the First-tier Tribunal aside on the grounds
    of a material error of law and  remade  the  decision.   Although  this
    matter comes before  me  in  the  first  place  as  an  appeal  by  the
    Respondent I have for the sake of convenience continued to refer to the
    parties as they were known at first instance.

The Explanation for Refusal

2.   The Appellant applied on 24th March 2014 for leave to remain as a  Tier
    4  (General)  Student  and  for  a  biometric  residence  permit.   The
    Respondent refused the application because bank statements submitted in
    support of the application had a closing balance  date  of  27th  March
    2014.  However the application was made on line on 24th March 2014  and
    therefore the closing balance date was after the date of application by
    three days.  The bank statements which ran from 27th February 2014  did
    not cover the required consecutive 28 day period.   The  Appellant  was
    required to show living costs of �2,000  for  the  consecutive  28  day
    period to meet the Tier 4 (General)  Student  maintenance  requirements
    but he could not do  this  and  no  points  were  awarded  for  CAS  or
    maintenance funds.

3.   The Appellant appealed  against  that  decision  arguing  that  he  had
    misunderstood the 28 day period.  He  thought  that  the  date  of  his
    application was 27th March 2014 when he  posted  the  documents  rather
    than 24th March 2014 when he submitted his application on-line.  He had
    sufficient funds at all material times to fulfil the requirements.  The
    Respondent had not contacted him before making  a  decision.   Had  the
    Respondent done so the Appellant would have submitted the correct  bank
    statements and explained his position and  his  application  would  not
    then have been  refused.   The  Respondent  had  acted  unfairly.   The
    Appellant's case should also  be  considered  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules under Article 8. The Appellant had been admitted for  his  course
    and had a legitimate expectation to  complete  it.   He  had  paid  the
    tuition fees to his Tier 4 Sponsor and this amounted to a private  life
    which deserved respect.  The  Appellant's  compassionate  circumstances
    outweighed the legitimate interest of the  immigration  authorities  in
    enforcing immigration controls.  The Appellant had been a student since
    2010  with  associated  permitted  work   and   social   life.      The
    Respondent's decision was disproportionate.

The Decision at First Instance

4.   At  paragraph  19  of  his  determination  the  Judge  noted  that  the
    Appellant did not dispute that the bank statements  submitted  by  post
    had a closing balance dated 27th March 2014 three days after  the  date
    on which the on-line application was  made.   It  was  clear  that  the
    Respondent could not consider bank statements covering the dates  after
    the date of application and the Appellant therefore  failed  to  comply
    with the  requirements  to  show  funds  for  a  28  day  period.   The
    Respondent had not disputed that the Appellant had sufficient funds  in
    his bank account from 4th February to 24th March and was  therefore  in
    funds for the relevant 28 day  period  expiring  on  24th  March.   The
    Appellant had shown a clear intention to comply with  the  requirements
    of paragraph 245ZX(D) and it  was  unfair  to  the  Appellant  to  have
    refused his appeal in the light  of  the  evidence  that  he  held  the
    requisite funds for the requisite period.  There were only a few  cases
    which failed under the Immigration Rules but succeeded under Article  8
    and this was one.  The Appellant had acted in good faith  and  complied
    with the spirit and intention of the legislation.  His failure on quite
    technical grounds should not interrupt his  legitimate  expectation  to
    complete his  studies.   The  Judge  dismissed  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules but allowed it under Article 8.

The Onward Appeal

5.   The Respondent appealed arguing that the Judge had taken  an  incorrect
    approach to the consideration  of  evidence  of  funds  which  was  not
    provided  with  the  application.   The  Respondent  did  not  owe  the
    Appellant a common law duty of fairness in considering  a  points-based
    system application where the Appellant admits as in this case  that  he
    did not provide the correct  bank  statements,  see  EK  (Ivory  Coast)
    [2014] EWCA Civ 15.  The Judge's  finding  that  the  Appellant  had  a
    legitimate expectation to complete his studies  was  misconceived,  see
    Nasim [2014] UKUT 25 which had held that the fact that  one  must  take
    the Immigration Rules as one finds them cuts both  ways.   Further  the
    Judge had erred in his approach to considering Article  8  outside  the
    Rules reliance being placed on SS  Congo  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387.   The
    Appellant's case had already been sufficiently  dealt  with  under  the
    Rules and there was no arguable case to consider it outside the  Rules.
    Weight had been given by the Judge neither to the  public  interest  as
    expressed within the Rules nor  to  the  purpose  of  the  points-based
    system including the need for simplicity, predictability  and  relative
    speed of the process.

6.   The application for permission to  appeal  came  before  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Davidge on the papers  on  10th  August  2015.   In
    granting permission to appeal she wrote that there  was  merit  in  the
    Respondent's ground that the Tribunal's reasoning in allowing this Tier
    4 Appellant's asylum appeal on Article 8 grounds was arguably erroneous
    in light of the exacting requirements of the  points-based  system  and
    the relevant jurisprudence.  It was erroneous  to  find  merit  in  the
    Appellant's contention that he misunderstood the  requirements  of  the
    points-based system.

7.   Directions were sent to the parties by the  Upper  Tribunal  that  they
    were to prepare for the forthcoming hearing on the basis  that  if  the
    Upper Tribunal decided to set aside the determination of the First-tier
    Tribunal any further evidence  including  supplementary  oral  evidence
    that the Upper Tribunal may need to consider if it  decides  to  remake
    the decision could be so considered at that hearing.

The Error of Law Stage

8.   For  the  Respondent  it  was  submitted  that  the  dismissal  of  the
    Appellant's appeal under the Rules had not been challenged by way of  a
    cross appeal therefore this appeal was in relation to Article  8  only.
    For the Appellant Counsel did not seek to uphold the way that the Judge
    had dealt with Article 8. I found there was an error of law in  8  such
    that the decision at first instance fell to be set aside and the matter
    reheard.  Counsel wished to raise a  new  matter  which  had  not  been
    before the First-tier. This related to whether the Appellant  could  be
    said to have varied his original application  for  further  leave  such
    that he could circumvent the time limits for the filing of evidence.  I
    deal with that in some detail below at paragraph 11 et seq.

9.   I deal first with the Article 8 issue. The Judge  had  found  that  the
    Appellant did not meet the Immigration Rules and proceeded to  consider
    the appeal outwith the Rules. This decision was not perhaps as clear as
    it could have been given the potentially ambiguous finding at paragraph
    23 that it was unfair to the Appellant to have his appeal  refused  "in
    the light of clear evidence that he held the requisite  funds  for  the
    requisite period".  Nevertheless I proceed on the basis that the  Judge
    had decided that he was considering this appeal outside the Immigration
    Rules and for the  reasons  set  out  herein  his  consideration  under
    Article  8  disclosed  material  errors  of   law.    The   Appellant's
    immigration status was precarious as he only had leave as a student and
    was applying for further leave.  In those circumstances  little  weight
    could be placed on any private life he had established during his  time
    in this country.  There was no claim that he had a family life the only
    claim was that his private life was disproportionately interfered  with
    because he wished to continue with his studies but had  thus  far  been
    unable to do  so  because  of  the  Respondent's  decision.   In  those
    circumstances given the little weight to be attached to the Appellant's
    claim under Article 8 the legitimate interest in enforcing  immigration
    control outweighed the Appellant's application such that  the  decision
    fell to be set aside.

10.  On that basis the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision
    fell to be dismissed. Once it was accepted that the Appellant could not
    meet the Immigration Rules because the bank statements he had submitted
    did not comply with the 28 day period and only little weight  could  be
    given to his private life  it  would  be  inevitable  that  the  appeal
    overall would be dismissed.

11.  The Appellant's argument before me was not to dispute  that  aspect  of
    the case but rather to raise a new matter which was that the Judge  had
    materially erred by dismissing the Appellant's appeal under the  Rules.
    If that were the case and the Appellant could succeed under  the  Rules
    the issue of Article 8  became  irrelevant.   The  difficulty  for  the
    Appellant was that there had been no cross appeal against  the  Judge's
    dismissal  of  the  appeal  under  Immigration  Rules.  The  Respondent
    disputed whether the Appellant was entitled to raise  an  entirely  new
    matter at such a late stage.

12.  I heard argument on  this  point  and  also  on  the  issue  itself.  I
    indicated that  if  my  decision  was  that  there  was  merit  in  the
    Appellant's late purported cross appeal then  I  would  set  aside  the
    First-tier decision but would direct that the matter come  back  before
    me for further argument on the issue newly raised by the Appellant.  If
    I found there was insufficient merit in the Appellant's new argument to
    justify that course then my decision to  dismiss  the  appeal  outright
    would stand since the issue raised in the  error  of  law  stage  under
    Article 8 would equally  apply  in  a  substantive  re-hearing  of  the
    Article 8 appeal (and as I  have  indicated  also  given  the  lack  of
    substantive representations on Article 8 by the Appellant).

13.  The Respondent's objections to  the  Appellant's  new  argument  relied
    upon the Upper Tribunal authority of EG and NG [2014] UKUT 143 that the
    Tribunal is not required to determine an  appeal  when  an  Appellant's
    case  has  been  withdrawn  and  the  Respondent  has  not  been  given
    permission to appeal.  The party  that  seeks  to  persuade  the  Upper
    Tribunal to replace the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  with  a
    decision that would make a material difference to one  of  the  parties
    needs permission to appeal.  The Upper  Tribunal  cannot  entertain  an
    application purporting to be made  under  Rule  24  for  permission  to
    appeal until the First-tier Tribunal has  been  asked  in  writing  for
    permission to appeal and has either refused or declined  to  admit  the
    application.

14.  My concern in this case  was  the  somewhat  ambiguous  nature  of  the
    Judge's comment at paragraph 23 which I have cited  above.   The  Judge
    appeared to have found that the Appellant did have funds for a  28  day
    period but had then gone on to decide that nevertheless the appeal fell
    to be refused under the Rules.  In those  exceptional  circumstances  I
    consider that it was right that the Appellant should at least  air  the
    fresh point he wished to make.

The Hearing before Me

15.  Counsel indicated that he did not abandon the Article 8 point  but  did
    not pursue it substantively any further.  He conceded that there  ought
    to have been a cross appeal against the  Judge's  dismissal  under  the
    Immigration Rules. The first instance decision should be remade but not
    limited to the Article 8 point.  The starting and  end  points  of  the
    Appellant's argument centred on paragraph 19 of the determination.  The
    Appellant relied on the case of Qureshi [2011] UKUT 00412  in  which  a
    Tier 4 Student had made an application on 6th August 2010 for extension
    of her leave to remain while relying on a CAS issued by a  college  and
    submitting a bank statement.  Whilst the  application  was  awaiting  a
    decision the applicant varied her original application by sending a new
    CAS issued by a different college and sending  a  bank  statement  that
    covered a different period.   The  later  bank  statement  was  not  in
    accordance with the then version of the Immigration Rules but the Upper
    Tribunal accepted the later  bank  statement  as  a  variation  of  the
    application and allowed the appeal.

16.  The ratio of Qureshi it was argued should apply  to  this  appeal.   In
    this case the date of decision was 19th August 2014 and  at  that  time
    the Appellant's bank  statements  were  available  to  the  Respondent.
    Section 85A did not preclude the Tribunal from taking into account post-
    application and pre-decision evidence (Ali [2013] EWCA Civ  1198).   By
    providing his statements  for  25th,  26th  and  27th  March  2014  the
    Appellant had varied his application just as the Appellant  in  Qureshi
    had done.  If the variation argument was accepted then  the  inevitable
    consequence was that at the date  of  decision  19th  August  2014  the
    Appellant did meet the requirements of Appendix C and was  entitled  to
    be awarded 10 points for maintenance.

17.  The second  point  was  that  any  statute  which  limits  the  court's
    jurisdiction must be interpreted narrowly.  Section 85A of the 2002 Act
    should be interpreted to mean that  post-application  but  pre-decision
    evidence could be taken into account.  The Judge at first instance  was
    not  restricted  by  the  operation  of  Section  85A  and  could  have
    considered the case within the Rules.  The Judge had sympathy  for  the
    Appellant and for the reasons he  gave  allowed  the  appeal.   Counsel
    acknowledged that it was very hard to  succeed  in  a  case  under  the
    private life aspect of Article 8 but this  Appellant  fell  within  the
    Immigration Rules.   It  was  in  the  interest  of  justice  that  the
    Appellant should be permitted to rely on these submissions by way of  a
    response under Rule 24 and time should be extended.

Findings

18.  The Appellant raised a new argument against the  Judge's  decision  but
    arising out of it that the Judge should have accepted  the  Appellant's
    bank statement which ran up to 27th March because the Judge should have
    treated the bank statement as a  variation  of  the  application.   The
    Appellant's argument depends on  the  concept  that  an  Appellant  can
    submit further evidence after an application  has  been  submitted  but
    before  a  decision  has  been  reached.   That  led  to   considerable
    litigation including cases such as AQ (Pakistan) which defined the date
    of application as being until the day of the decision of the Respondent
    to refuse.  The significance of the Court of Appeal  decision  in  Raju
    [2013] EWCA  Civ  754  is  to  clarify  the  position  that  where  the
    Immigration Rules specify  that  evidence  should  be  submitted  on  a
    certain date that is the date of application. On a true construction of
    the Rules evidence submitted after that date  is  not  admissible.   In
    this case it appears not to be in dispute that  the  Immigration  Rules
    set out the date on which the Appellant's evidence as to the amount  of
    money he had in his bank statement should be  submitted.   However  the
    Appellant did not submit evidence of monies held in his bank  statement
    for the 28 days prior to the submission of his application on 24th.  AQ
    (Pakistan) is therefore of limited assistance to  the  Appellant  since
    his situation is governed by the more  authoritative  Court  of  Appeal
    decision in Raju.  The Respondent was entitled to reject evidence which
    postdated the application as the Appellant's  bank  statement  in  this
    case did.

19.  The Appellant's argument is that he applied to the Respondent  to  vary
    his application by submitting bank statement which ran three days  post
    the application date.  I can see no merit in that argument.  For  there
    to be a variation there has to be an existing  application.   The  only
    application was the one made on  24th  March.   By  submitting  a  bank
    statement which covered an  incorrect  period  the  Appellant  was  not
    seeking subsequently to amend his original application  he  was  simply
    submitting an incorrect application in the first place.

20.  I do not consider that the Appellant's argument as  to  the  impact  of
    Section 85A of the 2002 Act  assists  him.   The  Appellant  relies  on
    subsection (4) of Section 85A that the Tribunal may  consider  evidence
    adduced by an Appellant if it was submitted in support of  and  at  the
    time of making  the  application  to  which  the  immigration  decision
    related.  The important point is not whether there  is  discretion  for
    the Tribunal to consider such evidence but whether the evidence in this
    particular case falls within those categories.  Section 85A(4)(c) shows
    that such further evidence may be adduced to prove that a  document  is
    genuine or valid.  No such issue arose in this case since the  validity
    of the bank statement was accepted.

21.  Having considered the further argument put forward by the Appellant  in
    this case I do not consider that there is sufficient  merit  in  it  to
    warrant the Appellant being granted permission out of time  to  file  a
    Rule 24 reply and for the matter to be put over to another date  for  a
    substantive rehearing.  The position remains that the  appeal  in  this
    case was properly dismissed by the Judge at first  instance  under  the
    Immigration Rules since the Appellant had submitted  a  bank  statement
    which did not comply with the Rules at the date of  application.   Even
    if it was open to the Appellant to have varied  his  application  at  a
    later date he did not do that he submitted an application which did not
    meet the Rules.  Whilst in certain circumstances postdecision  evidence
    can be admitted under the provisions of Section 85A  of  the  2002  Act
    (now repealed but with saving  provisions)  those  exceptions  did  not
    apply in this case and there was no error of law for the Judge to  fail
    to refer to them.

22.  Although the  Judge  could  have  expressed  himself  more  clearly  in
    paragraph 23 he was correct to find that the Appellant could  not  meet
    the Immigration Rules.  Where the Judge  erred  was  in  proceeding  to
    allow the appeal  under  Article  8  outside  the  Rules.   As  I  have
    indicated no argument of any great force was submitted to me in support
    of the Judge's conclusions under Article 8.  That must be  correct  for
    the reasons I gave when finding a material error of law in the  Judge's
    treatment  of  Article  8.   Little  weight  could  be  placed  on  the
    Appellant's private life given his precarious immigration status and he
    did not seek to argue that he had an established family  life  in  this
    country.  There were no compelling reasons such that this appeal should
    have been allowed outside the Immigration Rules.  I therefore set aside
    the decision at First-tier remaking it by  dismissing  the  Appellant's
    appeal against the Respondent's decision to refuse leave to remain  and
    to remove the Appellant.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law and I have set it aside.  I have remade the decision by  dismissing  the
Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decisions  to  refuse  to  vary
leave and to remove the Appellant.

Appellant's appeal dismissed.

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 11th day of December 2015

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft







TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The Judge declined to make a fee award in this case for the reasons he  gave
which I uphold.  As the appeal has been dismissed there can be no fee  award
in this case.


Signed this 11th day of December 2015


.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft



