
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34963/2013




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On  17th October 2014                           |On 23rd October 2014       |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                       First-tier Tribunal JUDGE KELLY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                           (anonymity not directed)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              MISS sABINA bEGUM
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal by the Secretary  of  State  against  the  decision  of
   First-tier Tribunal Judge Tiffin who, in a determination  promulgated  on
   the 14th August 2014, allowed the respondent's appeal against refusal  of
   her application for further leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student
   Migrant. In granting permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,  Judge
   Shimmin considered that the First-tier Tribunal had arguably erred in law
   by -

         a) failing to take account of the requirement  in  the  Immigration
            Rules  that  the  appellant  was  required  to  pass  all   four
            components of the English language test, and

         b) relying on the decision in Khatel and others  (s85A;  effect  of
            continuing application) [2013] UKUT 44 IAC.

2. There was no appearance by or on behalf of the respondent at the  hearing
   of this appeal. I was nevertheless satisfied that  she  had  been  served
   with reasonable notice of the time, date, and place of the  hearing,  and
   that it was therefore just to determine this appeal in her absence. After
   hearing helpful submissions from Mr Bramble, I reserved my decision.

3. The fundamental problem, faced by both the decision-maker and the  First-
   tier Tribunal, was that whilst the Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies
   (CAS) certificate indicated that  the  respondent  had  passed  all  four
   components in her English language test, the certificate  issued  by  the
   test-provider  indicated  that  she  had  in  fact  narrowly  failed  the
   'writing' component. The test-provider  did  however  indicate  that  the
   respondent's results were sufficient for her to achieve an overall 'pass'
   at the required B2 level  of  the  Common  European  Framework  Reference
   (CEFR). Moreover, there was evidence before the Tribunal that,  following
   the submission of her application but before the Secretary of  State  had
   made a decision, the respondent had re-sat and passed three of  the  four
   components. This included the 'writing' component of the test, which  she
   had previously narrowly failed.

4. At paragraph 19 of her determination, the judge reconciled these  various
   conflicts in the following way -

    Clearly the Appellant's language course provider was satisfied that the
    Appellant had achieved the required level  B2  of  CEFR  based  on  the
    requirements of the CEFR itself. I need to  consider  all  of  evidence
    provided by the Appellant to assess the disparate evidence. It  is  for
    me to decide whether or not the evidence is sufficient to show that  it
    is more likely than not that the Appellant has attained CEFR Level  B2.
    The Appellant has produced a further City And Guilds certificate  dated
    07 August 2013 showing that she has passed level B"  (sic)  in  reading
    writing and listening which combined  with  the  previous  certificates
    satisfied me that on a balance of probabilities the Appellant  has  the
    required ability and has demonstrated the required level of ability  in
    English language in accordance with the Immigration Rules.

5. The above approach was fundamentally flawed for three related reasons.

6. Firstly, in an appeal from refusal  of  an  application  made  under  the
   points-based system, the Tribunal is not generally concerned with  making
   findings of fact, whether to the standard of a balance  of  probabilities
   or otherwise. Exceptions to this general rule include where  there  is  a
   genuine  dispute  about  whether  (or  when)  an  applicant  submitted  a
   particular document to the respondent, or  where  the  Immigration  Rules
   themselves call for the making of a factual finding and/or an exercise of
   judgement. Otherwise, the issue in the appeal will be confined to whether
   the appellant submitted the specified  documents  that  are  required  by
   paragraph 245 and the relevant appendices to the Immigration Rules so  as
   to attract the required number of points. It was thus an error of law for
   the Tribunal to assess the respondent's ability in the  English  language
   by reference to all the evidence. That was not the issue in  the  appeal.
   The sole  issue  was  whether  the  respondent  had  submitted  specified
   documents that were in the required form.

7. Secondly, the Immigration Rules make it plain that in  order  to  attract
   the requisite points, the applicant must submit a single certificate that
   clearly shows (amongst other things) that he has achieved a 'pass' in all
   four components of  the  English  language  test  [see  paragraph  10  of
   Appendix B]. It was not therefore open to the Tribunal to 'add  together'
   the results of tests that the respondent  had sat on  separate  occasions
   in order to conclude that she had met the requirement for a 'pass' in all
   four components.

8. Thirdly, the Immigration Rules also make it plain that  in  order  to  be
   awarded the requisite 'points', the  English  language  certificate  must
   show that s/he had passed all four components by the date upon which  the
   application was made [see the fourth section of Table 10 of Appendix  A].
   An application is "made" on either the  day  when  it  is  posted  or  is
   otherwise  submitted  to  the  respondent  [see  paragraph  34G  of   the
   Immigration Rules, and Khatel v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 754  (reversing  the
   decision of the Upper Tribunal that was cited by Judge Tiffin)].  It  was
   thus not  open  to  the  Tribunal  to  consider  the  evidence  that  the
   respondent had re-sat  three  of  the  four  components  of  her  English
   language test after she had submitted her application to the respondent.

9. It  follows  from  the  above  that  I  must  set  aside  the  First-tier
   Tribunal's decision and remake  that  decision  in  accordance  with  the
   Immigration  Rules.  This  can  result  only  in  the  dismissal  of  the
   respondent's appeal from the Secretary of State's decision to refuse  her
   application.

Decision

10. The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed.

11. The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  allow  the  respondent's
   appeal from the decision to refuse her application for further  leave  to
   remain in the United Kingdom is  set  aside,  and  is  substituted  by  a
   decision to dismiss that appeal.

Anonymity not directed.

Signed                                  Date


Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal           23rd October 2014

