
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/34016/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 3 February 2017              |On 6 February 2017              |
|Prepared on 3 February 2017     |                                |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    H. L.
                            (ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Brakaj, Solicitor, Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. The Appellant is a citizen of China. She applied for the  issue  to
        her of a residence card as confirmation of  a  permanent  right  of
        residence, on the basis  she  was  the  family  member  of  an  EEA
        national, which was refused on 27 October 2015. The application was
        by  reference  to  the   Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
        Regulations 2006 ["EEA Regulations"] and disclosed  a  relationship
        with a Portugese national, to whom she had  borne  two  school  age
        children.
     2. The application was refused on the basis  the  Respondent  was  not
        satisfied that the Appellant's partner had exercised treaty  rights
        for a continuous period of five years or more  in  accordance  with
        the EEA Regulations. Second it was noted that she was  not  married
        to the EEA national in  question,  so  could  only  rely  upon  the
        existence of a durable relationship,  as  an  EFM.  Since  she  had
        accepted in her application that their relationship had broken down
        it was considered that she  could  not  meet  the  requirements  of
        Regulation. Third, it was noted that  although  her  children  were
        said to be in education, there was no evidence  provided  with  the
        application  to  establish  this.  Thus   the   derivative   rights
        potentially available to her under Regulation 15A(4) were  said  to
        be unavailable to her.
     3. The decision did therefore consider whether the appellant qualified
        for a derivative right to reside in the UK, and concluded not  that
        she was unable to make such a claim, but that it was not  evidenced
        adequately. The Respondent did not dispute that the  Appellant  was
        the mother of two children whose father was an  EEA  national,  or,
        that they were of compulsory school age, or,  that  she  was  their
        primary carer.
     4. The Appellant appealed to the  First  Tier  Tribunal  against  that
        refusal, and her appeal was heard, and  then  dismissed,  by  First
        Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Fisher  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  15
        September 2016.
     5. The Appellant sought permission to  appeal  that  decision  to  the
        Upper Tribunal in grounds that also double as the skeleton argument
        relied upon in support of the appeal.  Permission  was  granted  by
        First Tier Tribunal Judge Hodgkinson on 15  December  2016  on  the
        basis it was arguably wrong  of  the  Judge  to  refuse  to  accept
        jurisdiction to deal with the appellant's arguments concerning  the
        refusal to recognise that she was entitled to a derivative right of
        residence. Permission was refused in relation to a second complaint
        concerning the dismissal of the appeal concerning her claim  to  be
        entitled to a permanent right of residence.
     6. The Respondent served a Rule  24  response  dated  4  January  2017
        stating simply that it was not clear how the Appellant  could  have
        succeeded in a claim to a derivative  right  of  residence  on  the
        facts.
     7. Thus the matter comes before me.

   Error of Law?

     8. It was  common  ground  before  me  that  there  were  no  specific
        requirements for an application for the recognition of a derivative
        right of residence, and that the Appellant had  in  fact  done  all
        that could be expected of her when making an application.  She  had
        set out her circumstances in full. The  Respondent  had  considered
        what she had said, and had been alert to the possibility  that  she
        might satisfy the requirements for a derivative right of  residence
        as the mother of her children, even if she did not in fact meet the
        requirements for a permanent  right  of  residence  as  the  family
        member of the father of her children. Mr Diwnycz therefore accepted
        from the outset that the Judge had erred in declining  to  consider
        the claim to a derivative right of residence under Regulation 15A.
     9. It was common ground  before  me  that  the  Respondent  had  never
        disputed that the Appellant's  children  were  the  children  of  a
        Portugese national, or, that she was their primary carer.  Although
        the decision maker had said that  insufficient  evidence  had  been
        provided to show that either of those children was in education  at
        any material date, it was accepted before me that such evidence did
        exist within the material supplied in support of  the  application.
        Moreover such material clearly existed in the evidence supplied  in
        support of the appeal. Mr Diwnycz did  not  seek  to  suggest  that
        there was any basis upon which this could have been  disputed,  and
        accepted that it was not disputed at the hearing of the appeal.
    10. The evidence before  the  decision  maker  and  the  Tribunal  also
        disclosed that the children's father had from  time  to  time  been
        working in the UK, and thus  met  for  at  least  those  times  the
        definition of a "worker". He may not have been able to produce  the
        necessary evidence to establish five years continuous residence  as
        a "qualified person", but he had certainly produced evidence in the
        form of P60s to show that in 2013, 2014 and 2015 he had  full  year
        employment. There was also evidence to show that he had remained in
        employment to  the  date  of  the  hearing.  Thus,  as  Mr  Diwnycz
        accepted, the evidence showed that he was  at  least  during  these
        years in employment in the UK whilst the children were in education
        in the UK.
    11. If  the  father  of  the  children  was  no  longer  in  a  durable
        relationship with the Appellant, which was the  position  taken  in
        refusing the application for a permanent residence card, then  that
        begged the question  of  what  relationship  he  enjoyed  with  his
        children thereafter, and whether they would be able to continue  to
        be educated in the UK in the event the Appellant were  required  to
        leave. In practical terms the Appellant's position  was  that  they
        would be bound to be forced to leave the UK to  accompany  her,  if
        she were required to leave.
    12. Mr  Diwnycz  conceded  before  me  upon  due  reflection  that  the
        application and appeal had been wrongly  refused  by  reference  to
        Regulation 15A. In the light of that, it was confirmed by Ms Brakaj
        that the Appellant would  not  seek  to  advance  any  argument  to
        suggest that the application and appeal had been wrongly refused in
        relation to the claim to a  permanent  residence  card.  She  would
        simply advise the Appellant to make a fresh  application  once  she
        was able to demonstrate the necessary evidence to establish such  a
        claim.
    13. There was never a removal decision in relation  to  the  Appellant,
        and the decision under appeal did not contain a s120 notice to  the
        Appellant, and it is not suggested by either  party  that  one  was
        served otherwise. In the light of  the  guidance  to  be  found  in
        Amirteymour [2015] UKUT 466, and, TY (Sri Lanka)  [2015]  EWCA  Civ
        1233, I am satisfied that  the  Tribunal  was  obliged  to  confine
        itself to the  claim  under  the  EEA  Regulations,  and  that  the
        Appellant was not entitled to argue that the decision under  appeal
        was a breach of her Article 8 rights.

   Disposal

    14. The parties were accordingly ultimately agreed that  I  should  set
        aside the Judge's decision to  dismiss  the  appeal,  but,  that  I
        should only go on to remake that decision  in  her  favour  to  the
        limited extent that the Appellant was entitled to the  issue  of  a
        derivative residence card by reference to regulation 18A.





   DECISION


        The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was  promulgated
        on 15 September 2016 did involve the making of an error of law that
        requires that decision to be set aside and remade.


        I remake the decision so as to allow  the  appeal  to  the  limited
        extent that the remake that decision in her favour to  the  limited
        extent that the Appellant was entitled to the issue of a derivative
        residence card by reference to regulation 18A.


Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008

        Unless and until the Tribunal directs otherwise  the  Appellant  is
        granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
        indirectly  identify  her.  This  direction  applies  both  to  the
        Appellant and to  the  Respondent.  Failure  to  comply  with  this
        direction could lead to proceedings being brought for  contempt  of
        court.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes
Dated 3 February 2017
