
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
IA/34560/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 20th September 2017                    |On 21st September 2017            |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                jagdish kaur
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P. Nath, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Chohan, Counsel instructed by Expert Law
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission, against the decision of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Amin)  who,   in   a   determination
    promulgated on the 4th January 2017  allowed  her  appeal  against  the
    decision of the Respondent to refuse to vary leave to remain.

 2. Whilst the Secretary of  State  is  the  Appellant,  for  the  sake  of
    convenience I intend to refer to the parties as they  were  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 3.  No anonymity direction was made by  the  First  Tier-Tribunal  and  no
    application has been made on behalf of the Appellant or any grounds put
    forward to support such an application.

 4. The Appellant, a citizen of India, entered  the  United  Kingdom  on  5
    November 2010 as a Tier 4  student  and  was  leave  granted  until  17
    February 2012. On 22 August 2012  she  was  granted  further  leave  to
    remain valid until 20 June 2013. She was granted a  further  period  of
    leave from 5 July 2013 until 17 February 2015.

 5.  On 13 February 2015 she submitted an application for a  further  grant
    of leave to remain outside of the rules. As made plain in the  decision
    letter of 2  September  2015  she  submitted  an  FLR  (O)  application
    requesting leave to remain outside the rules. The  Secretary  of  State
    considered  whether  the  particular  circumstances  set  out  in   the
    application constituted compassionate factors  which  might  warrant  a
    grant of leave to remain outside the requirements  of  the  immigration
    rules. It appears that in support of her  claim  she  stated  that  she
    required an extension of 30 days leave in order to  obtain  a  CAS  and
    arranged to continue her studies. The grounds of the application  would
    considered but it was stated in the decision letter that it was open to
    her to return to India and pursue her studies or employment  there.  In
    the alternative, if she wished to undertake studies, she could make  an
    application for entry clearance under Tier 4. It was noted that she had
    already had six months in which to organise studies and no further Tier
    4 application had been raised. Thus the application was  refused  under
    paragraph 322 (one) of the Immigration Rules.


 6. The Respondent also refused the application under paragraph 322(5) of
    the Immigration Rules on the basis that the Appellant had, in an
    earlier application for leave to remain as a student on the 16th
    February 2012, submitted an English language test certificate from ETS
    which was false. The Respondent referred to the Appellant's test scores
    having been cancelled by ETS.  As a result the Respondent refused the
    application under Paragraph 322(5) on the basis that her conduct made
    it undesirable to allow her to remain in the UK.




 7. The Appellant appealed that decision. The application was made out of
    time. In a letter dated 30 November 2015 her legal representatives set
    out her position and her immigration history and submitted that she had
    an in country right of appeal. The letter also requested an extension
    of time for the reasons set out in that letter. On 2 March 2016 First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Doyle issued a decision in which he extended time
    to appeal. The appeal was lodged on 30 November 2015; the grounds
    argued that the circumstances of the Appellant was such that discretion
    should be exercised in the Appellant's favour. It was asserted that she
    would give evidence at the hearing. However, on or before 6 March 2016,
    the Appellant indicated that she wished the appeal to be heard on the
    papers without hearing. However in a later communication made to the
    Tribunal her solicitors requested an oral hearing (see email sent on 13
    April 2016).


 8. Directions had been sent by the Tribunal to the parties on 16 March
    2016 making reference to documents or submissions to be provided by 13
    April 2016. No documents were provided on behalf of the Appellant in
    response to those directions nor were there any further documents
    provided by the Respondent.


 9. A notice of hearing was subsequently sent on 30 April 2016 with a
    hearing date of 16 December 2016.


10. On the 16th December 2016 her appeal was heard by the First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Amin). The judge recorded at paragraph 8 that the
    Appellant had not attended and there was no representative in
    attendance either. In these circumstances the judge applied rule 25 of
    the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier) Immigration and Asylum Chamber
    Rules 2014 and decided to proceed in the appeal in the absence of the
    Appellant.


11. The judge recorded that the presenting officer applied to have a bundle
    of documents  served on the Tribunal at the commencement of the
    hearing. Those documents related to the evidence in support of the
    refusal under paragraph 322 (5) and the allegation relating to the
    submission of the TOEIC certificate. The judge noted that the documents
    had not been provided to the Appellant and thus it would result in an
    unfair trial. The judge also stated that the directions the service of
    documents had been sent to both sides some time ago and the documents
    should have been served in compliance with those directions. Thus the
    judge refused to admit those documents.


12.  In a determination promulgated on the 31st January 2017 the judge
    allowed her appeal. The judge set out the immigration history at
    paragraph 12 under paragraph 13 made reference to the issue of
    deception and the burden of proof. At paragraph 14 the judge found that
    "there is no evidence from the Respondent proved that the Appellants
    TOEIC certificate was fraudulently obtained "and at paragraph 15 stated
    that "the difficulty with the refusal letter is that the strong
    assertions of fraudulent certificate are not supported by any
    admissible evidence." The judge referred to the burden being on the
    Respondent and that "the Respondent has failed to do this due to a
    total lack of evidence. For these reasons the appeal succeeds as a
    refusal was not in accordance with the law". Thus the judge set out in
    the notice of decision that the appeal succeeded on the grounds of the
    Respondent's decision was not in accordance with the law therefore a
    valid decision was outstanding.



13. The Respondent sought permission to appeal that decision on 11 January
    2017 and permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Page on 10 July
    2017 for the following reasons:
    "The Respondents grounds of appeal are arguable. The Respondent
    complained that the judge acted unfairly by refusing to admit the
    bundle of documents which the Home Office presenting Officer attempted
    to serve at the commencement of the hearing. This evidence, it is
    argued, was the evidence that would approve the Respondent's allegation
    that the TOEIC test had been obtained fraudulently. The Respondent
    argues that the appeal could not have been justly determined without
    this crucial evidence. The judge is arguably erred by not considering
    whether to adjourn the hearing for the Appellant to be served with this
    evidence and respond to it. At paragraph 7 - nine the judges said that
    the Appellant did not attend the hearing and there was no
    representative in attendance and the judge decided to proceed with the
    appeal in the absence of the Appellant. Paragraph 9 the judge records
    that he said to the Respondent's representatives that proceed without
    the Appellant having had sight of the Respondent's bundle of documents
    prior to the hearing would result in an unfair trial. This reason, the
    judge ruled against admitting the Respondent's bundle of documents and
    they were handed back to the Respondent's representative. Paragraph 14
    the judge said that there was no evidence from the Respondent to prove
    that the Appellants TOEIC certificate was fraudulently obtained. The
    Respondent's argument is that there was such evidence and that the
    judge erred in law by refusing to admit it."


14. At the hearing before their Upper Tribunal MrNath appeared on behalf of
    the Secretary of State and Mr Chohan appeared on behalf of the
    Appellant. There had been no rule 24 response to the Respondents
    grounds and no further evidence provided. The Appellant's solicitors
    had written to the Presenting Officer's Unit for a copy of the
    documents after permission had been granted.

15. Both advocates had the opportunity to discuss the issues and inform the
    Tribunal that it was conceded that the decision of Judge Amin involved
    the making of an error of law and that the outcome should be that the
    decision should be set aside and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal
    for a hearing.

16. Given that concession, it is necessary to set out why the decision of
    the judge did involve the making of an error on a point of law which
    results in the decision being set aside.

17. The first error relates to the consideration of the evidence that the
    Respondent sought to provide to the Tribunal. Whilst the judge made
    reference at paragraph 9 that service of the documents without the
    Appellant having had sight of them would result in an unfair trial,
    there was no consideration of the nature of that documentation and
    whether there would have been any unfairness if the appeal had been
    adjourned so that service could take place and for the Appellant to
    respond. There was no reference in the determination to any analysis of
    the Tribunal's powers under the Procedure Rules or any reference to the
    overriding objective and to justly determining the appeal.


18. The 2014 Procedure Rules Rule 4(3) (h) empowers the Tribunal to adjourn
    a hearing. Rule 2 sets out the overriding objectives under the Rules
    which the Tribunal "must seek to give effect to" when exercising any
    power under the Rules. It follows that they are the issues to be
    considered on an adjournment application as well. The overriding
    objective is deal with cases fairly and justly. This is defined as
    including "(a) dealing with the case in ways which are proportionate to
    the importance of the case, the complexity of the issues, the
    anticipated costs and the resources of the parties and of the Tribunal;
    (b) avoiding unnecessary formality and seeking flexibility in the
    proceedings; (c) ensuring, so far as is practicable, that the parties
    are able to participate fully in the proceedings; (d) using any special
    expertise of the Tribunal effectively; (e) avoiding delay so far as
    compatible with proper consideration of the issues".


19. It is plain from the decision that the Appellant had not provided any
    documentation before the Tribunal. Furthermore she had not appeared
    before the court despite asking for an oral hearing and there had been
    no further correspondence from those representing her as to either her
    non-attendance or their non-attendance. It is also the position that
    the documents that were sought to be admitted were ones which were
    dealing with an important issue of substance. Had the judge considered
    the overriding objective when considering whether to admit the
    documentation, the judge could have ordered that the documentation be
    served in a short space of time with the appeal returning to the
    Tribunal with little delay. That would have provided for a fair hearing
    for both parties. This is particularly so when the judge went on to
    find that there was no admissible evidence to support the decision
    letter.

20. The judge made reference to the assertion of the fraudulent certificate
    in the decision letter that went on to state "the burden is initially
    on the Respondent to show that fraud has been at play in the
    application. Respondent has failed to do this due to a total lack of
    evidence in this case." However there was evidence available as the
    history demonstrates.


21. The second error of law is that the judge found that the Appellant's
    appeal succeeded because the "refusal was not in accordance with the
    law." (See paragraph 15 and decision).  However the decision letter set
    out the nature of the application made to the Secretary of State by the
    Appellant. This was an application made outside of the immigration
    rules for a period of leave on compassionate grounds which was refused
    under paragraph 322(1) for the reasons set out within the refusal
    letter. As it stated, the Appellant's application was for an extension
    of 30 days leave in order to obtain a CAS and to arrange to continue
    studies however the Secretary of State considered that the Appellant
    could return to India and pursue her studies or employment or
    alternatively, if she wished to undertake studies, she could make an
    application for entry clearance under Tier 4. It was noted that she had
    already had six months in which to organise a studies and no further
    Tier 4 application had been raised. Thus the application was refused
    under paragraph 322 (1) because the Secretary of State was not
    satisfied that variation of leave to enter or remain was being sought
    for a purpose not covered by the rules.


22. The judge made no reference to that application and the refusal under
    paragraph 322 (1) and made no findings in relation to the appeal
    against that decision and only dealt with paragraph 322 (5). In those
    circumstances it was not open to the judge to allow the appeal on the
    basis that the decision was "not in accordance with the law" and that
    "a valid decision was outstanding" because there was a decision which
    was valid and was the subject of the appeal.

23. Consequently both advocates agree that the decision cannot stand and
    must be set aside. Both advocates further agreed that the correct
    course to adopt is for the appeal to be remitted to the First-tier
    Tribunal for a further hearing. I am satisfied that that is the correct
    approach therefore I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a
    further hearing.

    Decision:

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the  making  of  an
    error on a point of law; the  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  is
    allowed. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

Signed
                                Date: 20/9/2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds






