





Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/34287/2015

                             THE IMMIGRATION ACT

|Heard at Field House              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 12th July 2017                 |On 31st July 2017                       |
|                                  |                                        |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE

                                   Between

                             Mr Kholilur Rahman

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department

                        (no AnoNYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Ahmed Lincoln's Chambers Solicitors

For the Respondent :   Mr Tarlow Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Mr Kholilur Rahman date of birth 28th February 1974 is a
    citizen of Bangladesh.  Having considered all the circumstances,  I  do
    not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Housego promulgated on 2nd March 2016 whereby the  judge
    dismissed the appellant's appeal against the decision of the  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department. The Secretary of  State  had  refused
    the appellant indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom  on  the
    basis of 20 years continuous residence in the UK  and  thereby  refused
    the appellant's application under Article 8 of  the  ECHR,  family  and
    private life.

 3. By a decision of 12th May 2016  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Peart granted permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.   Thus  the
    case appeared before me to decide whether there was an error of law  in
    the original decision.

    Basic outline of the facts

 4. The appellant claims that he entered the UK aged  5  on  the  25th  May
    1979.

 5. On the 24th July 2012 the appellant made application for naturalisation
    as a British Citizen. That application was refused on the 18th February
    2013. The reasons given  for  refusing  the  application  were  because
    passports submitted with the application  were  alleged  to  have  been
    mutilated in respect of one passport and a second passport was  alleged
    to contain false stamps. The appellant requested that the  decision  be
    reconsidered.  The  refusal  was  reconsidered  but  the  decision  was
    maintained by letter dated 25th September 2013.  There  was  no  appeal
    against that decision.

 6. On the 11th February 2014 the appellant was served with an  IS.151A,  a
    notice to a person liable to removal.

 7. On the 13th May 2014 the appellant made an  application  for  leave  to
    remain on the basis of 20 years residence under paragraph 276ADE (iii).
    That application was rejected on the 4th November 2015.  The  appellant
    lodged an appeal against that decision on the 23rd November 2015.

 8. After hearing all of the evidence the judge dismissed the appeal.   The
    judge found that the appellant's account of having been in  the  United
    Kingdom since 1979 was not truthful. The judge found that the appellant
    at best had been in the United Kingdom since 2011 and as such that  the
    appellant could not succeed in the  application.  In  coming  to  those
    conclusions the judge made a number of adverse credibility findings.

 9. The appellant seeks now to appeal against that decision challenging not
    only to the conclusion of facts but to the approach  of  the  judge  in
    respect of the law.

10. The first matter raised in the grounds of appeal is the matter  of  the
    appellant's previous application for nationality  and  whether  or  not
    there were the passport produced was "false".

11. The appellant had applied on 24 July 2012 for naturalisation. In making
    the application the appellant submitted an  old  Bangladeshi  passport,
    which had been mutilated, and a new passport which he had obtained from
    the Bangladeshi  High  Commission  in  the  United  Kingdom.  That  new
    passport allegedly had stamps, indicating that the holder had  been  in
    and out of the United Kingdom.

12. As identified by the judge in paragraph 2 the  issue  was  whether  the
    appellant having signed to say that he had  not  used  deception  in  a
    previous application had used  passports,  on  which  there  was  false
    information or stamps that had been materially altered.

13. With regard to that issue  concentration  was  on  the  fact  that  the
    appellant had allegedly produced an old passport  which  was  mutilated
    and a new passport upon which there were altered or counterfeit  stamps
    but the respondent had failed to produce the passports. The  respondent
    had not explained how the stamps in the new passport  were  altered  or
    how it could be ascertained that they were not  genuine  or  that  they
    were altered.

14. It had been accepted that the appellant had submitted  a  new  passport
    and that there were stamps in the  passport.  Mr  Hussain  the  witness
    called on behalf of the appellant had admitted that  he  had  seen  the
    passport according to the notes of evidence made by the judge.

    Q- Mr Hussain was asked  -Is  it  accepted  that  the  stamps  are  not
    genuine?

    A-Mr Hussain - Not a conversation we have had.

    Q -Do you know what the stamps are ?

    A-Like airport.

    Q- So if he (the appellant) has not left they are not genuine?

    A- Flipped through it and he not capable of doing it and  lost  it  and
    maybe someone done something.

    Q- Some stranger must have done it.

    A-Yes other workers.

15. As recorded by the judge Mr Hussain was not taking issue with the  fact
    that the stamps were in the passport indicating that the appellant  had
    travelled out of the country and were therefore false, if the appellant
    present account was to be believed, but asserting  that  the  appellant
    was not capable of making the alteration. The only conclusion from  the
    answers by Mr Hussain are that someone  has  gone  to  the  trouble  of
    stealing a passport; getting someone to put  stamps  in  the  passport;
    only to return the passport to the appellant so that he can submit  the
    passport with his nationality application. It is  not  surprising  that
    the judge found the explanation incredible. The judge was  entitled  to
    conclude that the suggestion that someone else had got  stamps  in  the
    passport and then returned the passport to the  appellant  without  the
    appellant's knowledge was not credible.

16. The appellant's case was that he had never left the UK since his  entry
    in 1979. Either the stamps on the passport were false in that they were
    not genuine stamps or the passport was false when produced  because  it
    was indicating that the appellant had used the passport to  travel  out
    of the UK. In either sense the appellant  had  used  a  passport  which
    purported to support a factual state of affairs that could not be  true
    on the appellant's evidence.

17. The passport was the appellant's passport. The appellant had not  given
    evidence. Mr Hussain had. He said that as far as he was  concerned  the
    appellant was not capable of altering the passports and  therefore  not
    capable of a deception of the type referred to.  Many people may not be
    capable of falsifying stamps in passport but be able to get  others  to
    do it for them at a  price.  In  that  regard  the  judge  recorded  at
    paragraph 37 the evidence of Mr Hussain  "It  was  impossible  for  the
    appellant to engage in deception as he did not have the ability".

18. Whilst Mr Hussain made a number of claims about the  abilities  of  the
    appellant, the gentleman is not medically qualified. As  noted  by  the
    judge Mr Hussain on his evidence had seen the  passport.  It  had  been
    submitted and Mr Hussain had been given the  opportunity  of  examining
    the same. The judge has noted that the stamps  had  been  altered  [see
    paragraph 81- as contended for by the evidence from the Home Office] Mr
    Hussain's explanation was that they must have been altered by others.

19. However the judge on the basis of the evidence was not  satisfied  that
    the respondent had proved that the stamps were  false  but  the  matter
    does not end there. The appellant on his version of  events  could  not
    have used the passport but there were the stamps in the  passport.  The
    document in one form or another is false.  When  submitted  to  the  UK
    authorities as part of the naturalisation application, a  document  was
    being submitted which on its face was not factually correct. The  judge
    was entitled in assessing the credibility of the appellant to take that
    into account. That was the  conclusion  of  fact  that  the  judge  was
    entitled to make on the basis of the evidence presented.

20.  The  judge  within  the  decision  has   highlighted   a   number   of
    inconsistencies. The judge noted that  the  witnesses  were  suggesting
    that the appellant had such learning difficulties that he could not  be
    trusted to do anything at all. However drawing  together  the  evidence
    the judge had noted  significant  discrepancies  between  the  evidence
    given in support of the  naturalisation  application  and  the  present
    application.

21. In the present application it was being  asserted  that  the  appellant
    could not be relied upon to do anything  by  himself.  However  in  the
    naturalisation application the appellant was described as  having  work
    experience in catering and letters from alleged  employer  referred  to
    the appellant as being a 2nd chef.

22. Similarly there were other references to the  appellant  working  as  a
    builder as referred to in paragraph 75.9. The judge noted that  at  the
    time that submissions were being made with regard  to  the  application
    for naturalisation it was important to have as good a  work  experience
    as possible. The documents submitted at that stage gave  an  impression
    that the appellant had significant experience in working in at least  2
    different areas. The judge noted that for the purposes of  the  present
    appeal the impression seeking to be given was that  the  appellant  was
    barely able to cope with life and was dependent upon others.

23. Similarly the judge examined other documentation  that  establish  that
    the appellant had a tenancy in his name; had utility bills in his name;
    and other documents to indicate that he had accommodation;  was  paying
    bills; and was leading an independent life.

24. The judge noted that the appellant had been paying money into his  bank
    account in Mansfield. The judge has given valid reasons  for  rejecting
    the  explanation  given  that  another  person  had  been  helping  the
    appellant to pay the money in. The  judge  concluded  the  evidence  in
    respect of that claim was not true. It was noted that  otherwise  there
    was evidence that the appellant had been working  at  a  restaurant  in
    Wimbledon.

25. Further with regard to the issue the documents from the Mint Restaurant
    indicating that the appellant had been working there between  2006  and
    February 2014. The letter indicated that the appellant was one  of  the
    best workers. The appellant had  only  ceased  to  work  there  because
    immigration had instructed him to do so. There had been HMRC statements
    indicating that the appellant had to pay tax surcharge/penalty for late
    filing of a self-assessment tax return.

26. In the present case the evidence from the witnesses called on behalf of
    the appellant was to the effect that he was hardly able  to  work.  The
    documentation otherwise gave a wholly different picture. The judge  was
    entitled to conclude that the evidence was changing to suit the  nature
    of the application. The judge was entitled to conclude  that  when  the
    naturalisation application had been made it was necessary to show  that
    the appellant was competent and capable of  working  and  documentation
    had been submitted to that effect. For  the  purposes  of  the  present
    application it was thought appropriate to  seek  to  suggest  that  the
    appellant was not capable of  functioning  in  everyday  life  and  was
    dependent on others. The judge was entitled to conclude that he was not
    being told the truth with regard to the circumstances of the appellant.

27. The judge has pointed out direct contradictions between the evidence of
    Mr Ahmed Hussain and the evidence otherwise, see for example  paragraph
    75.6, where the evidence of Mr Hussain  was  directly  contradicted  by
    that of his daughter. Mr Hussain had suggested that the  appellant  had
    lived with him since he had entered the United Kingdom.  However  again
    that was contradicted by the tenancy documents the  utility  bills  and
    the like.

28. The judge had gone on to consider the medical  evidence  submitted  and
    the evidence from the Community Learning Disability Service (CLDS).  He
    noted  the  distinction  between  a  mild   learning   disability   and
    significant learning disability rendering the  appellant  a  vulnerable
    adult. He noted that no medical records had been submitted. There  were
    contradictions as to the evidence given to  the  CLDS.  In  the  report
    there is reference to the appellant attending school and a reference to
    secondary school. As pointed out by the judge at one stage  Mr  Hussain
    was saying that the appellant had attended secondary  school  but  then
    sought to correct the same to say primary school.  It  having  been  Mr
    Hussain's evidence that the appellant had stopped going  to  school  at
    about the age of 10.

29. Central to a  consideration  of  this  case  was  the  claim  that  the
    appellant  was  dependent  upon  his  aunt,  so  dependent  that  their
    relationship was one of emotional and financial dependency as  engaging
    Article 8 family life. In assessing that it is suggested that the judge
    had failed to take proper account  of  the  case  of  Kugathas  v  SSHD
    [2003]EWCA Civ 31.  The  judge  specifically  considered  the  case  in
    paragraph 15. The judge had pointed out again that  the  appellant  had
    clearly had his own tenancy for a period of  time;  that  he  had  been
    working including working away from the aunt. The judge  was  satisfied
    that the appellant had being  working  supporting  himself  and  living
    apart from the aunt for a period of time. The  judge  was  entitled  to
    conclude again that the assertion that the appellant had a close family
    life with his aunt was not made out. The judge was entitled to conclude
    that the appellant did not have anything more than the normal ties to a
    relative, and not a close relative but an aunt.

30. It is alleged that the judge has mis-recorded the evidence of Mr Dennis
    O'Brien. Again the  importance  of  that  evidence  was  not  that  the
    appellant was working with  Mr  O'Brien  as  a  builder  but  that  the
    appellant was acting independently and working on his  own  behalf.  In
    that respect whether it was not that he was  working  with  Mr  O'Brien
    that  was  the  important  fact  but  that  the  appellant  was  acting
    independently and working.

31. Finally it is suggested that the judge in recording that the  appellant
    used simple language in "Urdu"  had made a significant  factual  error.
    As pointed out the appellant being from  Bangladesh  he  would  not  be
    using Urdu. Again the point being  made  was  that  the  appellant  had
    limited ability in the English language in accordance with section  117
    of the 2002 Immigration Act as amended. It was a factor that the  judge
    was entitled to take into account especially as the appellant  had  not
    given evidence. Whilst it is correct to say that the judge has made  an
    error factual basis what was significant was not  the  language  itself
    the fact that the appellant had limited ability in English.

32. The points being made by the judge are valid points to make with regard
    to the contradictions and discrepancies in the  evidence  presented  in
    support of the nationality application and in the present  application.
    The judge has clearly pointed out issues which the  evidence  presented
    on behalf of the appellant did not answer. In the  light  of  that  the
    judge was entitled to conclude that he was not being told the truth and
    the evidence submitted in support of the  nationality  application  had
    been false in that it purported to represent a state of  affairs  which
    was not truthful.

33. In that event the judge was entitled to  conclude  that  he  could  not
    believe the account given by the appellant  and  accordingly  that  the
    appellant had failed to discharge the burden that was on  him  to  show
    that he had been in the United Kingdom for the period claimed.  Further
    to that the judge was entitled to conclude that the  appellant  on  the
    evidence before him had only been in the  United  Kingdom  since  2011.
    Thereafter the judge was also entitled to  conclude  that  he  was  not
    satisfied that support and assistance would not  be  available  to  the
    appellant where he to be returned to Bangladesh. Taking all  that  into
    account the judge was entitled to conclude that the decision to  refuse
    the appellant's Article 8 was proportionately justified.

34. In the circumstances I do not find that there is any material error  of
    law in the decision by the first-tier Tribunal. I uphold  the  decision
    to dismiss this appeal.

Notice of Decision


35. I dismiss the appeal to the Upper Tribunal and uphold the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal.

36. I do not make an anonymity direction


Signed      Date 28 July 2017



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure



