
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34508/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 February 2018                   |On 26 February 2016                  |
|Determination prepared 1 February    |                                     |
|2018                                 |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                                Khalid Faize
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NoT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Georget, Counsel, instructed by Messrs Malik &
                    Malik Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a citizen  of  Afghanistan  born  on  17  October  1993,
    appealed against a decision of the respondent dated  17  November  2015
    refusing an application for further leave to remain.  The appellant had
    arrived in Britain on 19 November 2007.  He  made  an  application  for
    leave to remain on 11 February  2008.   He  was  granted  discretionary
    leave from 4 August 2008 to 1 April  2011.   He  applied  in  time  for
    further leave to remain.  He had continuation of leave under Section 3C
    of the 1971  Immigration  Act  from  1  April  2011  to  the  grant  of
    discretionary leave which was ended on 31 July 2013.  That second grant
    of discretionary leave had followed a refusal on 24  November  2011  of
    the application for further leave and a successful appeal heard  on  13
    January 2012 against that refusal, the appeal having  been  allowed  on
    Article 8 grounds  but dismissed on asylum grounds and under Articles 2
    and 3 of the  ECHR  a  decision  upheld  in  the  Upper  Tribunal,  who
    dismissed the respondent's appeal.

2.   The appellant made a further application in time for  leave  to  remain
    which was refused and the appeal against  that  refusal  was  heard  by
    Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Clapham  in  February  2015.   Judge
    Clapham remitted the matter back to the Secretary of  State.   By  that
    stage the appellant had had over  six  years'  leave  to  remain.   The
    Secretary of State reconsidered the  application  and  made  a  further
    decision to refuse on 17 November 2015.  It was in those  circumstances
    that the appeal came back for  hearing  before  Judge  Malcolm.   Judge
    Malcolm considered the application made and the argument put before her
    that the appellant qualified for indefinite leave to remain because  he
    had lived in Britain for six years with discretionary leave.

3.   Judge Malcolm did not accept the  arguments  put  forward.   She  noted
    evidence from the appellant that he had no family  in  Afghanistan  and
    could not read or write Dari and would have no family support, as  well
    as evidence of the ways in which he had integrated into  Britain,  but,
    having applied the structured approach set out  in  R  (Razgar)  [2004]
    UKHL  27,  she  then  considered  the  arguments  put  forward  by  the
    appellant's representative that the appellant qualified for  indefinite
    leave because he  had  had  six  years'  discretionary  leave  and  the
    counterargument  put  forward  by  the  Presenting  Officer  that   the
    appellant's discretionary leave had come to an end because the  further
    period of discretionary leave had been granted so  that  the  appellant
    could complete a carpentry course when in fact he had not done so.  The
    judge took the view, having considered transitional arrangements,  that
    there had been significant changes which meant that the appellant would
    no longer qualify for leave under the discretionary  leave  policy  and
    therefore a further leave application should be refused  and  took  the
    view that the appellant's circumstances  stopped  the  running  of  the
    discretionary leave.  She therefore found that the  appellant  had  not
    met the qualifications for indefinite leave to remain.   When  applying
    the law relating to Article 8 of the ECHR the judge  found  that  there
    were no exceptional compelling factors which meant that  the  appellant
    should be granted leave under the provisions of Article 8 of the ECHR.

4.   The  appellant  appealed.   The  grounds  of  appeal  argued  that  the
    appellant was entitled to indefinite leave to  remain  because  of  the
    length of time he had had discretionary leave and secondly argued  that
    the judge had erred when concluding that she  was  not   did  not  have
    jurisdiction to find that and that the decision  of  the  Secretary  of
    State was unlawful.

5.   Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan granted  permission.  Having  set  out  the
    appellant's immigration history and  referred to  his  various  appeals
    and having emphasised that the appellant had always had leave to remain
    either under  discretionary  provisions  or  under  the  provisions  of
    Section 3C, he stated:-

         "6.  An in time application to appeal accrues further  continuation
             leave.

         7.   The respondent contended that the appellant's leave ended when
             he (by his own volition) completed his carpentry course.  I am
             uncertain on what basis this is asserted.  It  might  be  that
             discretionary leave  was  subject  to  a  condition  that  the
             appellant was required to attend his studies but where is this
             condition said to be found?  It may be that the respondent was
             entitled by notice to cancel, revoke or curtail  discretionary
             leave if the condition underlying the grant  of  discretionary
             leave was no longer being  fulfilled  but  does  discretionary
             leave end automatically without such notice?

         8.   The matters should be argued out at a hearing."

6.   At the hearing before me Mr Bramble argued that Judge Jordan had  erred
    in granting permission  as  the  appellant,  he  argued,  had  not  had
    discretionary leave for a period of six  years.   He  referred  to  the
    relevant transitional provisions which are set out at section 10 of the
    relevant Immigration Directorate Instructions.  They state as follows:-

         "10.1    Applicants granted DL before 9 July 2012

             Those granted leave under the DL policy in force before 9 July
             2012 will normally continue to be dealt with under that policy
             through to settlement if they continue to qualify for  further
             leave on the same basis  as  their  original  DL  was  granted
             (normally they will be eligible to apply for settlement  after
             accruing six years' continuous  DL  (or  where  appropriate  a
             combination of DL and LOTR, see section 8 above)),  unless  at
             the date of decision they fall  within  the  restricted  leave
             policy.

             Caseworkers must consider whether the circumstances prevailing
             at the time of the original grant of  leave  continue  at  the
             date of the decision.  If the circumstances remain  the  same,
             the individual does  not  fall  within  the  restricted  leave
             policy and the criminality thresholds do not apply, a  further
             period  of  three  years'  DL  should  normally  be   granted.
             Caseworkers must consider whether there are any  circumstances
             that may warrant departure from the standard period of  leave.
             See section 5.4.

             If there have been significant changes that mean the applicant
             no longer qualifies for leave  under  the  DL  policy  or  the
             applicant falls for refusal on the basis of  criminality  (see
             criminality and exclusion section above),  the  further  leave
             application should be refused."

7.   Mr Bramble argued that the appellant  had  been  granted  discretionary
    leave  initially  because  he  was  a  minor.   The  second  period  of
    discretionary leave had been on an entirely different basis - that  was
    to enable him to finish a course in carpentry.   He  argued,  moreover,
    that the period of 3C leave in between the two periods of discretionary
    leave did not count as discretionary leave - Judge Jordan,  he  argued,
    had been wrong to state that the 3C leave continued the existing  leave
    and therefore was, in effect, discretionary  leave.   He  also   argued
    that the appellant's discretionary leave came to an end when either  he
    stopped the course or at the end of the period of  discretionary  leave
    and it could not be continued because of the 3C leave granted when  the
    appellant made the further application  before  the  second  period  of
    discretionary leave ended.  The refusal of the further application  had
    been on 17 November 2015.  He accepted of course that the fact that the
    appellant had been in Britain for ten years but, more importantly, that
    he  would  shortly  reach  the  ten  year  anniversary  of  his   first
    application for discretionary leave was another matter which could lead
    to a successful application for indefinite leave to  remain  under  the
    ten year provisions but emphasised that that was not an issue that  was
    before me or before Judge Malcolm - he was of course  correct  in  that
    contention.

8.   Mr Georget, in reply, argued that the 3C leave continued leave  on  the
    same  basis  as   that  already  granted.   There   was   therefore   a
    continuation of leave and therefore the six  year  provisions  when  an
    applicant had six years' continuous discretionary  leave  would  apply.
    He also raised the further matter that the appellant should  have  been
    granted permission to work over the last two years.  He argued that  in
    fact Mr Bramble was trying to bypass the 3C leave that had been  given,
    which was merely a continuation of the leave that had been  granted  in
    the past.  In reply Mr Bramble referred  to  a  document  dealing  with
    "active review" and when such review was required.  At paragraph 4.7 of
    that document is a section entitled: "Active  reviews  for  those  with
    Discretionary Leave".  It reads as follows:-

         "As a person with discretionary leave  will  not  be  eligible  for
         indefinite leave for six years (or at least ten years  for  persons
         covered by the exclusion provisions), the first active review  will
         always be to consider further  leave  rather  than  settlement.   A
         person whose discretionary leave is extended may be  subject  to  a
         number of further active reviews  (where  less  than  three  years'
         leave is given, for example).  When considering  whether  to  grant
         further leave to  remain  or  settlement,  decision  makers  should
         assess whether the applicant qualifies for discretionary  leave  as
         at the date of the active review (see  the  Asylum  Instruction  on
         Discretionary Leave  for  details  of  the  criteria  to  be  met).
         Decision makers will need to satisfy themselves that the  applicant
         meets  the   criteria   for   discretionary   leave.    The   exact
         considerations will vary depending on the  particular  reasons  for
         the original grant of  discretionary  leave  if  further  leave  is
         sought on the same basis.  For example, where leave was granted for
         ECHR Article 8 reasons, decision makers would need to consider  the
         applicant's current family situation and  whether  the  applicant's
         removal would still constitute a  breach  of  Article  8  (see  the
         Asylum Instructions on Considering Human Rights and  Article  8  of
         the ECHR).  The section below sets  out  particular  considerations
         required in the case of applicants who were  unaccompanied  asylum-
         seeking children."

Discussion

9.   The relevant issue before me is whether or not, taking  the  time  from
    the first grant of discretionary leave forward  by  six  years,  during
    that time the appellant had or continued to have discretionary leave to
    remain.  The reality is that the appellant had discretionary  leave  to
    remain firstly because he was a minor but it was, in essence, leave  on
    protection grounds.  His application thereafter was on asylum and human
    rights grounds - the same basis as his first application.   His  appeal
    was allowed by Judge Page "on human rights grounds under Article 8" and
    that decision although appealed by the Secretary of State was upheld by
    Upper Tribunal Judge  Storey  and  thereafter  the  further  period  of
    discretionary leave to remain was granted.  The vignettes placed in the
    appellant's travel document record the grants of  discretionary  leave.
    They do not indicate anything other than that the  appellant  had  been
    granted discretionary leave.  They state that the  appellant  had  been
    granted "limited leave to remain in the United Kingdom"  and  state  on
    the stamp headed discretionary leave in the immigration status document
    the following:-

         "The Secretary of State  has  granted  the  person  named  on  this
         document leave to enter or remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a
         reason not covered by the Immigration Rules, in accordance with the
         Home Office Asylum Policy Instruction on Discretionary Leave.   The
         period for which leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom has
         been granted is indicated in the endorsement.  While the period  of
         leave indicated remains valid, the holder is able to  work  in  the
         United Kingdom without any immigration  restrictions  limiting  the
         type of work they can undertake."

10.  It is therefore clear that for whatever reasons the Secretary of  State
    granted discretionary leave to the appellant on two occasions. There is
    nothing to  distinguish between the  two  periods  of  leave.   When  I
    consider the transitional provisions to which I have referred  above  I
    do not consider that there is anything therein that would mean that the
    leave the appellant had was not characterised  as  discretionary  leave
    and that the discretionary leave as indicated on the vignettes  in  his
    travel document were both periods of discretionary leave.  I  consider,
    moreover,  that it is trite law that under the provisions of Section 3C
    the leave to remain granted initially continues  after  the  expiry  of
    leave until such time as there is a further appeal  and,  if  appealed,
    that the appeal is unsuccessful.  For these reasons I conclude that the
    appellant did have discretionary leave for a period of  six  years  and
    that therefore he was entitled to settlement on that  basis.   I  would
    point out that, having considered the IDIs at section 10,  it  relevant
    to take into account that there  seems  no  reason  why  the  appellant
    should not have been granted settlement - there is nothing to  indicate
    that his conduct had been such that that should not be granted.

11.   For  these  reasons  I  find  that  the  judge  had   erred   in   her
    interpretation of the weight to be placed on the  Section  3C  leave  -
    although her determination was not particularly clear on this point  it
    is clear that somehow she considered that the discretionary  leave  had
    come to an end because the appellant had not completed  his  course  of
    study.  As Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan said, there is no basis  in  law
    for that conclusion.

12.  For these reasons I set aside the decision of the First-tier Judge.

13.  Given the facts as set out above and  my  interpretation  of  the  law,
    which I have also set out  above,  I  find  that  this  appellant  does
    qualify for indefinite leave to remain and therefore I allow his appeal
    on that basis: the decision is therefore not in accordance with the law
    and I therefore allow the appeal on human rights grounds.

14.  I would add that in any event the appellant has now lived  lawfully  in
    Britain  for  10  years,  counting  from  the  date  of   his  original
    application, and or would shortly have lived here  with  authority  for
    and so  he would qualify under the 10 years provisions  for  indefinite
    leave to remain.

15.  Taking that into account and  given the appellant's history  here,  his
    age and the fact that it appears he has no family  to  which  he  could
    return in Afghanistan and has been out of the country for more than ten
    years, I find that there would be exceptional compelling  circumstances
    which would mean that his appeal would have been allowed on  Article  8
    grounds, even if I had not considered that the  arguments  relating  to
    discretionary leave should succeed.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Judge is set aside.

I allow this appeal on immigration and human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   [pic]                      Date 20 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
