
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34485/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4 August 2014                              |On 07th Aug 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM

                                   Between

                           ms nancy lisa mpangile

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Youssefian, Legal Representative, D J Webb & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Tanzania and her date of birth is 5  June
    1972.  She entered the UK as a student on 5 January 2003 and she made a
    series of in-time applications for  extensions  to  remain  here  as  a
    student.  Her leave expired on 31 May 2009.  She  made  an  application
    for leave on 2 July 2009 and this application was rejected  as  invalid
    on 31 July 2009.  She made a second application on 4  August  2009  but
    this was refused by the Secretary of State in a decision of 3 September
    2009.  On 17 November 2009 she made another out of time application and
    her leave was varied in a decision of 22 January 2010.  On 27 July 2012
    she made an application for indefinite leave to remain on the basis  of
    ten years' continuous lawful residence pursuant to paragraph 276B(i)(a)
    of the Rules. This application was refused by the Secretary of State in
    a decision of 6 August 2013.  The application was  refused  because  of
    the seven month gap between 1 June 2009 and 21 January 2010.  There was
    a  gap  in  her  leave  and  the  application  was  refused  under  the
    Immigration Rules.  In addition the application  was  considered  under
    Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules  and  refused
    under those provisions.

2.   The appellant appealed against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    and her appeal was dismissed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Verity
    in a decision that was promulgated on 30 May 2014 following  a  hearing
    on 8 May 2014.  Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Ford in a  decision  of  19  June  2014.  Permission  was
    limited to the decision under the Rules/policy only and not  Article  8
    of the 1950 Convention on Human Rights.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

3.    The  First-tier  Tribunal  heard  evidence  from  the  appellant   and
    witnesses.  The Judge recorded that it was accepted  by  the  appellant
    that there was a gap in her leave between 1 June 2009  and  21  January
    2010.  Her evidence was that the application was made out  of  time  by
    her college on 2 July 2009.  This application was invalid  because  the
    form used by the college was out of date.  The college then submitted a
    further application on 4 August 2009 which was refused on  3  September
    2009 on the basis that the college at that time was  not  a  registered
    sponsor.  The appellant made an out of time application on 17  November
    2009 as a Tier 4 (General) Migrant and this was allowed on appeal.

4.       The appellant's evidence was that  she  was  in  regular  telephone
    contact with her family in Tanzania. She  was  employed  as  a  support
    worker in the UK.  The position of the Secretary of State was that  the
    appellant has a private life here but she could return to Tanzania  and
    continue her private life there.

5.       The Judge recorded in her determination  that  Mr  Youssefian,  who
    represented the appellant before the First-tier Tribunal,  argued  that
    the decision of the Secretary of State was not in accordance  with  the
    law because the decision-maker had not considered the  relevant  policy
    guidance. In his view, in the light of the fact that the  initial  late
    application was submitted by the college and therefore was not late  as
    a result of anything within the appellant's control, she should benefit
    from the policy. In his view the case should be remitted  back  to  the
    Secretary of State for a lawful decision to be made.

6.    The  First-tier  Tribunal  made  findings  at  [19]  to  [30]  of  the
    determination as follows:

         "19. I am prepared to accept that the Appellant came to the  United
             Kingdom in January 2003, when she was approximately  30  years
             of age.  I am also prepared to  accept  that  her  mother  and
             eight of her siblings still live in Tanzania and that she  was
             educated  in  Tanzania  and  undertook   Accounting   and   IT
             qualifications.  In her statement at paragraphs 12 to  14  she
             indicates the history of her application to remain in  the  UK
             as a student and attempts to demonstrate that it was the fault
             of her college that resulted in her spending time  in  the  UK
             without  the  required  visa.   She  does  accept   that   for
             approximately seven months between June 2009 and January  2010
             she did not have lawful status in the UK.  At paragraph 12  of
             her statement she states  that  she  approached  her  college,
             Vision College of Theology  and  Business  Studies,  with  the
             completed application form and all the required documents  and
             asked them to submit this on her behalf.  She then  states  as
             follows:-


                       'I believe that the college had done so  and  that  I
                  was therefore in the UK lawfully'.


         20.  The Appellant is an intelligent adult who had  by  this  stage
             been in the UK for some years.  She had also gone through what
             might be termed the visa process and must have been  aware  of
             its technicalities.  I do not therefore  accept  that  without
             any  proof  she  believed  her  college  had   submitted   the
             application form.  A prudent person would  have  asked  for  a
             copy of the application form countersigned  and  submitted  by
             the college or  would  have  at  least  ascertained  from  the
             college the date the form was submitted to  the  Home  Office.
             She appears to have done neither.  She states at paragraph  13
             that it was only in July 2009 that she became aware  that  the
             college had actually submitted an application out of time  and
             that as a result an incorrect version of the application  form
             had been submitted and a new version of the  application  form
             had to be completed.  She  then  states  that  she  asked  the
             college to 'resubmit the application  as  soon  as  possible'.
             She then maintains that she believed that everything  was  now
             in order.  Bearing in mind, that on her own evidence  she  had
             become aware that  the  assurances  of  her  college  were  of
             dubious value, I am at a loss  to  understand  why  she  would
             accept those assurances yet again from her college,  when  she
             had clear evidence that they had already  let  her  down  once
             before.  Surely, it would have been prudent for her,  to  have
             requested that the college provide exact details  as  to  when
             they submitted her application and the nature  of  the  letter
             they had written in her support.  I therefore  do  not  accept
             that she believed everything was in order.   At  paragraph  14
             she stated that she was surprised when she was  informed  that
             her application was refused on 3rd September 2009 because  her
             college was no longer  on  the  Sponsor  register.   She  then
             maintains that she sought legal advice from her solicitors and
             a fresh application was made on her behalf  on  17th  November
             2009.  If, as she claims she became aware that her application
             had been refused at the beginning of September 2009, then I am
             again at a loss to understand why two  months  elapsed  before
             she sought legal advice and a fresh application was  submitted
             on her behalf.  She must at this stage have clearly been aware
             that she was residing  in  the  UK  without  leave,  that  the
             assurances of her college were valueless, and that she  needed
             to rectify her position  immediately  with  the  Home  Office.
             Even if I accept that she only became finally aware  that  her
             college was no longer an accredited Sponsor at the end of  the
             first week of September, it is clear  that  there  was  little
             sense of urgency on her part and that the new application  was
             only submitted some two months later.  Her own conduct clearly
             indicates a  lack  of  urgency  and  purpose  with  regard  to
             satisfying Immigration Rules.


         21.  With the help of her solicitors she was then  given  leave  to
             remain in the UK from  January  20  July  2010.   She  made  a
             further application in July 2010, and this was  refused.   The
             appellant challenged this decision by way of  appeal  and  the
             matter came before Immigration Judge Alakija on  2nd  December
             2010.  I note that when  considering  the  Appellant's  rights
             under Article 8, he concluded that the Appellant had  been  in
             the UK for a long period of  time,  that  she  now  wished  to
             finish her education and return to Tanzania. At  paragraph  13
             of his determination he records this information as follows:-


                       'She submits that she will then return to Tanzania to
                  work in the company her brother owns using skills acquired
                  here.  Whilst I feel that  this  Appellant  has  taken  an
                  exceedingly long time over her studies, the fact that  her
                  application has not  been  refused  on  any  such  grounds
                  suggests that she is complying with Immigration  Rules  in
                  that respect.  In such circumstances  precedent  seems  to
                  suggest that it would  be  disproportionate  to  make  her
                  return to Tanzania in order to  make  what  would  in  all
                  probabilities be a successful application to return'.


         22.  He then records that the  decision  is  dismissed,  under  the
             Immigration Rules, although the appeal  is  allowed  on  human
             rights  grounds.   It  is  therefore  clear  to  me  that  the
             Appellant does not satisfy the Immigration Rules at  the  date
             of that decision and that the Appellant had clearly  indicated
             to the  Immigration  Judge  that  she  wanted  to  finish  her
             academic course and would then be returning to Tanzania to her
             family and to work in her  brother's  company.   Approximately
             two years later however, the Appellant changed her mind  about
             returning to Tanzania and is now making an application through
             her solicitors for indefinite leave to remain in the UK.   She
             was asked when this change had occurred in her plans  and  the
             Appellant indicated  that  it  was  only  after  the  previous
             hearing before the Immigration Judge that she had decided that
             she wanted to remain in the UK.  She indicated  that  she  now
             worked and provided assistance to vulnerable adults  and  that
             she preferred this type of work to  Accountancy  and  Computer
             Studies.  I accept that the Appellant was offered a  job  with
             the London Borough of Richmond upon Thames in June of 2012  in
             this capacity and that this might have been  the  trigger  for
             her application to remain in the UK made in December 2012.   I
             do therefore accept that this change of heart as to her future
             intentions and decision not to return to Tanzania was probably
             triggered by the start of her new  job,  which  she  obviously
             enjoyed and found satisfying.  Nevertheless, for the reasons I
             have already given I do  not  think  the  Appellant  took  the
             application  process  for  her  visa  seriously  monitored  it
             carefully and that as a result a seven month gap does exist in
             her stay.

         23.  It was put to me by the Appellant's Legal Representative  that
             the requirements of the UK  Border  Agency  guidance  on  long
             residence and private life should have  been  applied  by  the
             Respondent and interpreted in the Appellant's favour.   Having
             studied that guidance  it  is  clear  that  continuous  lawful
             residence is broken if there is a gap of six  months  or  more
             which is the position in the Appellant's case.  A short gap of
             approximately ten days is acceptable, if as an  administrative
             error  by  the  UK  Border  Agency  or  a  postal  strike   or
             hospitalisation.  It is clear that the three examples given in
             the guidance clearly indicate that it is not the fault of  the
             Appellant that the gap resulted.  For  instance  an  Appellant
             should not be penalised because they enter into hospital or  a
             postal strike means that their application is not delivered in
             time.  They cannot of course be held responsible for an  error
             on the part of the UK Border Agency.  However none of this  is
             applicable in the Appellant's case.  If she had exercised some
             degree of diligence and care,  steps  might  have  been  taken
             earlier in her visa application process.  She was dilatory and
             appears to have accepted assurances from Vision College,  even
             though after the initial mistakes  had  become  apparent,  she
             still continued to trust them to submit  applications  on  her
             behalf and certainly did not request proof that they had  done
             so or took the trouble to  find  out  when  applications  were
             submitted.  She herself accepts that there has  been  a  seven
             month break and I therefore find that  the  Immigration  Rules
             have not been satisfied and that the Appellant cannot meet the
             requirements.  As to the various authorities which were  given
             to me with regard to "near miss" I do not consider  that  this
             is a "near miss" situation.  In my opinion seven months is far
             too long to categorise this as a "near  miss".   The  Tribunal
             also note in the case of Nasim and Others (Article 8) Pakistan
             [2014] UKUT 00025 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal concluded that when
             a course of education comes to an end there was no  basis  for
             contending that a  new  freestanding  right  to  exploit  that
             education in the United Kingdom emerged.  They also noted that
             although friendships, employment and studies to be involved by
             an Appellant in the UK did not restrict a Government's ability
             to rely on the enforcement of immigration controls as a reason
             for  interfering  with  these  friendships,   employment   and
             studies.




The Grounds Seeking Leave to Appeal and Oral Submissions

7.   The grounds seeking leave to appeal argue  that  the  Judge  failed  to
    make a finding in relation to whether the decision  was  in  accordance
    with the law.  It is argued that  the  Secretary  of  State  failed  to
    consider her own published policy in accordance with Abdi  [2005]  EWCA
    Civ 1363 and the First-tier Tribunal failed to make a proper finding in
    relation  to  this.   It  is  argued  that  the   First-tier   Tribunal
    misdirected itself in relation to  the  policy  guidance  and  specific
    reference is made to [23] of the determination which reads as follows:

         "A short gap of approximately ten days  is  acceptable,  if  as  an
         administrative error by the UK Border Agency or a postal strike  or
         hospitalisation."


     However, according  to  the  grounds,  the  policy  guidance  reads  as
    follows:

         "You may use your judgment in cases where there may be  exceptional
         reasons why a single application was made more than 10 days out  of
         time.  For example, exceptional reasons can be used for cases where
         there is:


                o a postal strike


                o hospitalisation, or


                o an administrative error made by the UK Border Agency."

    The guidance goes on to state as follows:


         "It may be appropriate to exercise discretion if an  applicant  has
         multiple gaps in leave that have  been  caused  by  events  outside
         their control such as postal strikes, hospitalisation and so on."


8.   It is argued in the permission application that  the  Judge  placed  an
    unreasonable burden on the appellant.

9.   I heard oral submissions  from  both  representatives.   Mr  Youssefian
    argued that the Judge did not accept the appellant's evidence  relating
    to what happened after the first late application, but in his view, she
    accepted the reasons given for the initial late  application  and  that
    circumstances were outside the appellant's control.  He argued that the
    Judge's approach was prescriptive and, in any event,  she  applied  the
    wrong policy.  The Judge focused on process rather than the end result.
     The Secretary of State should have considered the policy and  did  not
    do so.

10.  The Secretary of State in this case  had  submitted  a  response  under
    Rule 24 of the 2008 Procedure Rules in which it was  conceded  that  it
    was arguable that the Judge may have erred in his consideration of  the
    policy for the  reasons  outlined  in  the  grounds.   However,  it  is
    immaterial in the light of the fact that the policy, if such  a  policy
    is applicable, is to be applied by the  Secretary  of  State  and  that
    arguably the Secretary of State would never have applied the policy  on
    the  basis  that  there  was  no  evidence  to  demonstrate  that   the
    appellant's gap in her  continuous  residence  was  the  fault  of  her
    college as claimed and was over six months.   In  oral  submissions  Mr
    Tufan argued that the Judge's findings were open to her and  that  they
    were not irrational.  He also argued that the Secretary  of  State  had
    considered discretion under the policy and he referred  me  to  page  3
    (paragraph 2) of the Reasons for Refusal Letter of 6 August 2013.   His
    oral submissions were  at  odds  with  the  response  in  the  Rule  24
    response.

The Policy Guidance and the Reasons for Refusal Letter

11.  Mr Youssefian provided me with the relevant guidance which is  guidance
    (Long Residence and Private Life - V6.0 valid from 15  November  2012).
    In relation to a single gap in lawful residence the  policy  states  as
    follows:

         "It may be appropriate to use discretion if an applicant:


                o has a single short gap in lawful residence through  making
                  one single previous application out of  time  by  no  more
                  than 10 calendar days, and


                o meets all the other requirements for lawful residence."

     You can use your judgment in  cases  where  there  may  be  exceptional
    reasons why a single application was made more than  ten  days  out  of
    time.  For example, exceptional reasons can be  used  for  cases  where
    there is:

           o a postal strike


           o hospitalisation, or

           o an administrative error made by the UK Border Agency

12.  The relevant paragraph of the  Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter  which  Mr
    Tufan referred me to reads as follows:

         "It is noted from your representative's covering letter,  dated  14
         December 2012 that you claim to have completed an  application  for
         further leave and provided supporting documents to  Vision  College
         of Theology & Business Studies, prior to the expiry of  your  leave
         on 31 May 2009, and that the college failed to submit  an  in  time
         application on your behalf.  It is also noted that  Vision  College
         of Theology & Business Studies  do  not  appear  to  have  provided
         written  confirmation  that  the  failure  to  make  an   in   time
         application was due to  their  administrative  error.   Whilst  the
         reasons for making an out of time application have been  noted,  it
         is the responsibility of the applicant to ensure that a  valid  and
         in  time  application  is  made  therefore  discretion  cannot   be
         exercised.  The reasons you have provided  are  not  sufficient  to
         allow us to consider your application outside  of  the  Immigration
         Rules."




Conclusions


13.  In my view the Judge did not make a material error of law. She did  not
    accept that the appellant believed that the college had  submitted  the
    application and that the appellant genuinely thought that she was  here
    lawfully.  I refer specifically to [20], [21] and [23] of the  findings
    of the First-tier Tribunal.  She did  not  find  that  the  appellant's
    evidence was credible  on  this  issue.  Her  findings  are  adequately
    reasoned, lawful and sustainable.

14.  The Judge made reference to the Home  Office  policy  at  [23]  of  the
    determination.  It was incumbent  on  the  decision-maker  to  consider
    discretion and the policy guidance. The Judge did not make a finding on
    whether discretion had been exercised. However, this does not amount to
    a material error because it is apparent from the decision  letter  that
    the decision maker properly considered discretion under  the  published
    policy. Thus the decision-maker lawfully exercised discretion that  was
    vested in him. In addition the error is rectified by the Judge  because
    she recognised her statutory power to uphold the decision or to reach a
    different conclusion.  She decided to uphold the decision  having  been
    unpersuaded that  the  decision-maker's  discretion  should  have  been
    exercised differently.   This  was  based  on  her  findings  that  the
    appellant was responsible for the delay and could not benefit from  the
    policy because there were no exceptional reasons for the submission  of
    the out of time applications.

15.      The Judge made reference to a short gap of ten days  at  [23],  but
    considering the paragraph as a whole it is clear to me that she did not
    misunderstand the policy. In  any  event,  the  Judge  found  that  the
    appellant could not benefit from the policy because in the  absence  of
    exceptional reasons why the application was made out of time. The Judge
    made the relevant findings but did not go on to make her final decision
    clear at the conclusion of the determination namely that  the  decision
    was in accordance with the law.

16.      For these reasons I find that there was no material  error  of  law
    and I dismiss the appeal.   The decision of the Judge  to  dismiss  the
    appeal under the Rules and under Article 8  stands.   In  addition  the
    decision is in accordance with reference to section 84 (1) (f)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.


Signed  Joanna  McWilliam                                    Date  6  August
    2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
