
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
IA/34832/2015
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|Heard at Field House                     |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 17 July 2017                          |   On 19 July 2017                |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH
                                   Between
                                 SOHAIL AMIR
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. S. Karim of counsel, instructed by M A
Consultants (London)
For the Respondent:    Mr. P. Singh, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Appellant, who  was  born  on  8  March  1983,  is  a  national  of
    Pakistan. He arrived in the United Kingdom on 8  December  2004,  as  a
    student, and his leave in this capacity was subsequently extended until
    31 October 2009. He applied for leave to remain as  the  partner  of  a
    person settled here on 22 August 2009  and  he  was  granted  leave  to
    remain in this capacity until 27 July 2012. He applied  for  indefinite
    leave to remain in this capacity on 25 July 2012  but  his  application
    was refused on 6 March 2014. He appealed and his appeal  was  heard  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge James on 31 July 2015. The Judge  decided  to
    remit the case make to the Respondent for a re-consideration.  She  did
    reconsider her decision and made a further refusal on 24 November 2015.



2.   The Appellant appealed against this decision and his appeal  was  heard
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Wright, who  dismissed  his  appeal  in  a
    determination promulgated on  11  November  2016.  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Hollingworth granted the Appellant permission to  appeal  against
    this decision on 10 May 2017.

ERROR OF LAW HEARING

3.   Both counsel for the Appellant and the Home Office  Presenting  Officer
    made detailed oral submissions and I have referred to  the  content  of
    these submissions, where relevant, in my decision.

DECISION

4.   At the appeal hearing, the Appellant had  accepted  that  his  marriage
    was no longer subsisting but submitted that he was entitled to leave to
    remain on the basis of long residence.

5.   It was the Respondent's  case  that  the  Appellant  had  not  met  the
    requirements of paragraph 276B(iii) of the Immigration Rules as he  was
    subject to one  of  a  general  ground  of  refusal,  namely  paragraph
    322(1C)(iv) of the Rules. This states that where a  person  is  seeking
    indefinite leave to remain, such leave is to be refused where a  person
    has:

     "within the 24 months prior to the date on  which  the  application  is
    decided, been convicted of or admitted an offence for which  they  have
    received a non-custodial sentence or other out of court disposal  which
    is recorded on their criminal record".

6.   The Appellant's application for indefinite  leave  to  remain  was  re-
    considered  and  then  refused  on  24  November  2015.  There  was   a
    Certificate of Conviction in the Appellant's Bundle before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge which showed  that  the  Appellant  was  tried  and
    convicted of assisting unlawful immigration into an EU Member State  at
    Kingston Crown Court on 26 September  2013,  which  was  more  than  24
    months before the decision in question. The certificate also shows that
    he was subsequently sentenced at Kingston Crown Court  on  29  November
    2013.

7.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Wright had relied on the fact  that  a  print
    out of the Appellant's PNC referred to his conviction  having  occurred
    on 29 November 2013. This does  not  concur  with  the  Certificate  of
    Conviction and  I  agree  with  counsel  for  the  Appellant  that  the
    certificate is the best evidence  of  the  date  of  conviction  as  it
    emanates from the Court itself.

8.   It is also clear that paragraph 322(1C)(iv) of  the  Immigration  Rules
    refers to a "conviction" and not the date of sentence or the date  that
    any conviction is recorded on his PNC.  The reference in the  paragraph
    to being "recorded on their criminal record" does not mean that this is
    the date of conviction. It refers to the need to take into account  any
    non-custodial sentence or other out of court disposal.

9.   As a consequence, I find that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did err  in
    law in his construction of the meaning of paragraph 322(1C)(iv) of  the
    Immigration Rules.

10.  As  noted  by  the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge also went on to consider whether  it  was  open  to  the
    Respondent, in  the  alternative,  to  exercise  her  discretion  under
    paragraph 322(5) of the Immigration  Rules,  which  states  that  leave
    should normally be refused due to:

     "the undesirability of permitting the person  concerned  to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom in the light of his conduct  (including  convictions
    which do not fall within paragraph 322(1C), character  or  associations
    or the fact that he represents a threat to national security".

11.  I find that the Home Officer Presenting Officer was correct  to  submit
    that it was open to the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  to  look  at  this
    provision in the alternative.

12.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  acknowledged  that  the  Appellant's
    counsel had referred to the Respondent's Guidance on General ground for
    refusal Section 1 - version 26.0, published on 19 April 2016.  Page  69
    of this Guidance states that  "a  suspended  prison  sentence  must  be
    treated as a non-custodial sentence". It also states at  page  75  that
    "it is unlikely a person will be refused under the  character,  conduct
    or associations grounds for a single conviction that results in a  non-
    custodial sentence outside the relevant timeframe".

13.  He went on to distinguish this  policy  and,  when  explaining  why  it
    should not apply to the Appellant and how he fell within a class  where
    discretion should not be exercised, he relied on a number of factors.

14.  Firstly, he found that  the  Guidance  only  applied  for  the  general
    grounds for refusal. However, page 2 of the Guidance states that it  is
    relevant "to all categories of applications  for  entry  clearance  and
    leave to remain in the UK". Therefore, the Guidance also applied  to  a
    decision under paragraph 276B(ii).

15.  The Home Office Presenting Officer also relied on the case  of  SF  and
    others (Guidance, post-2014 Act) Albania [2017] UKUT 00120 (IAC).

16.  However, the ratio of this case is that:

     "Even in the absence of a "not in accordance with the  law"  ground  of
    appeal, the Tribunal ought to take the Secretary  of  State's  guidance
    into account if it points  clearly  to  a  particular  outcome  in  the
    instant case. Only in that way  can  consistency  be  obtained  between
    those cases that do, and those cases  that  do  not,  come  before  the
    Tribunal".

17.  Therefore, the policy in relation to  those  who  had  convictions  was
    that a suspended sentence was a non-custodial sentence and that it  was
    unlikely that a person would be refused leave for a  single  conviction
    which attracted a non-custodial sentence.

18.  It is true that at paragraph 12 of SF and Others,  the  Vice  President
    had noted that :

     "On occasion, perhaps where it has more information than the  Secretary
    of State had or might have had, or perhaps if a  case  is  exceptional,
    the Tribunal may find a reason for departing from such guidance".

19.  However, the question was whether the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had
    identified such an exceptional factor. He had  taken  into  taken  into
    account the fact that  the  Appellant  was  sentenced  to  nine  months
    imprisonment, suspended for eighteen months, for a serious  immigration
    crime and the Home Office Presenting  Officer  submitted  that  he  was
    entitled to find that his case was outside the bounds of "normality" as
    it as in the public interests and the interests of the security of  the
    United  Kingdom  to  enforce  immigration  controls.  The  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer also relied on the case of SF and others  (Guidance,
    post-2014 Act) Albania [2017] UKUT 00120 (IAC).

20.  However, as counsel for the Appellant submitted  the  policy  addressed
    those who had  convictions  and,  therefore,  a  conviction  would  not
    reasonably be treated as an exceptional factor on its own.

21.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  also  relied  on  MU  ('statement  of
    additional grounds') - long residence - discretion)  Bangladesh  [2010]
    UKUT 4423 (IAC) and the fact that he was only able to show that he  had
    been here for more than ten years by remaining after his  marriage  had
    come to an end.

22.  However, the head note of MU clearly states that:


    "1. As held in AS (Afghanistan) and NV  (Sri  Lanka)  [2010]  EWCA  Civ
    1076, there is no time limit  on  serving  a  Statement  of  Additional
    Grounds in response to a 'section 120 notice'.  Thus, an appellant  may
    accrue ten years' lawful leave (including leave extended by section  3C
    of the 1971 Act) while his appeal is pending.  The Tribunal may then be
    asked to decide whether the appellant qualifies  for  indefinite  leave
    under the Long Residence Rule".

 23. It is not authority  for  the  proposition  that  indefinite  leave  to
    remain cannot accrue if the reason  for  earlier  leave  is  no  longer
    relevant. In any event, it was clear  from  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    James' decision, promulgated on 5 August 2015, that the  Appellant  had
    submitted his initial application for indefinite leave to remain on the
    basis of marriage on 25 July 2012 but that the Respondent had not  made
    a decision on this application until 6 March 2014.  First-tier Tribunal
    Judge James also found in paragraph 11 that the Respondent's  decision,
    due to mere passage of time as a consequence of delay on  the  part  of
    the Respondent had become unlawful. Therefore, the  responsibility  for
    the delay lay with the Respondent. In addition, reference  should  have
    been made to First-tier Tribunal Judge James's decision.

24.  As a consequence, I find that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Wright  did
    make material errors of law in his decision and reasons.

DECISION

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.

(2)  The decision by First-tier Tribunal Judge Wright is set aside.

(3)  The appeal is remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  re-hearing
    before a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge
    James or Wright.



Nadine Finch


Signed                                  Date 17 July 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


