
[pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34460/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13th October 2015                 |On 19th October 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     BM
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B Hawkin of Counsel instructed by Nova Legal
Services


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against a decision of  Judge  Hodgkinson
    of the First-tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 8th May 2015.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and I will refer to him as the Claimant.

 3. The Claimant is a male citizen  of  Albania  born  3rd  June  1982  who
    applied for leave to remain in the United Kingdom on the basis  of  his
    family and private life, and in reliance upon Article  8  of  the  1950
    European Convention on Human Rights (the 1950 Convention).

 4. The application was refused on 5th August 2014, the Secretary of  State
    issuing a Notice of Immigration Decision of that date,  to  remove  the
    Appellant from the United Kingdom.  A reasons for  refusal  letter  was
    also issued, though this is incorrectly dated 5th August 2013.   It  is
    common ground that the correct date should be  5th  August  2014.   The
    reasons for refusal are based on S-LTR.1.6 which is set out below;

         'The presence of  the  applicant  in  the  United  Kingdom  is  not
         conducive to the  public  good  because  their  conduct  (including
         convictions which do not fall within paragraphs S-LTR.1.3 to  1.5),
         character, associations, or other reasons, make it  undesirable  to
         allow them to remain in the United Kingdom.'

 5. In addition the Secretary of State  considered  the  application  under
    Article 8 and accepted the Appellant was in  a  relationship  with  his
    partner and that  they  have  a  son  born  in  August  2013,  and  the
    Appellant's partner has a  daughter  born  in  September  2011  from  a
    previous relationship.  It is accepted that the Claimant's partner  and
    both children have leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  until  10th
    November 2016.  It is considered the Appellant's partner  and  children
    could leave the United  Kingdom  and  relocate  with  the  Claimant  in
    Albania, or alternatively the relationship could be  continued  through
    modern  forms  of  communication  such  as  telephone,  email,   social
    networking sites and Skype.

 6. The Claimant appealed and the appeal was heard by the FTT on 28th April
    2015. Evidence was given by the Claimant  and  his  partner.   The  FTT
    allowed the  appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules  finding  that  the
    Secretary of State had failed to establish that the Claimant should  be
    refused  limited  leave  to  remain  on  grounds  of  suitability  with
    reference to S-LTR.1.6.  The FTT found that the Claimant satisfied  the
    requirements of paragraph EX.1(b) of Appendix  FM  in  that  he  has  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with his partner who is an Albanian
    refugee, and therefore there were insurmountable obstacles  for  family
    life continuing in Albania.

 7. This decision prompted the Secretary of State to apply  for  permission
    to appeal which  was  granted  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Cruthers in the following terms;

         "2.  In my assessment  there  is  something  arguable  in  all  the
             strands  of  the  grounds  on  which  the   Respondent   seeks
             permission to appeal.  I will summarise those strands:

             (A)  It is arguable that the judge erred in not accepting  the
                    Respondent's case pursuant to the  suitability  criteria
                    in paragraph S-LTR.1.6 of the rules -  especially  given
                    that this is an Appellant who had  illegally  re-entered
                    the United Kingdom within one or two  months  of  having
                    been removed  at  public  expense  on  8th  August  2009
                    (paragraph 8 of the decision under consideration).

             (B)&(C)  It is arguable that the outcome of this appeal  would
                    have  been  different  if  the  judge  had  applied  the
                    principles explained in Farquharson (removal - proof  of
                    conduct) [2013] UKUT 146 (IAC).

             (D)  It is arguable that the judge failed to properly consider
                    the  likelihood  that  the  Appellant's  partner   could
                    reasonably be expected to live with him in Albania -  if
                    the Appellant and his partner do wish to continue family
                    life together after the Appellant  is  next  removed  to
                    Albania."

 8. Directions were issued making provision  for  there  to  be  a  hearing
    before the Upper Tribunal to decide  whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

The Secretary of State's Submissions

 9. Miss Fijiwala relied and expanded upon the grounds contained within the
    application for permission to appeal which are summarised below.

    A - Suitability under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules

    The FTT erred by finding the Secretary of State  relied  entirely  upon
    the Claimant's alleged criminal history in  refusing  the  application.
    It is contended that the Secretary of State at all  times  relied  upon
    the Claimant's immigration history as  well  as  the  alleged  criminal
    offending and in failing to have regard to the  Claimant's  immigration
    history the FTT erred in assessing whether suitability requirements are
    met.

    B - Proof of Conduct

    The FTT correctly  found  that  the  Claimant  failed  to  advance  any
    credible innocent explanation for  the  alleged  taking  of  a  vehicle
    without consent at paragraphs 37-39.  In those circumstances  and  with
    reference to Farquharson the FTT erred by failing to find on a  balance
    of probabilities that the Claimant has been shown to  have  engaged  in
    some or all of the disputed criminal offending alleged by the Secretary
    of State.

    C - Failing to Correctly Follow or Apply a Binding Case Authority

    The Secretary  of  State  relied  upon  the  case  of  Farquharson  and
    submissions were made on this before the FTT.  There is no reference to
    Farquharson in the FTT decision and it is not sufficiently  clear  that
    the FTT directed itself adequately or at all in respect of this case.

    D - Consideration of the Claimant's Partner's Status

    The FTT has  given  significant  weight  to  the  Claimant's  partner's
    ostensible inability to travel to Albania on the basis that  she  is  a
    recognised refugee and her current  travel  document  does  not  permit
    travel to Albania.  The FTT  arguably  erred  by  failing  to  consider
    whether the Claimant's partner's circumstances have changed so that she
    can now safely travel to and reside in Albania, as  she  would  now  no
    longer be returning to Albania as a lone female without family support,
    but would be returning as part of a family unit,  with  the  assistance
    and support of the Claimant.  The FTT erred by failing to consider  the
    same in finding that family life could not reasonably be  continued  in
    Albania.

The Claimant's Submissions

10. Mr Hawkin relied upon  the  combined  rule  24  response  and  skeleton
    argument submitted on behalf of the Claimant.

11. In brief summary it was submitted that the Secretary of State's refusal
    letter confirms that the Secretary of State relied upon the  Claimant's
    alleged criminality and not his immigration history.

12. In relation to proof of conduct, and the  alleged  taking  of  a  motor
    vehicle, the FTT noted that the Claimant was  not  prosecuted  or  even
    charged in relation to that incident due to insufficient evidence.

13. In relation to Farquharson, the FTT directed  himself  to  the  correct
    burden and standard of  proof  and  applied  that  standard  in  making
    detailed findings.

14. The FTT did not err in finding that there were insurmountable obstacles
    to family life continuing in  Albania.   The  Secretary  of  State  was
    seeking to introduce a new argument as to circumstances having changed,
    as this was  not  mentioned  in  the  original  decision,  nor  was  it
    mentioned in submissions before the FTT.  The conclusion reached by the
    FTT as to insurmountable obstacles was a conclusion that  was  entirely
    open to be made on the evidence presented.

15. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

16. I address the Grounds of Appeal in the sequence in which they  are  set
    out in the application for permission.

         A    I find no error in the FTT recording at paragraph 32 that  the
         Secretary of State relies  entirely  upon  the  Claimant's  alleged
         criminal history.  The reasons for refusal letter at  paragraph  16
         indicates that  the  reasons  for  refusal  under  the  suitability
         grounds were outlined in  the  following  paragraphs.   There  then
         follows the heading 'Criminality'.  The reasons are thereafter  set
         out in paragraphs 17-24.

         Those reasons relate to the Claimant's alleged criminal  offending.
         There is no reference to his immigration history in the  paragraphs
         which give reasons for  refusing  the  application.   The  FTT  was
         therefore entitled to find  that  the  Secretary  of  State  relied
         entirely upon the Claimant's  alleged  criminal  history.  The  FTT
         comprehensively addressed  all  of  the  reasons  set  out  by  the
         Secretary of State in paragraphs 17-24 of the reasons  for  refusal
         letter.  This ground discloses no error of law.

         B    There is specific reference in this ground to paragraphs 37-39
         of the  FTT  decision  in  which  consideration  is  given  to  the
         Claimant's alleged involvement in taking a  motor  vehicle  without
         consent on 21st September 2008.  The FTT at paragraph 39  expresses
         some concerns regarding the Claimant's credibility in  relation  to
         this incident, and notes the Claimant was not charged or prosecuted
         due to insufficient evidence.  The FTT was aware  of  the  relevant
         standard of proof as this was set out in paragraph  29.   As  there
         was insufficient evidence to  even  charge  the  Claimant  with  an
         offence, the  FTT  was  entitled  to  attach  no  weight  to  these
         allegations.

         C    It is correct the FTT does not specifically cite  Farquharson.
         That decision gives guidance where the Secretary of State relies on
         allegations of conduct in proceedings for removal, concluding  that
         the same principles apply as to proof of conduct and the assessment
         of risk to the public as in deportation cases.  It was  also  found
         that a criminal charge that has not resulted in a conviction is not
         a criminal record, but the acts that  led  to  the  charge  may  be
         established as  conduct.   In  relation  to  the  legal  principles
         relevant to assess disputed allegations  of  conduct  the  Tribunal
         found, inter alia at paragraph 23;

             "Nevertheless,  where  the  Secretary  of   State   makes   an
             allegation of conduct in the course of an  overall  assessment
             of the merits of the claim to remain or the decision to remove
             in the light  of  Article  8  and  the  provisions  of  former
             Immigration Rule 395C, it is for the  Secretary  of  State  to
             substantiate the conduct relied on  to  the  standard  of  the
             civil balance of probabilities."

         The FTT applied the principles set out above, stating in  paragraph
         29 that with reference to the suitability criteria  the  burden  of
         proof is on the Secretary of State to establish that the  Appellant
         falls for refusal thereunder,  and  the  standard  of  proof  is  a
         balance of  probabilities.   There  is  further  reference  to  the
         correct burden and standard of proof in paragraphs 43  and  45.   I
         conclude that  the  judge  considered  and  correctly  applied  the
         principles in Farquharson and this ground  discloses  no  error  of
         law.

         D    I observe that in the reasons for refusal letter there  is  no
         mention of the fact that the  Claimant's  partner  is  an  Albanian
         refugee and that one of the children also has refugee status.   The
         FTT,  in  my  view,  correctly   considered   the   definition   of
         'insurmountable obstacles' set out in EX.2.   I  accept  the  point
         made on behalf of the Claimant, that prior to the  application  for
         permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, there was no  reference
         to  a  change  of  circumstances  in  relation  to  the  Claimant's
         partner's circumstances.   I  have  not  been  made  aware  of  any
         application to  revoke  her  refugee  status.   As  the  Claimant's
         partner has been granted refugee status on the basis of her fear of
         persecution in Albania, the FTT in my view  was  entitled  to  find
         that there are insurmountable obstacles to family life between  the
         Claimant and his  partner  continuing  in  Albania.   I  accept  Mr
         Hawkin's submission that it was not contended before the  FTT  that
         there had been a change of circumstances that would  make  it  safe
         for the Claimant's partner to return, and `this submission was  not
         challenged before me.

17. The decision of the FTT  is  careful  and  comprehensive  and  contains
    findings with adequate and sustainable reasons for those findings.  The
    grounds submitted by the Secretary of  State  disclose  a  disagreement
    with those findings, but do not disclose an error of law.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law such that the decision must be set aside.

I do not set aside the decision.  The appeal of the Secretary  of  State  is
dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity  direction  and  I  continue  that
order pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008.


Signed   Date 15th October 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

There are no fees paid or payable and therefore there is no fee award


Signed   Date 15th October 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
