
[pic]
IAC-AH-pc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34451/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1st October 2015                  |On 21st October 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          THE HONOURABLE LORD BURNS
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                              Mr Gurpreet Singh
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr Tony Melvin (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    D Ross, promulgated on 21st April 2015, following a hearing  at  Hatton
    Cross on 9th April 2015.  In the determination, the judge dismissed the
    appeal of Mr Gurpreet Singh.  The Appellant subsequently  applied  for,
    and was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal,  and  thus
    the matter comes before us.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of India, who was born on 8th  April
    1991.  He appealed against the decision of the  Respondent  dated  21st
    August 2014, for leave to remain in  the  UK  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student Migrant.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim  is  that  his  Confirmation  of  Acceptance  for
    Studies (CAS) shows the sponsoring college to be the London College  of
    Business Management and Information Technology.  His  course  began  on
    17th February 2014.  This  was  expected  to  end  on  2nd  June  2015.
    However, the CAS showed that  the  sponsorship  had  subsequently  been
    withdrawn, and expired on 14th August 2014.   He  states  that  he  was
    informed by a Ms Vardajan that the licence  of  the  college  had  been
    suspended on 27th August 2014.  It was revoked on 5th January 2015.

 4. The Appellant's case is that the policy of  the  Home  Office  is  that
    where the licence of the Sponsor has been withdrawn, and as a result of
    this the student has lost out on the sponsorship, the Home Office gives
    the student 60 days in order to find another Sponsor, and this has been
    confirmed in Thakur [2011] UKUT 151 and in Patel  (India)  [2011]  UKUT
    211.  He, accordingly,  claims  30  points  under  Appendix  A  of  the
    Immigration Rules with respect to his application on the basis  that  a
    60 day period of grace would have enabled him to find  another  college
    with a sponsorship.

The Judge's Findings

 5. The judge rejected the Appellant's claim.  She held that the burden was
    on the Appellant to show that he complies  with  the  requirements  for
    leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student (see paragraph 6) as  she
    held that "the evidence shows  that  in  fact  the  college  must  have
    withdrawn the sponsorship themselves, since the date when the check was
    made was prior to the time when the college was  suspended"  (paragraph
    8).  She observed how the skeleton argument before  her  observed  that
    the Appellant should have been given 60 days to find  another  college.
    However, "this concession in policy, and case law only applies to cases
    where the college's licence has been  suspended  by  the  Home  Office"
    (paragraph 10).  The appeal could not succeed under the Rules.

 6. That left the question of whether the appeal could succeed under  human
    rights law.  Consideration was given to Article 8 of the ECHR, but  the
    judge held that, "there is no evidence to suggest  that  the  Appellant
    who had lived in India until he came to the UK two years ago would have
    any difficulties in reintegrating" (paragraph 11).  The Appellant could
    also not succeed outside the Immigration Rules (paragraph 12).

Grounds of Application

 7. In the grounds of application, the Appellant reiterated the same points
    made before Judge Ross.  On 25th June 2015, permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by the First-tier Tribunal.

The Hearing

 8. At the hearing before us on 1st October 2015, the Appellant was not  in
    attendance.  Nor was there anyone else in attendance on his behalf.  He
    had no legal representation.  The appeal before  Judge  Ross  had  been
    determined "on the papers".  The appeal before us was meant  to  be  an
    oral hearing but a letter from Malik  &  Co  (Solicitors  &  Advocates)
    dated 1st October 2015 purported to inform the Tribunal that  they  had
    been instructed not to attend the hearing with the appeal to be decided
    "on the papers" again.

Decision

 9. We are satisfied that the making of the decision by the judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that we should set aside the decision  and  remake  the
    decision (see Section 12(2) of TCEA 2007).  Our reasons are as follows.



10. First, the Appellant applied for further leave as a Tier 4  Student  on
    15th February 2014.  Yet, on 21st August 2014 a CAS check  showed  that
    the CAS relied on in the Appellant's application  had  been  withdrawn.
    His application fell for refusal.

11. Second, this suggests that the issue of the withdrawal of the CAS is an
    issue, not between the  Appellant  and  the  Secretary  of  State,  but
    between the Appellant and the revoking college where he attended.

12. Third, this means that the Secretary of State is not acting contrary to
    policy, which policy applies only in circumstances where the  Secretary
    of State has  herself  revoked  a  licence,  thereby  causing  possible
    prejudice to the Appellant, with the result that a period  of  60  days
    grace is give in these circumstances to an applicant to enable  him  or
    her to find another college.  This does not apply here.

13.  Finally,  the  case  law  establishes  that  there  is  no  issue   of
    "unfairness" to be determined in the Appellant's favour.  In EK  (Ivory
    Coast) [2014] EWCA Civ 1517 it was held that,

         "The essence of  the  CAS  element  within  the  PBS  is  that  the
         Secretary of State relies on a check on certification  by  approved
         colleges, and does not have to investigate further.  It is inherent
         in the scheme that an applicant takes the  risk  of  administrative
         error on the part of a college" (see paragraph 33).

    It was also held that the remedy for an Appellant in such  a  situation
    is that,

         "The applicant may have a contractual right of recourse against the
         college.  The fact that there  is  scope  for  applicants  to  seek
         protection against administrative errors by choosing a college with
         a good reputation and  checking  the  contractual  position  before
         enrolling is of some relevance to the fair  balance  to  be  struck
         between the public interest in the due operation of the PBS  regime
         and the interests of an individual who is detrimentally affected by
         it" (paragraph 34).

    All of this places the onus upon the applicant.  In the  instant  case,
    the issue is of no concern to the Respondent Secretary of State.  There
    is no error of law.  There is no unfairness.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

No anonymity order is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    21st October 2015

