
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
IA/34723/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |      Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 November 2017                    |      On 4 January 2018             |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

                           Fatai Gublahun Taofeek
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. M. Al-Rashid, Counsel, instructed by David A
Grand
For the Respondent:    Mr. P. Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Davidson, promulgated on 3 February 2017,  in  which  he
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse further leave to remain.


 2. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


    "The grounds  contend  error  in  taking  account  of  the  Appellant's
    unlawful immigration status whilst still a minor.  Although he  was  an
    adult by the date of the decision appealed against, the failure of  the
    judge at paragraph 31 to distinguish between his  pre  and  post  adult
    unlawful status may give rise to an arguable error of law."


 3. I  heard  submissions  from  both  representatives  following  which  I
    reserved my decision.


Submissions


 4. Mr. Al-Rashid submitted that there was no dispute regarding the history
    of the Appellant's case.  He came to the United Kingdom aged eleven and
    had been here ever since.  His parents had  come  before  him  and  his
    younger sister came with him.  They had  all  been  granted  30  months
    leave under the immigration rules.  He had two other siblings who  were
    British citizens.  He was the only member of the  family  who  remained
    without leave.  The Respondent had refused his application  because  he
    was aged over 18, he had no family life with his family, and there were
    no significant obstacles to his return.   The  judge  had  agreed  with
    this.  I was referred to paragraphs [16] and [27] of the decision where
    the  judge  stated  that  there  was  no  claim  to  remain  under  the
    immigration rules.  He submitted that this was  clearly  wrong  because
    consideration of a claim had to start with the immigration rules.


 5. In relation to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), "very significant obstacles", I
    was referred to the case of Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813,  in  particular
    paragraph [14].  This states:


    "The idea of "integration" calls for a broad evaluative judgment to  be
    made as to whether the individual will be enough of an insider in terms
    of understanding how life in the  society  in  that  other  country  is
    carried on and a capacity to  participate  in  it,  so  as  to  have  a
    reasonable opportunity to be accepted there, to be able to operate on a
    day-to-day basis in that society and to build up  within  a  reasonable
    time a  variety  of  human  relationships  to  give  substance  to  the
    individual's private or family life."


 6. I was referred to [23] of the decision.  The judge had  not  adequately
    considered whether or not there were very significant obstacles to  the
    Appellant's reintegration.  He made no reference to the  caselaw.   The
    Appellant had been in the United Kingdom between the ages of 11 and 21.
     No reasoning  had  been  given  at  [23]  as  to  why  there  were  no
    significant obstacles  to  his  reintegration  into  Nigeria.   It  was
    submitted that there was no way that the Appellant would be  enough  of
    an insider.  He was in fact an outsider to life in Nigeria.   The  test
    applied in relation to "very significant obstacles" was wrong.


  7. The judge had found there was no family life  at  paragraphs  [18]  and
     [22].  It  was  submitted  that  this  went  against  all  the  settled
     authorities.  I was referred to the case of Rai [2017] EWCA Civ 320, in
     particular paragraph [18], which confirmed the older authorities on the
     existence of family life between adults.  Rai referred to the fact that
     the judgment in Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31 had  been  interpreted  too
     restrictively in the past.  It also referred to the case of  AA  [2012]
     Imm AR 1, which held that a significant factor would be whether or  not
     the adult child had founded a family life of his own.  If he was  still
     single and living with his parents, he was likely to enjoy family  life
     with them.  There was also a quotation from paragraph [49] of  AA:  "An
     examination of the Court's case-law would  tend  to  suggest  that  the
     applicant, a young adult of 24 years old, who resides with  his  mother
     and has not yet founded a family of his own, can be regarded as  having
     "family life"."


 8. I was referred to [20] of Rai, which quotes  from  the  case  of  Singh
    [2015] EWCA Civ 630:


    "I point out that the approach of the  European  Commission  for  Human
    Rights cited approvingly in Kugathas did not include any requirement of
    exceptionality. It all depends on the facts.  The  love  and  affection
    between an adult and his parents or siblings will not of itself justify
    a finding of a family life. There has to be something  more.   A  young
    adult living with his parents or siblings will normally have  a  family
    life to be respected under Article 8.  A child enjoying a  family  life
    with his parents does not suddenly cease  to  have  a  family  life  at
    midnight as he turns 18 years of age. On the other hand, a young  adult
    living independently of his parents may well not have a family life for
    the purposes of Article 8."


 9. I was also referred to [16] of Singh.  It was submitted that there  was
    no criminality in the case of the Appellant.  I  was  referred  to  the
    quotation from Boussara and also from JB (India) [2009] EWCA  Civ  234.
    At five occasions in the decision, at [16], [20], [21], [31] and  [32],
    the judge had referred to the illegal entry status of the Appellant and
    had blamed him for his parents' misdemeanours, which was wrong.


10. I was referred to the case of HK (Turkey) [2010] EWCA Civ 583, set  out
    at [22] of Singh, and the case of AP (India) [2015] EWCA  Civ  89,  set
    out at [23] of Singh.  This states:


    "It seems to me that adult children (male  or  female)  who  are  young
    students, from most backgrounds, usually continue to form an  important
    part of the family in which they have  grown  up.   They  attend  their
    courses and gravitate to their homes  during  the  holidays,  and  upon
    graduation, while (as the FTT put it) they seek to 'make their own way'
    in the world.  Such a child is very much part of  the  on-going  family
    unit and, until such a child does fly the nest, his or her belonging to
    the family is as strong as ever.  The proportionality  of  interference
    with the family rights of the various family members should receive,  I
    think, careful consideration in individual cases  where  this  type  of
    issue arises."


11. In response  Mr.  Nath  submitted  that  the  judge  had  set  out  the
    Appellant's situation at [22] and [23].  The judge had not  incorrectly
    considered the wrong requirements.  He had to  consider  whether  there
    were very significant obstacles.  It was a consideration for the  judge
    that the Appellant had arrived illegally at the age of eleven.  It  was
    open to the judge to consider that the Appellant was  now  here  as  an
    adult.


12. In relation to family life and the other siblings, he queried  how  the
    case had been put to the First-tier Tribunal.  There was  not  much  in
    the decision on that issue and it  had  not  been  submitted  that  the
    emphasis was on the family and the  Appellant's  integration  into  his
    family.  He was an adult.  If he went to Hull University, he would  not
    be looking to his family for support.  This finding  was  open  to  the
    judge.  The other family members had some form of  limited  leave.   It
    was open to the judge to find that there was no family life  given  his
    age and surrounding circumstances.


13. In response Mr. Al-Rashid referred me to the Appellant's bundle and the
    witness statements of the Appellant and  his  father.   The  judge  had
    taken no issue with the evidence before him.  I was referred to [6]  to
    [8] of the Appellant's statement,  and  [2]  to  [4]  of  his  father's
    statement.  The unchallenged evidence had been accepted by  the  judge,
    and the evidence showed that there was family life.  He submitted  that
    it was wrong of the judge to find that, if the Appellant stayed in  the
    United Kingdom, he would use public funds for his education [21].  This
    was not  correct  given  that  there  was  now  no  public  funding  of
    university even for British citizens.


Error of law


14. In relation to the judge's consideration of whether or  not  there  was
    family life between the Appellant, his parents and  his  siblings,  the
    judge finds at [18] that the Appellant does not have such family  life.
    He states:


    "However, Article 8 cannot be engaged in respect  of  his  family  life
    because he is now a single adult and therefore does not have any family
    in the UK, since there is no evidence of anything more than the  normal
    ties of love and affection between the Appellant and  his  parents  and
    siblings."


15. At [22] he states:


    "I find that the Appellant has no family  life  in  the  UK  to  engage
    Article 8.  He is now 20 and a single adult.  He said himself  that  if
    he went to Hull University to study he was 'old enough to take care  of
    himself'.  His parents and younger sister only had discretionary  leave
    to remain in the UK."


16. The judge does not reject the evidence of the Appellant or his  father,
    and this evidence is unchallenged.  At [18]  the  judge  states  simply
    that Article 8 cannot be engaged because  the  Appellant  is  a  single
    adult with no family in the United Kingdom, since there is no  evidence
    of anything more than the normal ties of love and affection.   However,
    there was evidence before the judge in  the  form  of  the  Appellant's
    witness statement of the dependency that he had on his family.  In  his
    witness statement he says:


    "The second point to note is that in my refusal letter of 24th November
    2015, the secretary of state does not mention that my two siblings  are
    British citizens, and that my other sister and  both  my  parents  have
    been granted 30-months leave to remain after a successful appeal  which
    all started with my  parents'  application  back  in  June  2012.   The
    refusal  letter  appears  to  have  erased  my  family  and  our  whole
    immigration history from the decision-making process." [6]


    "My family and I are very distressed by the refusal  to  issue  me  any
    leave.  We have all lived together  in  the  UK  since  my  arrival  in
    January 2008.  I still  live  with  my  parents  and  siblings.   I  am
    dependent upon my parents in every respect - financially,  emotionally,
    and support in every respect.  I do not work as I am not  permitted  to
    do so.  I have no income of my own.  I have lived here since the age of
    11, and all my friends are here.  I have never  been  back  to  Nigeria
    (for nearly nine years now) and I do not know anyone there.  I  am  not
    in touch with any relatives and do not have any family  connections  in
    Nigeria.  Simbiat is 17, and the twins are 11.  I help them with  their
    school/college work, and get on with them  like  any  normal  family  -
    going out, having fun, playing games, etc.  We are one family unit  and
    we are very upset to have to be separated in this way." [8]


17. The Appellant's father states:


    "We both work full-time and all  the  children,  including  Fatai,  are
    totally dependent upon us financially and in every other way.  Fatai is
    an integral part of his family.  We do things together as a family, and
    often Fatai does activities with his brother and sisters, and it  is  a
    joy for us parents to see them get along so well.  He  is  really  good
    for his younger siblings.  He motivates them and  tells  them  to  work
    hard and do well at school." [2]


18.      The judge has not rejected this evidence.  He states that there is
    "no evidence of  anything  more  than  the  normal  ties  of  love  and
    affection" but there was such evidence  before  him.   No  reasons  are
    given, either in [18] or [22], as to why this  evidence  has  not  been
    taken into account, or why  this  evidence  has  been  rejected.   This
    evidence points to the existence of family life.


19. I have taken into account the cases to which I was referred by Mr.  Al-
    Rashid, in particular the case of Rai which made  clear  that  Kugathas
    had been interpreted too restrictively in the past.  In effect, as held
    by Rai, all that needs to be shown is that there is real, committed  or
    effective support [28].  If there is such real, committed or  effective
    support, both financially and emotionally, nothing exceptional needs to
    be shown and family life will be shown to exist.


20. Further, as set out in paragraph 36 of Rai:


    "If, however, the concept to which the decision  maker  will  generally
    need to pay attention is 'support' - which means, as Sedley LJ  put  it
    in Kugathas, 'support' which is 'real' or 'committed' or 'effective'  -
    there was, it seems to me, ample and undisputed evidence on  which  the
    Upper Tribunal Judge could have based a finding that such 'support' was
    present in the Appellant's case."


21. I find that there was evidence before the judge to show that there  was
    real, effective and committed support, both  financial  and  emotional.
    The judge has failed to give reasons for why this evidence did not lead
    him to find that there was family life between the  Appellant  and  his
    family, given that he did not reject the evidence.


22. I have also taken into account the case AP (India) ([11]  above).   The
    judge has placed weight on the fact that the  Appellant  said  that  he
    could take care of himself if he went  to  university.   However,  just
    because he would  be  able  to  take  care  of  himself  when  away  at
    university does not mean that family life has ceased to exist.  As made
    clear in AP (India), adult children  who  are  young  students  usually
    continue to form an important part of the family  in  which  they  have
    grown up.  It is clear from  the  evidence  set  out  in  that  witness
    statement that the Appellant is an important part of  the  family,  and
    that  his  relationship  with  his  siblings  is   important   as   his
    relationship with his parents.


23. I find that the judge has failed properly to consider the evidence, and
    has failed to analyse it with  reference  to  the  case  law  regarding
    family life between an adult child and his parents, or an  adult  child
    and his siblings.  I find that insufficient reasons have been given for
    the finding that there is no family life.  The findings  seem  to  rely
    simply on the fact that the Appellant is a single  adult  of  20  years
    old, and is prepared to go to university and look after himself when he
    is there.  I find the decision contains a material error of law in  the
    failure properly to consider whether the Appellant has family life with
    his parents and siblings.


24. In relation to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), the decision  is  not  entirely
    clear as the judge states at [16] that the Appellant has "no  claim  to
    remain under the Immigration Rules",  but  then  goes  on  to  consider
    paragraph  276ADE(1),  which  forms  part  of  the  immigration  rules.
    Paragraph 276ADE(1) sets out the requirements by the Respondent for  an
    individual to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  with  reference  to  his
    private life.  To state that the Appellant has no claim to remain under
    the immigration rules is therefore misleading.


25. When considering paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), the judge  has  set  out  the
    correct test, "very significant obstacles" [23], but he has  failed  to
    take into account the caselaw which  considers  how  "very  significant
    obstacles" should be analysed.  The case of Kamara considered the level
    of integration, and whether  an  individual  would  be  "enough  of  an
    insider" to participate in society.   The  judge  has  found  that  the
    Appellant, as an adult, can return there.  He states:


    "The Appellant has lived there for the first 12 years of his  life;  He
    has some relatives still living there; He  is  now  an  adult;  he  was
    separated from his parents between the age of 4  and  12  when  he  was
    brought up by his grandmother; He can be supported by the family in the
    UK; He evidently adapted to life in the UK after arriving and can  just
    as easily re-adapt to life in Nigeria  on  return;  He  is  a  Nigerian
    national." [23]


26. In paragraph [24] he finds that the Appellant would be at no linguistic
    disadvantage, and could obtain education in Nigeria.


27. There is no real evaluation of the Appellant's circumstances.  He is an
    individual returning to Nigeria where he last lived as a young boy.  He
    has been in the United Kingdom from the age of  eleven.   There  is  no
    reference to the fact that the Appellant has not spent any of his adult
    life in Nigeria, nor worked in Nigeria.  There is no reference  to  the
    fact that his formative years from the  ages  of  eleven  onwards  were
    spent in the United Kingdom.


28. The judge does not make any distinction between when the Appellant  was
    an adult and when he was a child.  The Appellant  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom as a child.  He was not involved in the decision to  enter  the
    United Kingdom illegally.  The fact that he  has  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom illegally is not of his doing.  The caselaw is clear  that  the
    sins of the parents should not be visited  on  the  children,  but  the
    judge has paid no account to the fact that he is not to blame  for  his
    illegal presence in the United Kingdom.


29. I find that uppermost in the mind of the judge was the  fact  that  the
    Appellant had been here illegally for eight  years.   However,  he  has
    only been an adult since 2014.  The majority of  the  time  spent  here
    illegally was as a child.  He is not responsible for having  come  here
    illegally and it is incumbent on the judge to recognise that fact.


30. I find that the judge has given insufficient reasons  for  the  finding
    that there  are  no  very  significant  obstacles  to  the  Appellant's
    integration in Nigeria at [23] and [24].  He  has  failed  to  consider
    whether the amount of time spent in the United Kingdom means  that  the
    Appellant is not an insider and will not be able to  integrate  in  the
    same way as if he were an adult Nigerian.


31. I find that the decision involves the making of material errors of  law
    and I set the decision aside.


Remaking


32. I have considered the Appellant's  appeal  under  Article  8,  both  in
    relation to his family and his private life.   My  starting  point  for
    this consideration is the immigration rules.   It  has  been  submitted
    that the Appellant meets the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) in
    relation to his private life.


 33. I find that the Appellant has been in the United Kingdom since the  age
     of eleven.  I find that he has spent his formative years in the  United
     Kingdom.  I find that he has not returned to Nigeria since he  came  in
     2008.  He speaks English, but there is no evidence before  me  that  he
     speaks any other languages spoken in Nigeria.


34. As stated above, the judge in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  accepted  the
    Appellant's evidence but found nevertheless that  he  could  return  to
    Nigeria.  I find that the  Appellant's  elderly  grandparents  live  in
    Nigeria but I find that the Appellant is not in contact with any of his
    relatives in Nigeria.  Indeed, I find that he is not  in  contact  with
    anyone in Nigeria.  I find on the balance of probabilities  that  there
    would not be any support for him in Nigeria from family or friends.   I
    find that he has not lived in Nigeria as an adult.  I find  he  has  no
    experience of working in Nigeria.  Indeed,  I  find  that  he  has  not
    worked at all, as he has not had  permission  to  work  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  I therefore find that, although he would be returning  as  an
    adult, he is an adult who has spent almost ten years away from Nigeria,
    those years being between the ages of 11 and 21.


35. I find, with reference to the case of Kamara, that  the  Appellant  has
    shown on the balance of probabilities, given the length of time he  has
    been absent from Nigeria, and the lack  of  support  in  Nigeria,  that
    there would be very significant obstacles  to  his  reintegration  into
    Nigeria.  I find that the Appellant will not be "enough of  an  insider
    in terms of understanding how life in the society in that other country
    is carried on and a capacity to participate in it".  I  find  that  the
    Appellant meets the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).


36. I have considered the Appellant's appeal under Article  8  outside  the
    requirements of the immigration rules.  I find that the Appellant has a
    family life with his parents and  siblings  sufficient  to  engage  the
    operation of Article 8.  In making this  finding,  I  have  taken  into
    account the evidence of the Appellant and of his father as set  out  in
    their witness statements, which was not challenged.  I have taken  into
    account the caselaw set out above.  I find  that  the  Appellant  lives
    with his parents and three siblings.  I find  that  he  is  financially
    dependent on his parents.  He does not have any income of his  own.   I
    find that he is emotionally dependent on his parents and siblings.   He
    has not formed his own family.  He has not formed an  independent  life
    away from his parents and siblings.  I find that the  Appellant  is  as
    much a part of the family now as he was when he was under  the  age  of
    18, and is as much a part of the family as his younger siblings are.  I
    find in accordance with the caselaw, that although he is an  adult,  he
    still has a family life with his parents  and  siblings  sufficient  to
    engage the operation of Article 8.


37. I find that the Appellant has been in the United Kingdom since  he  was
    eleven years old, almost ten years,  and  has  formed  a  private  life
    sufficient to engage the operation of  Article  8.   I  find  that  the
    decision interferes with both his family and private life.


38. Continuing the steps set out  in  Razgar,  I  find  that  the  proposed
    interference would be in accordance with the law, as  being  a  regular
    immigration decision taken by UKBA in accordance with  the  immigration
    rules.  In terms of proportionality, the Tribunal has to strike a  fair
    balance between the rights of the individual and the interests  of  the
    community.  The public interest in this case  is  the  preservation  of
    orderly and fair immigration control in the interests of all  citizens.
    Maintaining the integrity of the immigration rules is self-evidently  a
    very important public interest.  In practice, this will  usually  trump
    the  qualified  rights  of  the  individual,  unless   the   level   of
    interference is very significant.  I find that in this case, the  level
    of  interference  would  be  significant  and  that  it  would  not  be
    proportionate.


39. In considering whether the decision is proportionate I have taken  into
    account my findings above in relation to the immigration rules.


40. In assessing the public interest I have taken into account  section  19
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.   Section  117B(1)
    provides that the maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in
    the public interest.  I have found above that the Appellant  meets  the
    requirements of the immigration rules in relation to his  private  life
    under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).  I therefore find that  the  maintenance
    of effective immigration control will not be compromised by a grant  of
    leave to remain.


41. I find that the Appellant can speak  and  understand  English  (section
    117B(2)).  I find that  he  is  not  financially  independent  (section
    117B(3)).  Section 117B(4) provides that little weight should be  given
    to a private life established by a person at a time when the person  is
    in the United Kingdom unlawfully.  While I find that the Appellant  was
    in the United  Kingdom  unlawfully,  I  find  that  this  was  not  his
    decision.  He was brought to the United Kingdom as a child.  He was not
    involved in the decision to stay in the United Kingdom  unlawfully  and
    no blame should attach to him for this.  He was still a child  when  an
    application was made for leave to remain, as he was  dependent  on  his
    parents' application ([5] of the  Appellant's  witness  statement).   I
    find that in the Appellant's circumstances, where I have found that  he
    meets the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), and where he was not
    responsible for his illegal status, greater weight should be  given  to
    his private life.


42. Section 117B(5) does not apply.  Section 117B(6) is not relevant as the
    Appellant does not have a parental  relationship  with  any  qualifying
    children, although two of the the  Appellant's  younger  siblings  with
    whom he has a family life are British citizens.


43. I find that the Appellant forms part of a family unit consisting of two
    siblings who are British  citizens,  and  his  parents  and  a  further
    sibling who have been granted leave to remain.  The  Appellant  is  the
    only one who  was  not  granted  leave  to  remain  by  the  Respondent
    although, when his parents made an application in 2012,  the  Appellant
    was included as  a  dependent  on  that  application.   The  Respondent
    refused to grant him leave primarily on  the  basis  of  his  age,  and
    although she referred to his parents and siblings,  she  did  not  give
    full consideration to his family circumstances.  The fact that  he  has
    since become an adult does not mean that he has ceased to form part  of
    the family unit, as I have found  above.   I  find  that  it  would  be
    disproportionate to separate him from  this  family  unit  in  all  the
    circumstances.


 44. I find that the Appellant has lived in the United Kingdom since the age
     of eleven.  As stated above, the fact that he was not here  legally  is
     not his fault.  He cannot be held responsible for the  actions  of  his
     parents who brought him here when he was still a child.  He  has  spent
     his formative teenage years in the United Kingdom.  He has spent almost
     half of his life in the United  Kingdom.   He  has  not  been  back  to
     Nigeria since he came to the United Kingdom in 2008, almost  ten  years
     ago.  He has no contact with Nigeria.  He has never lived in Nigeria as
     an adult.  He is a young adult who has not yet developed an independent
     life.


 45. Taking into account all of the above, and giving particular  weight  to
     the fact that I have found that the Appellant meets the requirements of
     the immigration rules, I find that the balance comes down in favour  of
     the  Appellant.   I  find,  in  carrying  out  the  balancing  exercise
     required, that the Appellant has shown on the balance of  probabilities
     that the decision is a breach of his rights, and those of his  parents,
     and siblings, to a family and private life under Article 8 ECHR.


 46. I do not make an anonymity direction.


Decision


 47. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involves  the  making  of  a
     material error of law, and I set the decision aside.


 48. I remake the decision, allowing the Appellant's appeal on human  rights
     grounds with reference to his family and private life under Article  8.
     The Appellant meets the requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE(1)  of  the
     immigration rules.


 49. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 2 January 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award.  The Respondent did  not  give  proper
consideration to the Appellant's family circumstances in the decision.   She
was aware that the Appellant had applied as  a  dependent  on  his  parents'
application.  She was aware that he was the only member  of  his  family  to
whom she had not granted leave, but she failed to give due consideration  to
his family situation.  In the circumstances I  make  a  fee  award  for  the
entire fee paid.


Signed                                  Date 2 January 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain


