
[pic]
IAC-AH-sc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34371/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower,          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 18th December 2015                |On 28th January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     deputy upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                               Mohammed islam
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Howard of Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Bangladesh born on  2nd  June  1980.
    Apparently the Appellant first entered the UK sometime in 1991  and  in
    June 2007 he applied for leave to remain.  Thereafter the Appellant has
    a lengthy immigration history.  Suffice it  to  say  that  following  a
    Judicial Review application made in June 2014, the Respondent agreed to
    reconsider an application made by the Appellant on 13th  February  2014
    for leave to remain on human rights grounds  under  Article  8  of  The
    European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  (ECHR).   The  reconsideration
    resulted in the application being refused again for the  reasons  given
    in the Respondent's letter of 14th August 2014.  At the same  time  the
    Respondent decided to remove the  Appellant  under  the  provisions  of
    Section 10 of the Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  1999.   The  Appellant
    appealed, and his appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge J Pacey
    (the Judge) sitting at Birmingham on 14th November 2014.   She  decided
    to dismiss the appeal for the reasons given in her Decision dated  21st
    November 2014.  The Appellant sought leave to appeal that decision, and
    on 5th February 2015 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. It was the Appellant's case that he had lived  and  worked  in  the  UK
    continuously since 1991.  The Judge dismissed the  appeal  because  she
    found the Appellant not to be a credible witness and that therefore she
    could not place any reliance upon his evidence.  She therefore rejected
    his case.

 4. The Judge gave various reasons for finding  the  Appellant  not  to  be
    credible.  She found contradictions in the Appellant's  evidence  which
    she also described as, at times, inherently  implausible.   The  Judged
    noticed that there was a paucity  of  documentary  evidence,  and  that
    which was produced contained  contradictions.   The  Judge  also  found
    discrepancies in the evidence of the Appellant and that  given  by  two
    witnesses at the hearing, namely Mohammed Miah and Abdul Kaium.

 5. In the grounds of application and at the hearing Mr Howard argued  that
    the Judge had erred in law in  coming  to  her  conclusion  as  to  the
    credibility of the Appellant.  This was because the judge had failed to
    take into account and make findings  in  respect  of  the  evidence  of
    Christopher  Poynton,  Margaret  Ullah,  and  Iftikhar   Shah.    These
    witnesses had made statements included in  the  Appellant's  Bundle  of
    Documents which was before the Judge.   The  Judge  referred  to  these
    documents at paragraph 27 of the Decision, but there was no analysis of
    their content.

 6. In response, Mr Mills argued that there had been no such error of  law.
    The  Judge  had  come  to  a  conclusion  concerning  the   Appellant's
    credibility which was open to her upon the  evidence  before  her,  and
    which she comprehensively explained.   The  Judge  had  carried  out  a
    careful  analysis  of  the  evidence   and   had   identified   various
    discrepancies and contradictions which bearing in mind the standard  of
    proof of a balance  of  probabilities,  justified  her  finding  as  to
    credibility.

 7. I find that there was an error of law in the decision of the  Judge  as
    argued by Mr Howard so that that  decision  should  be  set  aside.   I
    accept the argument of Mr Mills that the Judge  analysed  most  of  the
    evidence before her and gave a number of reasons for finding  that  the
    Appellant lacked credibility.  However, the Judge failed even to  refer
    to the evidence of three witnesses who, although they did not give oral
    evidence at  the  hearing,  made  statements.   Those  statements  were
    material to the issues in the appeal as they dealt with the  length  of
    time which those witnesses had known the Appellant  in  the  UK.   This
    amounts to such a significant body of evidence for the finding  of  the
    Judge as to credibility to be regarded as safe, even when applying  the
    standard of proof of the balance of probabilities.   In  my  view  this
    amounts to an error of law.

 8. I did not proceed to remake the  decision  of  the  Judge.   Instead  I
    direct that the appeal is returned to the First-tier Tribunal for  that
    decision to be re-made there and new findings of fact  made.   None  of
    the findings of fact of the Judge are to  be  preserved.   This  is  in
    accordance with paragraph 7.2(b) of the Proactive Statements.

Notice of Decision

 9. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

10. I set aside the decision.

11. The decision will be re-made in the First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity

12. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order for anonymity.  I was not
    asked to make such an order, and indeed I find no reason to do so.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
