

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/34329/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                    |              Decision & Reasons     |
|                                         |Promulgated                          |
|On: 6 November 2015                      |              On: 11 December 2015   |
|                                         |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA

                                   Between

                            MS Beatrice Adu Darko
                        (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                THE SECETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:          Just and Brown Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss Fujiwala Senior Presenting Officer


                                                  DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana  born  on  28  October  1976.  She
      appeals against the decision of the respondent dated  12  August  2011
      for leave to remain in the United Kingdom pursuant to Article 8 of the
      European Convention on  Human  Rights.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  R
      Chowdhury in a decision dated 19 June 2015 dismissed  the  appellant's
      appeal under the Immigration Rules  and  Article  8  of  the  European
      Convention on Human Rights. Permission to appeal was granted by first-
      tier Tribunal Judge Robertson on 23 September 2015 saying that  it  is
      arguable that the Judge's assessment of proportionality under  Article
      8 where the Judge does not refer to  section  117B  (6)  and  has  not
      explicitly applied its provisions to the appellant's  eldest  daughter
      and permission is granted on that basis.




      First-tier Tribunal's findings


   2. The Judge made the following findings in  his  determination  which  I
      summarise. The appellant does not satisfy the Immigration Rules  under
      Appendix FM in paragraph 276 ADE. She was 29 years old when  she  came
      to the United Kingdom and had previously  worked  in  Ghana.  Judicial
      notice is taken of the fact that the appellant  must  have  come  from
      comfortable circumstances in Ghana in order to  obtain  a  multi-entry
      visit Visa and to secure further extensions to her leave on the  basis
      that she was seeking private medical treatment. This is not a case  of
      a young woman having left  the  country  before  establishing  herself
      fully in Ghana.


   3. No evidence has been provided that demonstrates there  would  be  very
      significant obstacles to the appellant's reintegration into Ghana.  It
      is clear from our own evidence that she has no  wider  family  in  the
      United Kingdom and has lived the majority of life in  Ghana.  She  has
      siblings  in  that  country  although  she  says  they  have   limited
      resources.


   4. The Tribunal was not dealing with any  appeals  from  the  appellant's
      husband and children and therefore he could not consider  any  appeals
      under the Immigration Rules. Following the case of Bekou Betts, he can
      only look at the appellant's family life respect to Article 8.


   5. The upper Tribunal's decision in refusing the appellant permission  to
      apply for judicial review dated 12 February 2015 is noted.  The  upper
      Tribunal noted  that  the  appellant's  grounds  in  that  application
      mirrored the  same  grounds  of  the  appeal,  presented  are  without
      arguable merit.


   6. The appellant has failed to demonstrate that any member of her  family
      could satisfy the Immigration Rules. Further, the upper Tribunal found
      that Article 8 does not allow a person to choose the country in  which
      they live. The best interests of the children are to remain with their
      parents. The family would be returned as one. There is  no  basis  for
      granting leave outside the Immigration Rules.


   7. In respect of Article 8 in a particular section 117B these  provisions
      apply to all appeals heard on or after 28 July  2014  irrespective  of
      when the application or immigration decision was made.


   8. The appellant's leave to remain expired on 27 June 2008. The appellant
      and her family thereafter had  a  precarious  immigration  status  for
      nearly 3 years until she made an  application  for  further  leave  to
      remain on human rights grounds on 17 June 2011. It was  accepted  that
      the appellant and her children and husband are  English  speakers  but
      that this appellant together with the family would be a burden on  the
      taxpayer. She has shown a disregard for the  immigration  controls  of
      this country.


   9. The private life of the appellant's eldest child has  been  considered
      and regard has been had to the evidence from all the children  schools
      that they are doing well. Maintenance of effective immigration control
      must be considered and if the daughter was older, it is arguable  that
      a private life would be more entrenched in the United Kingdom so as to
      make a removal disproportionate. However at this time I find that  the
      removal of the family is proportionate.


      Grounds of appeal


  10. The grounds of appeal state  the  following  which  I  summarise.  The
      appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 22 January 2000. Whilst  in
      the United Kingdom she applied for further leave to remain for medical
      purposes. She was granted further leave to remain until 27 June  2008.
      A further application was refused by the Home Office and the appellant
      has lived in the United Kingdom ever since.


  11. While in the United Kingdom she started a relationship and married  by
      way of a  ceremonial  marriage  in  Ghana.  On  27  October  2006  the
      appellant gave birth to her daughter and on 31 December 2007 she  gave
      birth to her son and had another son on 23 March  2010.  The  children
      are well settled in school and nursery  in  the  United  Kingdom.  The
      appellant, her husband and the children live together  in  the  United
      Kingdom as a family.


  12. Whilst in the United Kingdom the appellant submitted an application to
      the Home Office for leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  based  on
      human rights and paragraph 276 ADE  of  the  immigration  rules.  This
      application was refused.


  13. The Judge failed to identify that the eldest daughter was a  qualified
      child having resided in the United Kingdom for over seven years as  at
      the date of the appellant's application. She and her parents  enjoy  a
      paternal relationship in the United Kingdom. She  also  enjoys  family
      life in the United Kingdom with her brothers. Given  that  the  eldest
      child is well settled in school in the United  Kingdom,  it  would  be
      unreasonable to expect them to leave the United  Kingdom.  The  public
      interest under Article 8 does not require the appellant's removal from
      the United Kingdom. In the circumstances  the  provisions  of  section
      117B (6) of the nationality and immigration act 2002 is irrelevant.


  14. The Judge erred in law when he did not appropriately  apply  paragraph
      276ADE of the Immigration Rules. As at the  date  of  the  appellant's
      application, her child was under the age of 18 and has  lived  in  the
      United Kingdom continuously for at least  seven  years.  She  is  well
      settled in school are progressing well therefore it  would  have  been
      totally unreasonable to uproot her and relocate her to Ghana. She  has
      never lived in Ghana before does not speak the  Guinean  dialect.  The
      school and educational situation in Ghana is deplorable.


      The hearing


  15. At the hearing I heard submissions as to whether there is an error  of
      law in the determination.


      Findings on whether there is an error of law


  16. Having carefully considered the determination, I find that there is no
      material error of law in the determination. The Judge found that  none
      of the appellant's family were able to satisfy the  Immigration  Rules
      and that the Upper Tribunal found in  the  appellant's  husbands  that
      Article 8 does not allow a person to choose the country in which  they
      live. The Judge further noted that the best interests of the  children
      are to remain with their parents and that the family would be returned
      as one to Ghana.


  17. The Judge found that there is  an  education  system  in  Ghana  which
      although may not be as good as the United Kingdom  took  into  account
      the case of Azmi-Moyed and others [2013] UKUT 00197 which stated  that
      seven years from the age of four is likely to be more significant to a
      child in the first seven years of  life.  The  Judge  found  that  the
      appellant's daughter was young enough to adapt to life in education in
      Ghana. I do not find this is a perverse finding in light of  the  fact
      that the entire family would be returned to Ghana with the  appellant.
      A child is not a British citizen and therefore requiring her to  leave
      with her family is more than reasonable in all the  circumstances.  No
      error of law has been demonstrated in the determination.


  18. At paragraph 22, the Judge considered the appellant's eldest daughters
      private life in the United Kingdom and accepted  that  she  was  doing
      well. He was entitled  to  find  that  effective  immigration  control
      dictates that she should accompany her family to Ghana. He also  found
      that a private life would have been more relevant  after  the  age  of
      four.


  19. I find that there is no material error of law in the determination and
      a differently  constituted  Tribunal  would  not  come  to  any  other
      decision in light of the fact the appellant or her daughter is  not  a
      British citizen  and  when  the  appellant's  immigration  status  was
      precarious in the United Kingdom although I accept that cannot be held
      against her children.


      Decision


      Appeal dismissed


      Signed by


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana
      This 2nd day of December 2015

