
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/34668/2014
                                                               IA/34672/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 February 2016                  |On 18 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                           MS KALAIVANI SIVAKUMAR
                            MR JAYARAM SIVAKUMAR
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:  No appearance
For the Respondent: Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision, promulgated on 9 July 2015,  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Haria (hereinafter referred to as the FTTJ).

Background

 2. The first appellant applied for further leave to remain  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) student on 6 March 2014 in order to  follow  a  NQF  level  7
    Diploma in Healthcare Management at the  European  College  for  Higher
    Education. The second appellant applied for leave to remain,  dependent
    upon the first appellant's claim. Their applications were refused on 16
    June 2014 as the Secretary of State learned that  the  Confirmation  of
    Acceptance for Studies (CAS) previously issued to the  first  appellant
    had been withdrawn.  Consequently no points were awarded for a  CAS  or
    for maintenance.

 3. In the grounds of appeal, it was argued that Secretary of State  should
    have contacted the first appellant when the CAS was withdrawn in  order
    to enable her to provide another one. Reference was made  to  a  common
    law duty of fairness and the decision not being in accordance with  the
    law. A passing reference was also made to Article 8 ECHR.

 4. At the hearing before the FTTJ, the appellants did not  appear  despite
    having initially requested an oral hearing. A  representative  attended
    the hearing on their behalves but requested that the appeals  be  dealt
    with on the papers.  A skeleton argument stated  that  the  reason  the
    first appellant's CAS was withdrawn was because the Secretary of  State
    had removed the Tier 4 sponsor's licence. Accordingly,  it  was  argued
    that further leave to remain of 60 days should  have  been  granted  to
    enable the first appellant to switch to a different sponsor.

 5. The first appellant's witness  statement  disputed  that  her  CAS  was
    withdrawn and said that it was more likely that  the  college  provider
    had been removed from the register. The FTTJ did not  accept  that  the
    first appellant's case was on all fours  with  the  scenario  in  Patel
    (revocation of sponsor licence -  fairness)  India  [2011]  UKUT  00211
    (IAC) owing to a lack of evidence that there had been any change in the
    status of the sponsor. The FTTJ was guided by EK (Ivory Coast)  v  SSHD
    [2014] EWCA Civ 1517 and concluded that the  first  appellant  had  not
    been treated unfairly. With regard to Article 8, the  FTTJ  noted  that
    this had not been pursued with any vigour on the  evidence  before  her
    and she dismissed this claim on the basis that their private lives were
    outweighed by the legitimate public interest.

 6. The grounds of application argue, that the FTTJ erred in expecting  the
    appellant to provide evidence as to why the CAS  was  withdrawn  rather
    than asking if the Secretary of State  had  suspended  or  revoked  the
    sponsor's licence. It was asserted that; "colleges in  this  stage  are
    usually closed."  The  appellant's  case  was  distinguished  from  the
    claimant in EK on the basis that she  did  not  know  why  the  college
    stated that the sponsorship was withdrawn and "the fact" the college is
    closed could be indicative that the licence was revoked or suspended.

 7. Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Roberts  granted  permission  on  all  grounds,
    commenting "There appears to be  a  question  over  whether  the  first
    Appellant should have  been  afforded  the  opportunity  to  enroll  on
    another course. "

 8. The Secretary of State lodged a Rule 24 response on 4 January 2016.  In
    opposing the appeal, the respondent stated that  at  the  time  of  the
    refusal letter, the college in question was "licensed and active."

Error of law

 9. At the hearing before me, there was no attendance by or  on  behalf  of
    the appellants. At approximately 1050  hours,  my  clerk  handed  me  a
    letter, sent by facsimile at 1944 hours on 11 February 2016.  The  said
    letter, from Maalik & Co Solicitors & Advocates, advised  the  Tribunal
    that the appellants had instructed them not to  attend  and  that  they
    wished to have their appeals decided by way of the papers submitted  in
    the initial appeal and grounds for "reconsideration. "

10. I had regard to the  following  paragraph  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  in  deciding  whether  to  accede  to  the
    appellant's request.

         'Decision with or without a hearing

         34.  (1) Subject to [paragraphs (2) and (3)],  the  Upper  Tribunal
             may make any decision without a hearing.

             (2)  The Upper Tribunal must have regard to any view expressed
             by a party when deciding whether to hold a hearing to consider
             any matter, and the form of any such hearing.'

11. I have had regard to the  appellants'  desire  to  have  their  appeals
    considered on the papers but I decide to proceed to  reach  a  decision
    after a hearing given the very late notice from those representing  the
    appellants and I also wished to  have  the  benefit  of  Ms  Fijiwala's
    submissions.

12. I firstly considered the remainder of the contents of the letter of  11
    February 2012, a copy  of  which  was  provided  to  Ms  Fijiwala.   In
    essence, this letter argued, "that there was only point to make."  That
    point was far from clear and appeared to relate to  the  withdrawal  of
    the CAS going against "basic fairness." There were also references to a
    period of 28 days being insufficient to meet the  requirements  of  the
    Rules for a new application to be made.

13. Maalik & Co's letter emphasised that the first appellant had only found
    out that the CAS was withdrawn at the time of the refusal; the  college
    had closed down and therefore the appellant could not enquire as to why
    her CAS was withdrawn. It was maintained that the appellant  should  be
    granted a further 60 days leave to remain.

14. Ms Fijiwala urged me not to consider the point  raised  in  the  letter
    regarding the 28 day period for a fresh application to be made, because
    this had not been raised in the grounds of appeal  and  permission  was
    not granted on this basis. Permission to appeal had been  granted  only
    in relation to the withdrawal of the CAS and  whether  the  college  in
    question had had its licence revoked.

15. Ms Fijiwala argued that there were no errors in the decision. The  FTTJ
    had rightly considered EK and had recorded the  appellants'  case  that
    the 60 days should apply. The FTTJ had recorded at [35] and [36] of the
    decision that there was no evidence  from  the  appellants  as  to  the
    change of status  of  the  sponsor.  Thereafter,  she  referred  me  to
    documents enclosed in the respondent's bundle of  evidence,  which  was
    before  the  FTTJ,  in  order  to  support  the  Secretary  of  State's
    contention that the college in question was licensed and  fully  active
    as at the date of the check. The grounds were misconceived  in  stating
    that the appellants were not aware of this.

16. Ms Fijiwala drew my attention to the judgment in  Kaur  v  SSHD  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 13, which approved EK and  submitted  that  the  Secretary  of
    State had no obligation to notify the first appellant that the CAS  had
    been withdrawn or give her time to obtain a new sponsor. The  onus  was
    on the appellant to show that she met the requirements  of  the  Rules.
    The issue of fairness raised in  the  grounds  and  the  letter  of  11
    February 2016 was also addressed in Kaur.

Decision on Error of Law

17. This  was  a  detailed,  carefully  crafted  decision  where  the  FTTJ
    forensically examined the evidence before her as well as the  arguments
    put forward on the appellants' behalves.

18. Permission to appeal was granted on the  basis  of  whether  the  first
    appellant ought to have been afforded  the  opportunity  to  enroll  on
    another course. The appellant maintains that the  sponsor  in  question
    had its licence revoked or suspended.

19. Contained in the respondent's evidence, at  annexe  G  was  a  document
    headed "CAS check - migrant search results."  This document shows  that
    the CAS was withdrawn when the Home Office  caseworker  conducted  this
    check. Furthermore, at the date  of  this  check  the  licence  of  the
    sponsoring college was stated as being "Licensed and Fully Active." The
    appellants have chosen not to engage with this evidence  which  I  find
    shows that the reason for the withdrawal of the  CAS  was  unlikely  to
    have had anything to do with  the  status  of  the  sponsor's  licence.
    Furthermore the FTTJ noted at [34] of the decision that the  appellants
    had yet to provide any evidence that the college in question ever  lost
    its licence.

20. The appellants argue that it was unfair that  their  applications  were
    refused without warning or being given the opportunity to make  another
    application. The FTTJ considered this issue in  detail  at  [42],  with
    reference to EK and she correctly  assessed  the  position;  concluding
    that there was no such unfairness. Indeed, in Kaur,  the  following  is
    said, also at [42];

         "It follows, in my judgment, that both Rahman and EK (Ivory  Coast)
         are binding authority on the  question  whether  the  Secretary  of
         State should, as a matter of fairness, give notice to an  applicant
         for leave to remain or the Tier 4 sponsor that she considers  there
         to be a deficiency in the CAS before making an adverse decision  on
         that basis. There is no such obligation. "

21. Accordingly, the FTTJ was correct to find that the first appellant  had
    not met the requirements of paragraph 245ZX and to dismiss both appeals
    under the Immigration Rules.

22. There is no material error of law in the FTTJ's decision

    Conclusions

      1) The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
         involve the making of an error on a point of law.

      2) I uphold the decision of the FTTJ.




    Signed:  Date: 14 February 2016


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara


