
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/34184/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 27th March 2014                            |On 6th June 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL

                                   Between

                             MR MuHAMMaD RIZWAN

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Saini (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant's appeal against decisions to refuse to  vary  his  leave
    and to remove him from the United Kingdom by way  of  directions  under
    section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 (made on
    17th June 2013) was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Malone ("the
    judge") in a determination  promulgated  on  7th  February  2014.   The
    appellant applied for leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a Tier 4
    Student Migrant on 24th July 2012.  Almost a year later, on  17th  June
    2013, the Secretary of State refused his application.

2.   The application was refused in the light of the  Secretary  of  State's
    finding that the appellant was not entitled to the  points  claimed  in
    the attributes category, contained in Appendix  A  to  the  rules.   In
    particular, the CAS assigned in July 2012 related to a  course  at  NQF
    level 7, above degree level, and so the appellant was required to  show
    abilities in the English language at a minimum level of  CEFR  B2.   He
    was required to provide an original English language test  certificate.
    The appellant provided three TOEIC certificates  in  all.   The  first,
    dated 14th June 2012, showed that he passed the listening  and  reading
    modules.  The second,  dated  19th  June  2012,  showed  that  he  took
    speaking and writing but passed only the writing component.  He then re-
    set the speaking element on 11th  July  2012  and  passed  it  on  that
    occasion.

3.   The judge found that the appellant relied on a  certificate  showing  a
    single module passed at  a  sitting  and  so  he  could  not  meet  the
    requirements set out in Appendix O(1).

4.   The appellant was also required to meet the requirements  contained  in
    Appendix C(1)(B)(a)(i)(3) of the rules.  He had to show bank statements
    as evidence of funds, covering a period of 28 days.  The statements  in
    fact provided fell short by one day, although they  did  show  that  he
    held more than the minimum funds required.  After receiving the adverse
    decision, the appellant then provided bank statements relating  to  his
    account with Lloyds,  showing  that  he  held  more  than  the  minimum
    required between 22nd May and 18th July 2012, sufficient to  show  that
    the requirements of the rules were met.

5.   In this context, the judge found that by reason of  section  85A(4)  of
    the 2002 Act, the bank statements submitted by the appellant after  the
    decision could not be taken into account, as they did not accompany the
    application.

6.   The judge went on to consider "evidential flexibility".   He  concluded
    that any such policy could have no  bearing  on  the  English  language
    requirements.  Paragraph 245AA(c)  of  the  rules,  introduced  on  6th
    September 2012, also showed that the Secretary of State was not obliged
    to ask for a further bank statement, to cover the missing day.

7.   The judge went on to make an Article 8 assessment and  found  that  the
    appellant had established private life  ties  in  the  United  Kingdom,
    since his arrival in April 2011.  However, refusal to  vary  his  leave
    and his removal from the United Kingdom  amounted  to  a  proportionate
    response.

8.   The appellant applied for permission to appeal.  It was contended  that
    the  judge  erred,  first,  in  relation  to   the   English   language
    requirement.  Nothing in Appendix O to the  rules  specified  that  the
    speaking component could not be taken in isolation.  This was permitted
    in the TOEIC examination scheme.  What was prohibited  was  taking  the
    listening and reading components together  and  passing  the  listening
    component on one occasion, devoting the majority of the time  permitted
    to that discipline, and thereafter sitting a second combined  exam  and
    passing the speaking component by devoting the majority of time to this
    aspect.  The appellant did not, however, act in this way.

9.   It was also contended that the judge erred in  relation  to  evidential
    flexibility and paragraph 245AA of the  rules.   The  appellant's  case
    clearly fell within scope of the policy as it  was  apparent  that  the
    absent bank statement for the missing day was one document in a series,
    which had been omitted.  Paragraph 245AA itself referred to  a  missing
    bank statement from a series as an example falling within scope.

10.  Permission to appeal was granted on 26th February 2014.

11.  In a brief rule 24 response from the Secretary  of  State,  dated  12th
    March 2014, the appeal was opposed.  The respondent intended to  submit
    that the judge directed himself  appropriately.   The  requirements  of
    Appendix O were clearly stated and required the appellant to show  that
    he passed all components in one sitting, as found by the judge.

Submissions on Error of Law

12.  Mr Saini adopted the written grounds in  support  of  the  application.
    He sought a slight amendment to the first ground.  HC 628,  which  came
    into force on 28th October 2013, made changes to Appendix  O.   It  was
    this change that substituted for the earlier rules  a  requirement  for
    evidence of scores in all relevant components during a  single  sitting
    of the examination.

13.  The earlier  version  of  Appendix  O  did  not  stipulate  or  require
    combined tests. Paragraph 251 of the rules, the earlier  version,  came
    into force on 1st October 2008 and did not contain such a  requirement.
    The rules in force as at the date of decision enabled the appellant  to
    take the tests as he did.  He was able to re-sit the  module  and  pass
    it.

14.  So far as the missing bank statement was  concerned,  this  defect  was
    easily capable of remedy by means of evidential flexibility.

15.  Mr Whitwell said  that  the  logic  of  the  appellant's  position  was
    understood.  The Secretary of State accepted  that  HC  628  came  into
    effect in October 2013.  There was little he could  say  to  assist  in
    relation to the first ground.  The Secretary of State might be in  some
    difficulty.  He accepted that there might then  be  an  impact  on  the
    second ground.

16.  In a brief response, Mr Saini said that HC 628  contained  transitional
    provisions and so it was clear that the appellant was able to  rely  on
    the rules as they were, when the decision was made in June 2013.

Conclusion on Error of Law

17.  So far as the first ground is concerned, I find in  the  light  of  the
    evidence and the submissions that the appellant was entitled to re-take
    the module he failed,  as  he  did.   He  did  not  fall  foul  of  the
    requirements of Appendix O in so doing.  It was not  in  issue  between
    the parties that paragraph 245AA, which was  inserted  into  the  rules
    with effect from 6th September 2012, fell to be considered.   The  bank
    statement missing from the series provided by the appellant, so  as  to
    leave one day uncovered,  clearly  fell  within  scope.   Sub-paragraph
    (b)(i) identifies a missing bank statement from a series as an example.
     The Secretary of State ought to have  considered  the  application  of
    paragraph 245AA but the notice of decision shows that she  did  not  do
    so.

18.  With great respect to the experienced judge,  the  determination  shows
    that he did not have in mind the version of Appendix  O  to  the  rules
    which was in force when the adverse decision  was  made.   The  earlier
    version of Appendix O did not prohibit the passing of the components or
    modules in the  manner  achieved  by  the  appellant.   Similarly,  the
    determination  shows  (at  paragraph  21)  that  the  judge  considered
    evidential flexibility in the light of his  finding  that  the  English
    language requirements were not met.  This led him to conclude that  the
    Secretary of State was under no obligation to ask for  a  further  bank
    statement as this would have made no difference to the outcome  of  the
    application.  In fact, as the English language requirements  were  met,
    and as there was no other ground of refusal, paragraph 245AA fell to be
    applied, or at least taken into account.

19.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contains  material  errors  of
    law and must be set aside and re-made.

Re-making the Decision

20.  Mr Whitwell said that the appropriate  course  would  be  to  send  the
    decision back to the Secretary of State, so  that  she  could  make  it
    afresh, in the light of the Upper Tribunal's findings.   Mr  Saini  did
    not dissent from this proposed course.

21.  I find as a  fact  that  the  appellant  has  shown  that  the  English
    language requirements contained in the applicable version of Appendix O
    were met.  Refusal of the application on the basis of the missing  bank
    statement was the only other ground of refusal.  It now  falls  to  the
    Secretary of State to consider the application of  paragraph  245AA  of
    the rules,  taking  into  account  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  Judge's
    findings regarding the resources available to the appellant, as set out
    in paragraph 16 of the determination.  The appellant held more than the
    minimum level of funds required between 22nd May and  18th  July  2012,
    for a longer period of time than the minimum required under the  rules.
    Should the Secretary of State decide  to  call  for  the  missing  bank
    statement, the  outcome  will  inevitably  be  a  conclusion  that  the
    appellant met the maintenance requirements of the rules.  The  decision
    to refuse to vary  the  appellant's  leave  was  unlawful  in  all  the
    circumstances  and  the  decision  to   remove   him   is,   similarly,
    unsustainable.

DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside.  It  is  re-made
as follows:  appeal allowed; the appellant awaits a lawful decision  on  his
application from the Secretary of State.






Signed                                  Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell


FEE AWARD

By section 12(4) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007,  in  re-
making a decision, the Upper Tribunal may make any decision which the First-
tier Tribunal could make if  the  First-tier  Tribunal  were  re-making  the
decision.  In these circumstances, as I have allowed the appeal,  I  make  a
fee award in respect of any fee paid or payable in this appeal.






Signed                                  Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell




