
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Numbers:  IA/34171/2015

                                                       IA/34173/2015

                                                       IA/34174/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 November 2017                          |On 04 December 2017           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MRS HASINA KHANOM
                           MR FAKIR TAREKUL Islam
                            MR HASIBUL BIN TAREQ
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr J Collins, Counsel, instructed by Visa Inn
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal from the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Lingam that was promulgated on 21 March  2017.   It  is  one  of  a
         number of appeals which have their origin in allegations  of  fraud
         in the procurement of ETS language certificates.  The appellant  in
         this instance is the Secretary of State.
      2. The grounds allege a misdirection concerning the application of the
         now well known  decisions  of  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department and Shehzad and Another [2016] EWCA Civ 615 and  SM  and
         Qadir v Secretary of State of the Home Department (ETS - Evidence -
         Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT 00229 (IAC). It is submitted that  the
         judge  fell  into  error  by  rejecting  wholesale  the   so-called
         "generic"  evidence   of   the   Secretary   of   State,   and   by
         misinterpreting the evidence more generally.


      3. The position in  SM  and  Qadir  is  helpfully  summarised  in  the
         headnote which makes two broad propositions.  First, the  Secretary
         of State's generic evidence combined with her  evidence  particular
         to the two appellants sufficed to discharge the  evidential  burden
         of proving that their  TOEIC  certificates  had  been  procured  by
         dishonesty.  However given the multiple frailties from  which  this
         generic evidence was considered to suffer, and in the light of  the
         evidence adduced by the appellants, the Secretary of  State  failed
         to discharge the legal burden of proving dishonesty of their part.


      4. The central plank of the decision is that when fraud is alleged, it
         is for the Secretary of  State  to  satisfy  the  Tribunal  on  the
         evidential standard of a prima facie case of  fraud,  thus  calling
         for an explanation from the appellant.  Thereafter comes  a  second
         stage, where  the  Tribunal  must  assess,  having  regard  to  the
         totality of the  evidence,  whether  the  Secretary  of  State  has
         discharged the legal burden of proving such fraud.


      5. I have some sympathy for Mr Duffy in advancing the appeal on behalf
         of the Secretary of State. It is unfortunate that at paragraph  25,
         where the judge summarises the evidence, she states "therefore  the
         generic witness statements as found in  Qadir  have  little  or  no
         evidential value".


      6. Mr Duffy argues that the judge effectively came to  the  view  that
         the  generic  evidence  was  so  insubstantial  that  it  was   not
         sufficient  to  discharge  the  evidential  burden  and   therefore
         ascribed to it  a  zero  sum  when  looking  at  the  case  overall
         including the evidence adduced by the appellant in relation to  the
         taking of that test.


      7. It would certainly have been better had the judge acknowledged that
         the generic evidence of the Secretary of State did indeed discharge
         the evidential burden, thereby placing her in the second  stage  of
         having to assess the totality of the evidence to establish  whether
         the legal burden had been discharged.


      8. Mr Duffy submits that because there was no  express  resolution  at
         the first stage, one cannot be  satisfied  that  the  second  stage
         assessment was properly conducted. It is said that  the  judge  may
         have closed her mind to according proper  weight  to  the  evidence
         adduced by the Secretary of State.


      9. Mt Duffy's submission, in my opinion, cannot be maintained. In this
         instance, the second stage was conducted meticulously  leading  the
         judge at paragraph 39 to say:


             "For the reasons in SM and Qadir I am satisfied that the legal
             burden of proof falling on the Secretary of State has not been
             discharged".

     10. This finding, when the decision  is  looked  at  holistically,  was
         rooted in a number  of  key  factors  which  the  judge  took  into
         account,  mindful  that  cases  of  this  nature  are  always  fact
         specific.  Among features the judge considered are (i)  that  there
         was a perfectly legitimate reason why the appellant chose  to  take
         the test at the particular centre she chose which militated against
         the allegation of fraud; (ii) that the judge gave cognisance to the
         fact that evidence drawn from  other  sources  indicated  that  Mrs
         Khanom   was   accomplished   in   English;   and,   perhaps   most
         significantly, (iii) that the evidence which the appellant gave  on
         oath was largely unchallenged.


     11. Paragraph 18 reads:


             "I am satisfied that [Mrs Khanom's] evidence as set out  above
             (or her witness statement including supporting documents)  was
             not challenged therefore her evidence stands accepted".

     12. It is not appropriate for the Secretary of State to raise issues in
         the Upper Tribunal  concerning the adequacy of the material  relied
         upon by Mrs Khanom when there was no challenge  in  the  First-tier
         Tribunal to the credibility of the appellant or to the  content  of
         the evidence which she gave.


     13. The principle in SM and Qadir was clearly much in the judge's  mind
         although as a counsel of perfection it would have been more prudent
         to deal expressly with a conclusion on the  first  stage.  However,
         the judicial function of analysing the totality of the evidence and
         coming to the second stage conclusion was one that cannot faulted.


     14. To the extent that the  omission  to  make  an  overt  first  stage
         conclusion, might constitute an error of law, it is  certainly  not
         one which is material in the context of this case. On the basis  of
         what was before the First-tier Tribunal, as found by the judge, the
         ultimate conclusion was inevitable.


     15. It therefore follows that this appeal is to be dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed and the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
respect of all appellants affirmed.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   Mark Hill                  Date         4 December 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC
