
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34173/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |                Decision & Reasons   |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|On 21 May 2015                         |                On 9 June 2015       |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

              LORD MATTHEWS, SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE

                                     and

              Mr T B DAVEY, DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                       Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 SHAOHAN CAI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms G Broclesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent: Mr N S Ahluwalia, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS
1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary  of  State  against  a  decision  of
    Immigration Judge Widdup in the  First-tier  Tribunal,  who  upheld  an
    appeal by the  appellant,  Shaohan  Cai,  against  a  decision  of  the
    Immigration Officer at Heathrow.

2.   The background is that the appellant is a citizen of China born  on  28
    November 1984.  For the sake of consistency I shall refer to her as the
    appellant even though she is the respondent in this particular  appeal.
     She married a Norwegian citizen, Mr Anders Vattekar, in  London  on  3
    June 2010.  It appears that in November 2010 the appellant  was  issued
    with an EEA family permit as his wife.  She arrived  in  the  UK  on  a
    flight from Rome on 30 August 2014 and was  refused  admission  on  the
    grounds that her husband was not currently in the UK and she  therefore
    had no right of admission to the UK under  Regulation  11  of  the  EEA
    Regulations.  The basis for this is that her  husband  was  working  in
    Oslo where he was employed by Air France and that  he  had  been  there
    since September 2013. It is not necessary to  go  into  all  the  other
    details of the background.

3.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge heard  evidence  and  made  a  number  of
    findings.  He found as a fact that the parties were resident in  London
    in a flat in their joint names  and  that,  although  the  husband  had
    accommodation  in  Oslo,  it  was  shared  with  others  and  was   for
    convenience only while he worked and studied in Oslo.   He  found  that
    his home was in London and that he retained that as a home by  frequent
    visits and by having his wife and some of his possessions there.  It is
    said in terms that he is a two homes man but  his  principal  home  was
    found to be in London.  It was found as a fact  that  the  husband  was
    working in London for Air France UK until he relocated to Oslo and  was
    exercising treaty rights at that time as a worker.  The question  which
    the judge indicated he had to address was whether Mr Vattekar continued
    to be exercising treaty rights while a student and worker in Norway.

4.   The Regulations were  referred  to  by  Counsel.  The  Judge  was  also
    addressed and heard evidence  about  the  financial  situation  of  the
    parties.  He found as a fact that the husband had sufficient  resources
    of his own not to be a burden on the state and  that  in  addition  his
    financial commitments were shared with the appellant.  Details  of  the
    financial situation are set  out  in  the  determination.   It  is  not
    necessary for us to go into that for confidential reasons.

5.   The judge accepted a  submission  that  he  should  adopt  a  purposive
    approach to the EEA Regulations and should have regard to  the  general
    principle that the state should not  impede  the  free  movement  of  a
    worker.  If the appeal was dismissed  the  appellant  and  her  husband
    would have to reorganise their lives so that he returned to work in the
    UK and interrupted his studies or the appellant would have to  give  up
    her employment in order to follow her husband  temporarily  to  Norway.
    He accepted the evidence of the husband, who is studying for  a  course
    in international law, that his long-term intention is to return to work
    and study in the UK.  Given the evidence he heard about  the  husband's
    previous experiences in this country, given the judge accepted that  he
    intended to  remain  in  the  UK,  that  he  found  that  some  of  his
    possessions were here and that he only shared accommodation in Oslo, it
    seems to us that it cannot be said that his coming to this  country  is
    only for visits of the kind which  were  in  mind  in  the  case  of  O
    (Advocate General's  opinion)  [2013]  EUECJ  C-456/12  [2006]  and  in
    particular those referred to in paragraph 59 of the  court's  judgment.
    We also bear in mind the Advocate General's opinion at paragraphs 97 to
    111.

6.   Broadly speaking, the question of whether the  appellant's  husband  is
    resident in London is a matter of fact and on  the  evidence  that  was
    before the First-tier Tribunal his conclusion that Mr Vattekar does  so
    reside was one which he was entitled to reach.  That being so,  he  was
    also entitled to reach the conclusion that  he  was  exercising  treaty
    rights as a self-sufficient person.  The  question  of  money  did  not
    feature largely in the appeal before us although it did feature in  the
    grounds of appeal.  It does not appear  to  be  disputed  that  if  the
    appellant's husband is exercising  treaty  rights  then  the  appellant
    herself is entitled to work in this country and  her  earnings  can  be
    taken into account.  There is no suggestion that before us now the self-
    sufficiency question falls to be answered against the appellant or  her
    husband.  The only issue before us is whether the judge was entitled to
    find that the appellant's husband was resident  and  exercising  treaty
    rights in this country.  He answered that question in  the  affirmative
    and we cannot interfere with that answer.  In these circumstances it is
    not necessary for us to go into  detail  about  the  other  grounds  of
    appeal which in a sense follow the question of  residence.   For  these
    various reasons the appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.







                                                LORD MATTHEWS
                                          Sitting as an Upper Tribunal Judge
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)



No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.






