
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
Immigration and Asylum Chamber    Appeal Number: IA/34870/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 15 February 2018                  |On 26 February 2018                   |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?


                                   Between

                             Jaspal Singh Sandhu
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms C Charlton of Bhogal Partners
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          Determination and Reasons

Details of appellant and basis of claim

 1.   On 8 December 2017 this  Tribunal  found  an  error  of  law  in  the
    determination of First-tier Tribunal M A Khan  who,  on  3  July  2017,
    dismissed the appeal of this appellant, a national of India born  on  5
    December 1977, on human rights grounds and under the Immigration Rules.



 2.   The judge was found to have erred due to his failure to make findings
    on whether the appellant's presence in the  UK  was  conducive  to  the
    public good on account of a previous conviction for battery  for  which
    he received  a  community  order  sentence,  his  failure  to  consider
    material matters regarding relocation to India (specifically the family
    circumstances of the sponsor) and the lack of any meaningful assessment
    of article 8 including the absence of any finding on whether there  was
    family life between the sponsor and  the  appellant.  Accordingly,  his
    determination was set aside in as much as it related to the  article  8
    claim. A full summary of the submissions made by  the  parties  and  my
    reasons for finding errors of law are set out in my determination of  8
    December 2017.

Appeal hearing

 3.   It was agreed by the  parties  that  the  appeal  should  proceed  on
    article 8 grounds only, it having  been  accepted  by  Counsel  in  the
    grounds for permission that the judge's finding that the appellant  did
    not  meet  the  definition  of  a  partner  for  the  purposes  of  the
    Immigration Rules was  sustainable.   I  therefore  proceeded  on  that
    basis.

 4.   Brief oral evidence was called. The appellant gave  his  evidence  in
    Punjabi through an interpreter. He adopted the contents of his  witness
    statement prepared last year and confirmed there had been  no  changes.
    He stated that he had his mother and two married sisters in  India.  He
    had a son from his previous marriage who was  now  in  the  UK,  having
    arrived 4 weeks ago. A residence  permit  for  his  son  was  seen.  He
    confirmed that his son lived with him and the  sponsor  at  21  Carlyon
    Road. The appellant was then tendered for cross examination.

 5.   It was clarified at this stage that the appellant's son, who  was  in
    the hearing room would not be giving evidence and that there  would  be
    no reliance on his presence in the UK as part of the appellant's case.

 6.   In response to questions put by Mr Kotas, the appellant said  he  was
    in contact with his mother who lived in a  beautiful  house  which  she
    owned. He confirmed that his mother tongue  was  Punjabi  and  that  he
    spoke it at home with his partner. He stated that his  partner  had  no
    relatives in India but then said that she had  distant  family  on  her
    mother's side and had visited once for 4 weeks in 2015  accompanied  by
    her mother. She had visited the appellant's sister  on  that  occasion.
    Both she and the appellant were in good health.

 7.   The appellant said that his partner  discovered  his  illegal  status
    after they met. When asked to be more specific, he said they had met in
    2012-2013. He then amended his reply to 2012. When the contents of  his
    witness statement were put to him, he said  he  could  not  recall  the
    date. He then said they  had  been  acquainted  before  they  began  to
    cohabit. They met 2009-2010.  That completed cross  examination.  There
    was no re-examination.

 8.   I then heard evidence in English from Surinder Kaur Lall. She adopted
    her witness statement of 2017 as accurate  and  true.  Other  than  the
    arrival of the appellant's son, nothing had changed. She  confirmed  he
    was staying with them at Carlyon Road.

 9.   The sponsor said she had three children  aged  36,  34  and  27.  The
    eldest was married and had  two  children.  The  second  one  was  also
    married and had a stepchild and a child of his own  and  his  wife  was
    expecting. The youngest had an eleven year old child. The sponsor  said
    that she was very close to her children and grandchildren; her daughter
    lived in Isleworth and her sons lived in Hayes. She helped  look  after
    the grandchildren. Her family knew the appellant and although at  first
    they  were  not  keen  on  him,  they  had  since  accepted  him.   The
    grandchildren were very fond of him as were her mother and  her  former
    mother-in-law. She said he had supported her through  many  bad  times.
    Her children and grandchildren were all healthy.

10.   The sponsor was then cross-examined. She stated that she was last  in
    India around 2014 for about two weeks. She travelled  with  her  mother
    and met the appellant's family. She had also been there before but  was
    in connection with the sale of family property. Her father had been  in
    India  and  had  property.  Her  mother  was  selling  it  so  she  had
    accompanied her mother who was  now  85.  Her  mother  still  had  some
    property there. The sponsor said that she did not stay  more  than  two
    weeks as she did not like the climate. She said she was five  when  she
    came to the UK from  Africa.  There  was  no  re-examination  and  that
    completed the oral evidence.

11.   I then heard submissions. For the respondent, Mr Kotas relied on  the
    refusal letter. He pointed out that  it  had  been  conceded  that  the
    appellant could not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules  and
    so the only issue was whether he  qualified  to  remain  on  article  8
    grounds. He relied on the judgment of Agyarko [2017] UKSC  11  (at  54-
    56). He pointed out that the relationship commenced at a time when  the
    appellant was here unlawfully and his partner was aware of that.  There
    was no attempt to present this as a Chikwamba type case.  The  contents
    of the witness statement showed nothing remarkable. Many  sponsors  had
    children and grandchildren in the  UK.  The  appellant  had  family  in
    India, his mother owned property as  did  the  sponsor's  family.  Both
    spoke Punjabi. The sponsor's family did not live  with  her.  What  had
    been expressed was a preference for life here. It was not known on what
    basis the appellant's son obtained settlement and no  weight  could  be
    given to his  recent  arrival.  Whilst  the  relationship  between  the
    appellant and sponsor was accepted as genuine and  subsisting,  it  did
    not advance the case. The appellant was  not  financially  independent.
    Removal was proportionate. Although the appellant's conviction was  now
    spent, it was a matter to bear in mind.

12.   Ms Charlton relied on  the  skeleton  argument.  She  said  that  the
    appellant had been here since 1998  and  that  the  background  to  his
    flight from India had not been challenged. He had come here in fear and
    been here just short of 20 years. He had not seen his family  in  India
    for all that time. His son was now in the UK. The sponsor had  suffered
    the loss of her husband and had raised her three children herself.  The
    appellant had seen her through difficult times  and  was  part  of  her
    life. He was akin to a grandfather to her  grandchildren.  The  sponsor
    could not become accustomed to the climate in India or the way of life.
    Her family was in the UK  and  they  relied  on  her.  The  appellant's
    removal would cause a disproportionate upheaval in all their lives. The
    conviction was spent. The relationship was  accepted.  The  appellant's
    statements  have  a  response  to  the  decision  letter  and  to   the
    insurmountable obstacles to returning to India.  The appellant had  not
    sought public funds and did not owe any money  to  the  NHS.  He  spoke
    English. The appeal should be allowed.

Consideration

13.   I have considered the oral and documentary evidence before me and the
    submissions made by the parties. I assess the facts as they are at  the
    date of the hearing using the civil standard of proof  and  bearing  in
    mind that it is for the appellant to make out his  case  save  for  the
    burden on the respondent to show that his  conduct  is  such  that  his
    presence here is not conducive to the public good. As agreed, the  only
    issue before me is the consideration and determination of the article 8
    claim.

14.   I follow the steps set out in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 and find first of
    all that despite the conflicting evidence between  the  statements  and
    the evidence of when the appellant and sponsor met, how  they  met  and
    when they commenced cohabitation, there is family  life  between  them.
    Indeed, this was not disputed by  the  respondent  at  the  hearing.  I
    accept that they have been living together in a  relationship  akin  to
    marriage since some time in 2016. I also accept that the appellant  has
    a good relationship with the sponsor's family. The appellant claims  to
    have close friends in the UK and to have formed ties with this country.
    No details are given and there is no independent supporting evidence in
    that respect. I have also seen no evidence to show that  the  appellant
    has resided here since his clandestine arrival in 1998. He claims  this
    is self evident because he has no travel document but I have no way  of
    knowing whether that is true and, in any event,  in  this  jurisdiction
    the Tribunal comes across many cases of unlawful travel. Moreover,  the
    respondent refused the appellant's application for leave on  the  basis
    of long residency due to his inability to show continuous residence for
    the period claimed. Nevertheless, the appellant has been here for  some
    years and so I accept that he had established some form of private life
    here. It follows that  the  answer  to  the  question  of  whether  the
    proposed removal would interfere with the exercise of his  right  to  a
    private and family life is in the affirmative. I  also  find  that  the
    interference would be such as to potentially engage article 8 and  that
    the interference would be in accordance with the law and  is  necessary
    for the economic well being of the country, the prevention of crime and
    disorder, health and morals or the protection of the rights and freedom
    of others.

15.   Turning to the fifth and  final  question,  I  consider  whether  the
    interference is proportionate  to  the  legitimate  aim  sought  to  be
    achieved.

16.   Dealing first with the appellant's conviction for battery in February
    2013 in relation to a domestic argument with his ex-wife, I  note  that
    the appellant received a non custodial punishment which is  now  spent.
    Without knowing the details of the  offence  or  the  circumstances  in
    which it occurred, I cannot make a finding as to whether the  appellant
    is likely to re-offend. No evidence about the  offence  and  conviction
    was adduced, no oral evidence was called and I have seen no evidence of
    attempts at rehabilitation. The appellant refers to having "taken steps
    to make amends" (in his statement) however there is no  elaboration.  I
    also note that the offence would  have  occurred  at  a  time  when  he
    claimed to be in a relationship with his current partner which suggests
    that that relationship did not have a positive effect on his behaviour.
    Nevertheless, as the appellant's punishment was a community  order  and
    is now spent and as the appellant has not re-offended since then, I  am
    satisfied that it is not  conduct  which  merits  a  finding  that  the
    appellant's presence is  not  conducive  to  the  public  good.  It  is
    behaviour which cannot be condoned however it is not of such a  serious
    nature as to preclude the  appellant  from  the  UK  if  he  meets  the
    requirements of the rules or if there are other good reasons for him to
    be granted leave

17.   With respect  to  other  facets  of  the  appellant's  behaviour  and
    conduct, it is a fact that he has a very bad  immigration  history  and
    that no excuse for his unlawful stay and  evasion  of  the  immigration
    laws has been offered. He claims to have entered clandestinely in 1998.
    There is reference to a flight from persecution  in  a  statement  from
    February 2015  but  that  is  never  mentioned  again  in  any  of  his
    subsequent evidence as a reason he cannot return to India. Nor is there
    any explanation why, if that claim was true, he  did  not  seek  asylum
    when he entered. Instead he chose to remain unlawfully, work  illegally
    throughout his stay (as he maintains in his statement at paragraph 22),
    pay no taxes and contribute nothing to the economic well being  of  the
    country. It was not until 2012, some 14 years after his  claimed  entry
    and 2 years after he met the sponsor that he sought to  regularize  his
    stay.  One  can  have  little  sympathy  for  an  individual  who   has
    deliberately flouted the laws of this country and remained knowing full
    well he had no right to be here. The sponsor's statements are silent on
    her views of the appellant's long term unlawful status.

18.   The references in his evidence to applications for further  leave  to
    remain are plainly misconceived. Having never had leave of any kind, he
    could not have sought further leave.

19.   It is also a fact that the appellant has been less than  truthful  in
    his evidence. In February 2015, he referred to his parents having  been
    taken away by anti - Sikh elements and killed and his application  form
    of that date confirms he had no family in India (at 10.5)  but  he  now
    maintains that he has a mother and two sisters with whom he remains  in
    contact. It is maintained that he speaks English but his  evidence  was
    given in Punjabi and in his 2015 application he  gave  Punjabi  as  the
    only language he spoke. No evidence of his ability  to  speak  English,
    such as a test certificate, has been put forward.

20.   I have seen no evidence of the basis on which  the  2012  application
    was made or refused. I do not know if the sponsor was mentioned in that
    application.

21.    The  evidence  regarding  the  appellant's  previous  wife  is  also
    contradictory. She appears to have come here to visit him in  2004,  to
    have overstayed and then to have obtained indefinite leave  to  remain.
    The basis of this has not  been  disclosed  nor  was  I  told  how  the
    appellant's son, whom he claimed not to have any contact  with  for  20
    years suddenly turned up four weeks ago and has been  living  with  him
    since. Different dates are given for the  appellant's  divorce  and  no
    documentary evidence of this is available.

22.   The letter of support  referring  to  the  appellant  as  honest  and
    trustworthy carries little weight as there is  no confirmation that the
    author was aware of the appellant's unlawful status. If she  was,  then
    her own view of honest behaviour is skewed.

23.   There are repeated claims in the statements that the appellant  would
    be an alien if returned to India, that  he  has  lost  touch  with  the
    culture, that he would be destitute  and  that  he  has  forgotten  the
    Indian way of life. I do  not  accept  any  of  those  assertions.  The
    appellant lives within a Sikh community, his partner is a Sikh  (albeit
    originally from Uganda), he continues to speak Punjabi,  they  share  a
    common culture and have the same religion. There is  contact  with  the
    gurdwara. The appellant has contact with his family in India, they were
    visited by his partner on her recent visit  so  their  whereabouts  are
    known and he has confirmed that his mother lives in her own "beautiful"
    house.  The sponsor's mother also own property in India.  He  maintains
    that he has no property or business interests in India but he has  none
    in the UK either. His business skills can be put to  use  in  India  to
    generate an income  if  required.  There  is  nothing  to  support  the
    assertion that the appellant would be  destitute,  homeless  or  be  an
    alien in his own country.

24.   Given the appellant's failure to claim asylum and the failure to  put
    his fear of  return  forward  in  this  appeal  as  a  reason  for  not
    returning, I find that that is no longer a live  issue,  if  indeed  it
    ever was a genuine fear. Certainly, there is  no  evidence  adduced  to
    show that Sikhs would be at risk at the present time and  there  is  no
    claim that any of the appellant's relatives have faced any problems.

25.   I accept that the sponsor has three adult children in the UK and that
    she also has grandchildren and an elderly mother.  I  accept  that  her
    sister was previously unwell and that she had to assist with  care  but
    that no longer appears to be the case. I accept that she is involved in
    the care of her grandchildren, as are most grandparents, and  I  accept
    that whilst she has retired from her teaching  career,  she  now  works
    part time through a teaching agency. I accept that she has been in  the
    UK since the age of five and that she is a  British  national.  I  also
    accept that it would be extremely disruptive to her life and the  lives
    of her family members if she left the UK to accompany the UK to  India.
    The question remains; would the interference in the family lives of the
    appellant and sponsor be proportionate.

26.   The relationship commenced at a time when the appellant was in the UK
    unlawfully and both he and his partner were aware of this  yet  allowed
    the relationship to form and to develop. Given the appellant's unlawful
    status, the public interest has to be given substantial weight.

27.   The appellant does not  meet  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules. That is also a relevant consideration. Following the  principles
    of Agyarko, upon which reliance was placed by the respondent, it is the
    case that the number of appellants succeeding under article 8 would  be
    a very small minority (in accordance with Huang) and  that  the  public
    law interests in removing an unlawful migrant would only be  outweighed
    by exceptional circumstances. In other words:  "In  general,  in  cases
    concerned with precarious family life,  a  very  strong  or  compelling
    claim is required  to  outweigh  the  public  interest  in  immigration
    control" (at 57). The courts  have  repeatedly  held  that  states  are
    entitled to control the entry of non-nationals into their territory and
    their residence there and that  "the  Convention  is  not  intended  to
    undermine that right by enabling  non-nationals  to  evade  immigration
    control by establishing a family life whilst present in the host  state
    unlawfully or temporarily, and then presenting it with a fait accompli"
    (at 54 and in accordance with Jeunesse).

28.   Exceptional circumstances have been  defined  by  the  court  not  as
    something unique or unusual but as circumstances in which refusal would
    result in unjustifiably harsh consequences for the individual such that
    refusal would not be appropriate. Little has been put forward  for  the
    appellant to demonstrate that removal would be unjustifiably harsh.  He
    does not explain his poor conduct regarding  his  lack  of  immigration
    status in any way at all. The witness statements for these  proceedings
    offer no excuse at all. Whilst the appellant maintains that he would be
    destitute and homeless if returned to India, I  have  found  that  such
    assertions are without any foundation.   Not only does he have his  own
    family there but his partner  is  in  possession  of  very  substantial
    savings some of which could assist him to resume a life there or  cover
    his expenses whilst he makes an entry clearance to rejoin her.

29.   Whilst the sponsor maintains that she could not leave her family  and
    relocate to India, she gives no reasons why she could not accompany him
    there and remain whilst he makes an entry  clearance  application.  Her
    children and grandchildren could be expected to manage  temporarily  in
    her absence; the children are all adults  and  have  partners  and  the
    grandchildren have their parents. They may miss the appellant but  they
    do not live with him and I was not given  any  information  as  to  how
    frequently he has contact with them. The sponsor's employment  is  part
    time through an agency and could be put  on  hold  or  else  she  could
    travel during school holidays. The excuse that she does  not  like  the
    weather in India is a poor one. She can be expected to put up  with  it
    in order to be with the appellant. Both the appellant and  sponsor  are
    in good health. Both are of working age.

30.   Neither the appellant or sponsor have offered  any  evidence  on  why
    their relationship would end if removal took place  or  what  they  had
    expected would happen to it were the  appellant's  attempts  to  remain
    here to prove  unsuccessful.  Knowing  his  unlawful  status  from  the
    outset, this is a matter they must have considered. Yet no evidence  on
    this issue has been offered. The sponsor's claim that she did not  know
    that the appellant worked here illegally is undermined by her  evidence
    that she knew of his lack of status and also was plainly aware that  he
    was working on her  father's  property  and  subsequently  on  her  own
    property and that of her sister's.

31.   It is the sponsor's choice as to whether  or  not  she  relocates  to
    India permanently. It would be an upheaval but it could  be  done.  She
    too has family property there, she has visited a few times and she  has
    met the appellant's family who can  be  expected  to  assist  with  the
    process of transition. She speaks the language and is familiar with the
    culture. She is comfortably off  financially  and  her  pension  itself
    would go a long way to supporting them in India until they are able  to
    find employment. Alternatively, she could support  an  entry  clearance
    application made by the appellant to join her.

32.   With respect to the appellant's private life, I  have  been  provided
    with no information other  than  his  claims  to  have  friends.  Those
    friendships can be maintained through modern  means  of  communication.
    These are all matters which I must take into account.

33.   Having, therefore, considered all the factors  put  forward  for  the
    appellant and the sponsor and weighing them into the balance along with
    the  public  interest  considerations  including  those  in  s.117B,  I
    conclude  that  the  appellant  has  failed  to  show  any  exceptional
    circumstances that  would  make  removal  disproportionate.   Whilst  I
    accept  that  his  removal  would  result  in  disruption,  given   the
    appellant's  blatant disregard for the laws of this country,  the  fact
    that his family and private lives were established when he knew that he
    was  unlawfully  in  the  UK  and  the  absence  of   any   exceptional
    circumstances  appertaining,  I  conclude  that  the  public   interest
    outweighs the right to an enjoyment of article 8 rights in the UK.

Decision

34.   The First-tier Tribunal made errors of law on  article  8.  I  remake
    that decision and dismiss the appeal.




    Signed:


    Dr R Keki?
    Judge of the Upper Tribunal


    19 February 2018


