
S-T
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34041/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 February 2016                   |On 25 April 2016                     |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MICHAEL TYRONE ROBERTS
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Chipperfield, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1. The respondent to this appeal is a citizen of South Africa born  on  8
      October 1980. The appellant is the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
      Department, who has appealed with the permission of the Upper Tribunal
      against a decision of Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  M  Davies,
      sitting at Hatton Cross,  allowing  the  respondent's  appeal  against
      decisions of the Secretary of State made on 12 August 2014, to  refuse
      to issue him a Permanent Residence Card  and  to  revoke  his  current
      Residence Card.


   2. It is more convenient to refer to the parties as they were before  the
      First-tier Tribunal. I shall therefore refer to Mr Roberts from now on
      as "the appellant" and the Secretary of State as "the respondent".


   3. There was no application for an anonymity  directions  and  I  saw  no
      reason to make one.


   4. This  appeal  turns  on  the  correct  interpretation  of  Regulations
      15(1)(b), 7(1)(d) and 7(3) of the Immigration (European Economic Area)
      Regulations 2006 and it is helpful to set these out:



         "Permanent right of residence

         15.-(1) The following persons shall acquire the right to reside in
         the United Kingdom permanently-

         (a) ...

         (b) a family member of an EEA national who is not  himself  an  EEA
         national but who has resided in the United  Kingdom  with  the  EEA
         national in accordance with  these  Regulations  for  a  continuous
         period of five years;




         Family member

         7.-(1) Subject  to  paragraph  (2),  for  the  purposes  of  these
         Regulations the following persons shall be treated  as  the  family
         members of another person-

         ...

         (d) a person who is to be treated as  the  family  member  of  that
         other person under paragraph (3).

         (2) ...

         (3) Subject to paragraph (4), a person who is an  extended  family
         member  and  has  been  issued  with  an  EEA  family   permit,   a
         registration certificate or a residence card shall  be  treated  as
         the family member of the relevant EEA national for as  long  as  he
         continues to satisfy the conditions in regulation 8(2), (3), (4) or
         (5) in relation to that EEA national and the permit, certificate or
         card has not ceased to be valid or been revoked."



   5. Regulation 8(5) provides that the partner of an EEA national shall  be
      an 'extended family member' if he can prove that he is in  a  'durable
      relationship' with the EEA national.


   6. The decision with respect to the revocation of the appellant's current
      Residence Card was  taken  by  reference  to  Regulation  20(2)  which
      provides that the respondent may revoke a  Residence  Card  where  the
      holder has ceased to have a right to reside. No separate issues  arise
      in relation to  the  appellant's  appeal  against  that  decision.  He
      resists the decision on the basis he has acquired a permanent right of
      residence.


   7. There are no factual disputes in this case.  The  respondent  was  not
      represented at the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal  and  the  judge
      found the appellant entirely credible. The judge  made  the  following
      findings.


   8. The appellant first came to  the  UK  as  a  working  holidaymaker  in
      January 2004 and then, after briefly extending his stay as a  visitor,
      returned to South Africa before his leave expired. In South Africa  he
      secured entry clearance as a work permit holder valid for  five  years
      and he returned to the UK on 29 June 2006.


   9. In 2004, while working at a hotel on the Isle of Wight, the  appellant
      had met and formed a relationship with Ms  Daniela  Rusu,  a  Romanian
      national. They lived together from March 2004 until January 2012, when
      the relationship broke down.


  10. Romania joined the EU on 1 January 2007. The appellant did  not  apply
      for a Residence Card until October 2009 because he  did  not  need  to
      while he had leave to remain. He provided evidence that he and Ms Rusu
      were in a durable relationship and he was granted a Residence Card  as
      an extended family member from 2 November 2009 until 2 November  2014.
      As noted, the appellant's relationship ended in January 2012, a little
      over two years into the duration of his Residence Card.


  11. In March 2013 the appellant applied for a  Permanent  Residence  Card,
      which was refused. The reasons for the refusal of that application are
      not  of  interest  in  this  appeal.  The  appellant  made  a  further
      application in June 2014 and this led to the  decision  now  appealed.
      The reasons for refusal letter pointed out the appellant was no longer
      in a durable relationship with Ms Rusu. The appellant had not  resided
      in the UK for a continuous period of five years as an extended  family
      member because such status only counted from the date of the  issuance
      of the Residence Card.


  12. The judge disagreed with this interpretation. He reasoned as follows:


         "20. The Appellant was issued a Residence Card on the 2nd  November
         2009. Since he is a person who is both an  extended  family  member
         and has been issued a Residence Card then  pursuant  to  Regulation
         7(3) he shall be treated as the family member of the  relevant  EEA
         national for as long as he continues to satisfy the  conditions  of
         Regulation 8(3). In the absence of any case  law  directly  on  the
         point that I am aware of I accept  [counsel's]  submission  that  a
         purposive interpretation should be given  to  the  EEA  Regulations
         which achieve a just outcome. It is clear that  the  Appellant  has
         been in a durable relationship with Ms Rusu since March 2006  which
         was the second anniversary  of  their  cohabitation.  He  has  been
         issued with a Residence Card. I find that he  should  therefore  be
         treated as the family member of an EEA national "for as long as  he
         continues to satisfy the conditions in  Regulation  8(3)".  He  has
         satisfied those conditions since March 2006 and  I  therefore  find
         that he should be treated as the family member of Ms Rusu from that
         date until when the relationship ended in July 2012."


  13. I read the references to Regulation 8(3) as intended to refer to 8(5).


  14. The judge concluded the appellant had acquired a  permanent  right  of
      residence by March 2011, five years after the  second  anniversary  of
      his cohabitation with Ms Rusu, and which was before  the  relationship
      broke down in January 2012. He therefore allowed the appeal under  the
      EEA Regulations.


  15. Permission to appeal was granted by the Upper Tribunal because it  was
      arguable the judge's interpretation overlooked the requirement in  the
      EEA Regulations that a person cannot be treated as a family member  in
      such circumstances until he has been issued with a Residence Card.  It
      was arguable the judge had erred in taking into account  a  period  of
      residence as an extended family member that pre-dated the issuance  of
      a Residence Card.


  16. I heard submissions on whether the judge made a material error of law.


  17. Ms Isherwood argued the judge erred by overlooking the fact  that  the
      issuance  of  a  Residence  Card  to  an  extended  family  member  is
      discretionary. The respondent had not had the opportunity to assess an
      application prior to November 2009 and the judge should not have taken
      into account any period before that.


  18. Mr Chipperfield argued the judge had been entitled to look back before
      November 2009 and make a finding that the couple had been in a durable
      relationship.  He acknowledged the wording of Regulation 7(3) was  not
      helpful to the appellant. However, it was legitimate for the judge  to
      have made findings on the  earlier  period.  The  Residence  Card  had
      evidenced the existing circumstances. He took me  to  the  wording  of
      Article 16 of Directive 2004/38/EC and said  that  the  appellant  had
      "legally resided" in the UK for a continuous period of five  years  so
      as to qualify for permanent residence. Unlike the EEA Regulations, the
      Directive was broad enough to encompass a period before  the  issuance
      of the Residence  Card.  He  suggested  the  respondent's  restrictive
      interpretation would breach Article 25, which prohibits Member  States
      from treating the possession of a document as a  precondition  to  the
      exercise of a right. The appellant was exercising a 'right'  prior  to
      November 2009.


  19. Ms Isherwood argued Article 25 was not engaged in this case.


  20. I reserved my decision on whether the judge's decision is vitiated  by
      error of law.


  21. It is clear to me that the judge's interpretation is contrary  to  the
      plain meaning of the EEA Regulations. The use of  the  word  "and"  in
      Regulation 7(3) means that, in order to be treated as a family  member
      under Regulation 7(1)(d), the person must satisfy  the  definition  of
      'extended family member', in this case by showing he is in  a  durable
      relationship with an EEA national, and to have been issued a Residence
      Card on that basis. The judge in this case accepted the appellant  was
      in a durable relationship prior to November 2009 in order to calculate
      the five-year period for the purposes of Regulation 15(1)(b).


  22. The judge referred to the need to give a purposive  interpretation  to
      the EEA Regulations so as to arrive at a just result.  No  submissions
      were made to me regarding the correct approach to  the  interpretation
      of the EEA Regulations. However, there was discussion of  whether  the
      EEA Regulations, in limiting  the  period  which  can  be  taken  into
      account for the purposes of showing a permanent  right  of  residence,
      correctly transpose the provisions of the Directive.


  23.  After  giving  this  matter  careful  consideration,  I   reject   Mr
      Chipperfield's arguments to the effect  that  the  Directive  is  more
      permissive  than  the  EEA  Regulations.  It  seems  to  me  that  his
      submissions overlooked Article 3 "Beneficiaries",  which  extends  the
      scope of free movement provisions to persons other than Union citizens
      and their family members in  certain  circumstances.  It  provides  in
      relevant part as follows:


         "2. Without prejudice to any right to free movement  and  residence
         the persons concerned may have in their own right, the host  Member
         State shall, in accordance with  national  legislation,  facilitate
         entry and residence for the following persons:
         (a) ...
         (b)  the  partner  with  whom  the  Union  citizen  has  a  durable
         relationship, duly attested.
         The host Member State shall undertake an extensive  examination  of
         the personal circumstances and shall justify any denial of entry or
         residence to these people."


  24. In other words, the "right" of an extended family member  is  only  to
      have their application "facilitated", in contrast  to  family  members
      who have enforceable rights of free movement. More  significantly  for
      the purposes of this appeal the durable  relationship  must  be  "duly
      attested".  I interpret this as meaning that it  has  been  considered
      and approved by the host Member State. In the situation  envisaged  by
      the EEA Regulations, it means that a Residence Card  has  been  issued
      after an application and I therefore understand the Directive to  have
      been correctly transposed into domestic law in the form of  Regulation
      17(3). Put another way, the requirement  in  Regulation  17(3)  for  a
      Residence Card to  have  been  issued  in  recognition  of  a  durable
      relationship before a period of residence shall count towards the five-
      year period required to show entitlement to  permanent  residence,  is
      not inconsistent with the provisions of the Directive  which  the  EEA
      Regulations seek to transpose into domestic law.


  25. Article 16(2), which extends the right of permanent residence to other
      family members, must be read in  conjunction  with  Article  3,  which
      precedes it and which comes within Chapter 1:  General  Provisions  of
      the Directive.


  26. Article 15 is a general provision which makes it clear that possession
      of a document is simply declaratory of rights and entitlements.


  27. It follows that I must find the judge made a material error of law  in
      allowing the appeal. His decision is set  aside  and  I  substitute  a
      decision dismissing the appeal under the EEA Regulations.

NOTICE OF DECISION

         The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made a material error  of  law
         and his decision allowing the appeal is set aside.


The following decision is substituted:


         The appeal is dismissed under the EEA Regulations.



                               Signed                 Date 16 February 2016




                               Judge Froom,
                               sitting as a Deputy Judge of the Upper
                               Tribunal
