


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
IA347912014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                     |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 7th December 2015                      |  On 20th May 2016               |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                     PSK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C. Fielden, Counsel instructed by Leonard & Co
                       Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms E. Savage, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of the Islamic Republic  of  Iran  date  of
    birth 25th July 1987. He appeals with permission[1] the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge McLachlan) to dismiss his appeal  against  a
    decision to remove him from the United Kingdom pursuant to s10  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.


 2. The Appellant made a claim to international protection in December 2013
    advancing a fear of serious harm upon return to  Iran.  He  claimed  to
    have had a love affair with a woman who  was  married  to  an  official
    within the security services.  The affair had been discovered, and both
    the Appellant and his lover had fled Iran  for  fear  of  imprisonment,
    prosecution and punishment for adultery and/or  serious  physical  harm
    from her husband. Although the Secretary of  State  accepted  that  the
    Appellant may have had a relationship when he was  a  younger  man  the
    claim to have carried on the relationship once the  woman  in  question
    was married was rejected as not credible. International protection  was
    refused. By the time the matter came before the First-tier Tribunal the
    Appellant had a second plank to his case. He claimed to  have  a  well-
    founded fear of persecution  in  Iran  for  reasons  of  his  religious
    belief: since his arrival in the United Kingdom  he  had  converted  to
    Christianity.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal did not accept that either claim was true.   In
    a determination dated 28th January 2015 Judge McLachlan found there  to
    be a number of inconsistencies and  implausibilities  in  the  account.
    Although he, like the Respondent, accepted that the  Appellant  had  in
    the past been in a relationship, he rejected the Appellant's  claim  to
    have had an affair with a married woman. The Appellant had  produced  a
    document said to be a summons for his attendance at  the  Revolutionary
    Court. He gave evidence that it had been delivered to his parents' home
    in Iran on the 27th January 2014, and it had been scanned  and  emailed
    to him by a friend still in Iran.  The summons had been the subject  of
    commentary by an expert  witness,  Mr  Rashti.  Of  this  document  the
    determination states:

         "34. So far as the summons itself is  concerned,  I  note  that  Mr
         Rashti has given as his opinion that on the face of it, the details
         of the summons would appear  to  correct.  From  the  copy  he  has
         examined, Mr Rashti opines that the contents are accurate.


         35. However Mr Rashti also makes it plain that his report does  not
         amount to an assessment of the credibility of  the  Appellant,  but
         solely to give his opinion on the authenticity of the summons.


         36. I have found the Appellant  to  lack  credibility  and,  having
         considered the evidence in the round, I am not satisfied  that  the
         Appellant has established that production of the  copy  summons  is
         reliable corroboration of what he claims."

 4. In addressing the claimed conversion to Christianity, the determination
    notes  the  evidence  given  by  the  Appellant  and  three  additional
    witnesses, but concludes that the Appellant  has  not  proved,  to  the
    appropriate standard, that he has genuinely converted to Christianity.


 5. The grounds of appeal challenge the findings  on  Christianity  and  in
    respect of the summons, but permission has only been granted in respect
    of the latter. That ground is that notwithstanding the findings on  the
    affair and any risk arising therefrom, the evidence of  the  expert  Mr
    Rashti had been accepted,  and  given  his  views  the  summons  should
    therefore have been regarded as authentic. The determination failed  to
    address any risk arising from the fact that the revolutionary court had
    issued a summons against the Appellant.










    Error of Law

 6. On the 8th September 2015 I heard submissions on whether  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error such that  it  should  be
    set aside.


 7. The Respondent was that day represented by  Mr  Kandola  who  submitted
    that the findings at paragraphs  34-36  of  the  determination  do  not
    amount to an acceptance that the summons is in fact genuine.  Paragraph
    36 reflects a Tanveer Ahmed assessment, and the Judge clearly concluded
    that the summons was not  reliable  corroboration  of  the  Appellant's
    claims. In the alternative it was submitted that the Tribunal was under
    no obligation to conduct a discrete risk assessment in respect  of  the
    summons. There had been no alternative narrative advanced about why the
    summons might have  been  issued  and  in  those  circumstances  it  is
    difficult to see what conclusions the Tribunal might have reached.

 8. Ms Fielden relied on the  words  of  the  determination  which  in  her
    submission clearly indicated that the Tribunal  had  accepted  that  Mr
    Rashti was an expert and that his opinions could be given  weight.   If
    he found that the document was real, the Tribunal was not obliged to do
    the same but if it did not, reasons had to be given.

 9. In a written decision dated the 8th September 2015 I found there to  be
    an error of law in respect of the summons. What had at first sight been
    an unpromising ground of appeal has been made out. The opening sentence
    of paragraph 36 reveals that the summons was not considered as part  of
    a rounded Tanveer Ahmed assessment. The Tribunal begins by finding  the
    oral evidence of the Appellant not to be credible, then  uses  that  to
    find that the summons  cannot  be  regarded  as  reliable.  The  proper
    approach would have been to consider  all  of  the  evidence  together.
    Although the expert Mr Rashti had offered his opinion that the  summons
    was genuine and explained why, it was open to the Tribunal to  reach  a
    different conclusion about the authenticity of the document.   If  that
    was the case, however, reasons should have been given. It is not  clear
    from paragraph 36 what those reasons might have  been  other  than  the
    fact that the account had already been rejected, for which  see  above.
    The  determination  appears  to  accept  Mr  Rashti's   expertise   and
    objectivity. Mr Rashti's conclusion was that the summons was  "entirely
    genuine".  In those circumstances the Tribunal should  have  considered
    whether any discrete risk arose from the investigation being  conducted
    into the Appellant by the Revolutionary Court in Esfahan.

10. The remainder of this otherwise well-reasoned determination was upheld.
    The decision was only set aside in respect  of  the  summons,  and  the
    parties agreed that the re-making of this part of  the  decision  would
    follow from further evidence and submissions.








    The Re-Made Decision


    The Evidence


11. The summons is said to have been sent to the Appellant by  his  mother.
    It is produced under cover of letter dated 10th September 2014 in which
    his mother records that on the 4th November 2013 government agents came
    to the family home looking to arrest the  Appellant.  She  states  that
    they took some belongings and the Appellant's computer. The Appellant's
    mother explains that the summons was  delivered  by  hand  in  February
    2014, then:


         "After two weeks you had not attended the court,  another  writ  of
         summons was issued by the Revolutionary Court  for  you,  and  then
         after a few days two officers holding an arrest warrant came to our
         door to arrest you.


         During this period they have arrested your  father  several  times,
         each time interrogating him about you. My dear [P] do you  see  how
         much trouble you have put yourself  and  us  into,  by  doing  this
         childish act? I just hope that  you  are  more  careful  with  your
         behaviour from now on and do not do anything  that  embarrasses  us
         again. I still cannot believe that you have done such a disgraceful
         act"

12. A copy of a summons has been provided with a certified translation. The
    original Farsi version shows it to be pro-forma and  relevant  sections
    completed by hand.  It purports to have been issued on the 27th January
    2014 by the Isfahan Revolutionary Court, branch 4. It is  addressed  to
    the Appellant and gives the reason for his required attendance  as  "to
    provide explanations regarding adultery and fornication". It is  signed
    by a Lieutenant Heidari and it is recorded that it was  handed  to  the
    Appellant's father, who has  signed  for  receipt.   In  a  pre-printed
    section the recipient is advised:


         "If you have appointed your lawyer and also know of any people  who
         are witnesses to this case, you must introduce them to this  office
         before  the  due  date,  so  that  they  could  be  summoned.   The
         consequences of not attending this office will be your arrest,  and
         in case you don't attend the court on  due  date,  the  court  will
         issue a verdict in absentia. If you gave  a  good  reason  why  you
         cannot attend, according to Article 116 of  the  Criminal  Code  of
         Procedure of the Public and Revolutionary Courts, you  must  inform
         the court of your reason"


13. The summons was subject to examination by Dr Rashti[2]. In  respect  of
    the summons Dr Rashti found that the address given  for  the  court  is
    correct and that branch 4 of the Revolutionary Court  in  Isfahan  does
    indeed deal with adultery cases.  Dr  Rashti  checked  the  dates  that
    appear on the summons and they are consistent; the court  was  open  on
    the date that it was issued. The emblem on the top of the  document  is
    correct, and all the details that one would expect to see are  present:
    in particular the "text, details and format are exactly the same as the
    Esfahan court use". The stamp size, colour and shape  is  correct.   Dr
    Rashti compared the document with one  which  he  knows  to  have  been
    issued by the Revolutionary Court in Esfahan and this  one  accords  to
    that.  Taking all of these matters into account  Dr  Rashti  finds  the
    document to be entirely genuine.


14. Prior to the re-making the Appellant  sought  further  opinion  from  a
    recognised expert on Iranian affairs[3], Ms Anna Enayat of St  Antony's
    College, Oxford.  Ms  Enayat's  report,  prepared  with  her  customary
    diligence and observance of the Ikarian Reefer principles, is dated 2nd
    December 2015. Her detailed conclusions, insofar as they  are  relevant
    to the issue before me,  can be summarised as follows:


        .  Prosecutions  regarding   "adultery   and   fornication"   could
          potentially be brought under two parts of  the  Iranian  criminal
          code


        . Under the law of zena prosecution can  be  brought  for  unlawful
          sexual intercourse. This is a crime for which the  punishment  is
          fixed by God: a Hadd crime.  The  prescribed  punishment  for  an
          unmarried party (like the Appellant) is 100 lashes

        . Under Article 637 of Book 5 of  the  Law  of  Islamic  Punishment
          prosecution can be brought for any  act  deemed  "immoral"  which
          does not amount to zena. Examples are given such as  attending  a
          party where women are not wearing hijab, to being caught kissing.
          The discretionary punishment upon conviction is up to 99 lashes

        . Conviction of a zena offence or under Article 637 can be based on
          confession, the evidence of 4 male witnesses, or  matters  within
          the "knowledge of the judge". The latter can arise  from  matters
          such  as  circumstantial  evidence,  hearsay,  local   enquiries,
          reports from law enforcement officers etc.  The  report  cites  a
          case where conviction was  secured  on  the  basis  of  a  single
          "suspicious" text message.  A party having  disappeared  and  not
          making himself available for investigation/trial is likely to  be
          taken as evidence against him in this context

        . Once a case is opened under either the zena provisions or Article
          637 (upon a complaint being lodged by an individual), it  becomes
          a public matter and must be  pursued  (even  if  the  complainant
          withdraws)

        . Such crimes cannot be tried in absentia.  In  the  absence  of  a
          party the case remains open until one or  both  parties  involved
          reappears. There is no statute of limitations

15. This latter point was supported by a footnoted reference  in  the  2015
    Code of Criminal Procedure. Noting that  the  summons  was  purportedly
    issued in 2014 I sought clarification, by way of  further  submissions,
    as to whether the Code of Criminal Procedure in force on  the  relevant
    date was the same, or whether there would at the time have  been  scope
    for a trial to be heard in the absence of the witness.


16. My request resulted in an addendum report by Dr Enayat which came under
    cover of letter dated 15th March 2016. There was unfortunately a  delay
    in the report being joined to the file, and this has delayed further my
    promulgation of  this  already  very  late  determination.  My  sincere
    apologies to both parties for that.


17. Dr Enayat's addendum report explains that there have only ever been two
    post-revolutionary Codes of Criminal Practice, one issued in  1999  and
    an amended version in 2015.  The  provision  excluding  'divine  right'
    cases from in absentia hearings has remained  the  same  in  both,  the
    wording of Article 217 of the 1999 Code being adopted in Article 406 of
    the 2015 Code.

      Discussion

18. The question before me is whether the Appellant has  established,  with
    reference to a summons purporting to have been issued  against  him  by
    the Revolutionary Court in Iran that he faces a real  risk  of  serious
    harm if returned to Iran. The standard of proof is one  of  "reasonable
    likelihood".

19. I have four items of evidence. There is the summons itself, the  letter
    from the Appellant's mother dated 10th September 2014 explaining how it
    was served, and the expert testimony of Dr Rashti and Dr Enayat.

20. I accept that the evidence of the Appellant's mother is consistent with
    that which he has given. That is to be expected, since his  information
    has allegedly come from her.  However I also accept the point  made  by
    Ms Savage that even accepting that the letter  does  emanate  from  the
    lady in question, there is only a limited weight that could be attached
    to it, given her obvious interest in supporting her son.

21. The more significant evidence is that of the document itself,  and  the
    expert opinion that I have been given on it.

22. The summons indicates that  the  Appellant  is  wanted  for  crimes  of
    "adultery and fornication". I  accept  and  find  as  fact  that  under
    Iranian law crimes of this nature can be tried either  as  zena  or  as
    "immoral acts" not falling under that heading.  The punishment  can  be
    up to 100 lashes for either and I accept Ms  Enayat's  assessment  that
    the strict rules of evidence relating to adultery under Islamic law are
    in practice not always applied in the Iranian courts.  Convictions  can
    be secured on as little as adverse  inferences  drawn  from  suspicious
    text messages, applying the amorphous notion of the "knowledge  of  the
    judge".     In  light  of  this  I  am  satisfied  that  a  man  facing
    prosecution for such a crime would be at a real risk of  ill  treatment
    upon return to Iran. Ms  Fielden  additionally  pointed  out  that  the
    Appellant's prolonged disappearance  may  well  be  taken  against  him
    should he face prosecution today.

23. The question then is whether that summons is reasonably  likely  to  be
    reliable. If it is it matters not that I do not know why the  Appellant
    actually faces such charges. The fact  that  he  has  not  advanced  an
    alternative narrative to the one already rejected would be irrelevant.

24. I have attached some weight to the report of Mr  Rashti.  I  appreciate
    that Mr Rashti is well placed to  assess  the  particulars  of  Iranian
    legal documents and to consider whether they accord with his  knowledge
    about how such forms are filled in, the address of courts etc. I accept
    without hesitation that Mr Rashti is an honest and objective witness. I
    have borne in mind that Mr Rashti's expertise is in the  authentication
    of such documents.

25. I must however also have regard to  Ms  Enayat's  clear  and  carefully
    researched evidence that crimes of this kind are not, according to  the
    Criminal Code,  tried in absentia:

         "Hadd crimes, and ta'zir crimes  classified  as  belonging  to  the
         'rights of God' or 'shari'a crimes' (as is the  case  with  article
         637) cannot be tried in absentia.  That is to say, the file remains
         open until one or both of the parties reappear. If/when they do the
         prosecution will resume".

26. Ms Fielden properly concedes that this evidence is  at  odds  with  the
    words that appear on the face of the summons: "The consequences of  not
    attending this office will be your arrest, and in case you don't attend
    the court on due date, the court will issue a verdict in absentia".
27. I bear in mind that it is always possible that just as Judges  in  Iran
    might deviate from the strict rules of  evidence,  so  officials  might
    deviate from the strict rules of procedure. I have  considered  whether
    the investigating officer, Lieutenant Heidari, might have misunderstood
    the court's powers. That possibility must however  be  discounted:  the
    threat of in absentia  hearing  has  not  been  written  by  Lieutenant
    Heidari.   It appears on a pre-printed section of the  summons.  It  is
    extremely unlikely that Branch 4 of the Revolutionary Court in Isfahan,
    where such 'divine right' prosecutions take place, would be using a pro-
    forma with the wrong law on it.   I appreciate that Mr Rashti found the
    details on the summons to be in accordance with  his  understanding  of
    what forms issued by the Revolutionary Court in Isfahan look like.  His
    report does not however address  the  point  arising  from  the  Enayat
    report. Directions were issued in January 2016 giving  the  parties  an
    opportunity to submit further evidence on the matter,  but  no  further
    comment was received from Mr Rashti.   It does not appear that  he  has
    considered whether the warning that appears on the face of the  summons
    is in accordance with the applicable Code of Criminal Procedure. It  is
    evident from Dr Enayat's evidence that it is not.


28. I am not satisfied, on the lower standard of proof,  that  the  summons
    can be relied upon. The Appellant has advanced no credible evidence  as
    to why it might have been issued, and its threat of in absentia hearing
    is contrary to the law in Iran.

29. It follows that on the limited grounds upon  which  this  decision  was
    remade the Appellant has not discharged the burden  of  proof  and  the
    appeal is dismissed.

      Decision

30. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  of  law
    and it is set aside only to the extent identified above.


31. I re-make the decision  in  the  appeal  as  follows:  "the  appeal  is
    dismissed on all grounds".


32. Having regard to the nature  of  the  evidence  I  make  the  following
    direction for anonymity, pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1  of
    2013: Anonymity Orders.


        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This direction applies both to the Appellant  and  to  the
        Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to
        contempt of court proceedings"
                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                               18th May 2016
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission granted on the 24th March 2015 by First-tier Tribunal McDade
[2] No issue is taken with Dr Rashti's expertise. He has been providing
expert reports for the Tribunal for a number of years. He is recognised as
having particular expertise in the verification of legal documents
emanating from Iran, having worked as a lawyer in Iran and having set up
the filing system in Astaneh Asharfieh General and Revolutionary Court. Dr
Rashti holds a database of over 850 samples of various legal documents, of
which 300 are believed to be fake. In assessing the authenticity of a
document he is able to compare it against identified samples in this
collection.
[3] Ms Enayat has been providing expert evidence on Iran to the British
courts since 2001. She was formerly an academic in Iran and has been at St
Antony's College since 1983. She has taught, written and researched widely
on the Middle East but is recognised as having particular expertise in
respect of Iran: see for instance BA (Demonstrators in Britain - risk on
return) Iran CG [2011] UKUT 36 (IAC). The Respondent does not challenge her
expertise or objectivity in this case.

