
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-LEM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34090/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower,          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 9th January 2017                  |30th January 2017                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                                     mbd
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Bradshaw, Counsel instructed by Cartwright King
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Nigeria born on [ ] 1976.  He  first
    arrived in the UK on 2nd June 2006 when he was granted leave  to  enter
    as a student until 1st April 2009.  He was then granted leave to remain
    in the same capacity until 19th April 2014.   On  17th  April  2014  he
    applied for indefinite leave to remain as a Tier 2  (General)  Migrant.
    That application was refused for the reasons given in the  Respondent's
    letter of 13th August 2014.  The Appellant appealed, and his appeal was
    heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pooler (the Judge) sitting at  Stoke
    on Trent on 11th January 2016.  He decided to dismiss  the  appeal  for
    the reasons given  in  his  Decision  dated  13th  January  2016.   The
    Appellant sought leave to appeal that decision, and on 13th  June  2016
    such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. At the outset of the hearing before me, Mr Mills informed me that there
    was agreement between him and Mr Bradshaw.  It was conceded by Mr Mills
    that the  Judge  had  erred  in  law  by  failing  to  give  sufficient
    consideration to the consequences for the  Appellant's  family  and  in
    particular his children of the division of the Appellant's family which
    would  happen  as  a  consequence  of  the  Respondent's  decision   in
    connection with the Appellant's Article 8 ECHR rights.  The decision of
    the Judge should be set aside.  Further, considering that the Appellant
    now had ten years' lawful residence in the UK,  Mr  Mills  intended  to
    withdraw the  original  decision  so  that  the  circumstances  of  the
    Appellant, his wife, and his children could be reconsidered.

 4. Mr Bradshaw confirmed his agreement, and in the circumstances explained
    to me I gave the consent of the  Tribunal  to  the  withdrawal  of  the
    Respondent's decision.

 5. I therefore find an error of law in the decision of the  Judge.   I  do
    not give reasons for that finding in accordance with Rule  40(3)(a)  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  I  set  aside  the
    decision of the Judge.  I do not remake that decision because with  the
    consent of the Tribunal the decision of the Respondent is withdrawn.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside that decision.

I have not remade the decision in the appeal because the  original  decision
of the Respondent is treated as withdrawn.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity  which  I  continue  for
the reasons given by the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have not remade the  decision  in  the  appeal,  and  as  the  original
decision of the Respondent has been treated as withdrawn, there  can  be  no
fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

