
[pic]
IAC-TH-CP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/34766/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 June 2016                                |On 01 August 2016             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF

                                   Between

                         Adenike Victoria Odebamowo
                         (anonymity ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Nizami of Counsel instructed by Perera & Co,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen of the Specialist Appeals Team



                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS





The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born in  1966.   She  claims  she
    arrived in March 1995 and has  been  continuously  present  since  that
    date.  The Respondent considers she arrived on 19  April  2008  with  a
    multi-visit visa and overstayed.

 2. The Appellant states she has been in a relationship  akin  to  marriage
    with a British citizen since 2004 and that coupled with the  length  of
    time she has been in the United  Kingdom  she  could  not  re-integrate
    herself into life in Nigeria.  She made an  application  for  leave  to
    remain by way of reference to paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules
    and in the alternative, asserted her removal from  the  United  Kingdom
    would place the State in breach  of  its  obligations  to  respect  her
    private and  family  life  protected  by  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention.

 3. The Appellant has a daughter born in 1992 who is in the United  Kingdom
    but there is no appeal  on  her  part  linked  to  the  appeal  of  the
    Appellant.

 4. The  Appellant  made  an  application  for  leave  in  2010  which  the
    Respondent refused with no in-country right of appeal.  Some two  years
    later, her  solicitors  made  representations  to  the  Respondent  who
    reconsidered the application and on 21 August 2014 issued a decision to
    refuse the application which carried an in-country right of appeal.

The Respondent's Decision

 5.  The  Respondent  considered  the  Appellant   met   the   "suitability
    requirements" of Appendix FM S-LTR.1 and the  eligibility  requirements
    of paragraphs E-LTRP other than the fact that her Islamic marriage  was
    not recognised in the United Kingdom. The Respondent did not accept her
    relationship with her partner was genuine or that it had subsisted  for
    at least two years prior to the date of decision.  Her daughter did not
    qualify as an eligible child under Section EX.1 because  she  was  over
    the age of 18.

 6. The Respondent rejected the Appellant's claim based on her private  and
    family life.  She  did  not  meet  any  of  the  relevant  time  period
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE, there was evidence she had  not  come
    to the United Kingdom until  2008  and  there  were  no  insurmountable
    obstacles (Appendix FM Section EX.2) to her returning  to  Nigeria  and
    continuing her relationship with her partner and  her  adult  daughter.
    There were no exceptional circumstances  to  justify  the  Respondent's
    consideration of the  application  under  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention outside the Immigration Rules.

 7. On 3 September 2014 the Appellant through her solicitors lodged  notice
    of appeal under Section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 as amended  (the  2002  Act)  together  with  a  Statement  of
    Additional Grounds in response to a notice under  Section  120  of  the
    2002 Act.  The grounds assert that the Appellant arrived  in  1995  and
    her daughter in 2008; that she has been  in  a  relationship  with  her
    British citizen partner since 2004, and co-habiting since 2010 and that
    they had entered into a religious form of marriage on 17 December 2011.
     Her daughter had been in the United Kingdom since the age of 15  where
    she had received secondary and higher education but  could  not  go  to
    university because of her irregular immigration status.  The  Appellant
    and indeed her daughter had established private and family lives in the
    United Kingdom into which society they were  fully  integrated.   Their
    removal would be an unjustified interference  with  their  private  and
    family lives and in particular that of the Appellant.

The First-tier Tribunal's Proceedings

 8. By a decision promulgated on 1 October 2015  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Kelly dismissed the Appellant's appeal on  all  grounds.   She
    accepted the Appellant's relationship with her partner was genuine  and
    subsisting.  She did not decide whether the Appellant arrived  in  1995
    or 2008 on the basis that in any event the Appellant's position in  the
    United Kingdom was throughout precarious  and  she  had  no  reasonable
    expectation that she would be given leave to  stay  on  a  longer  term
    basis.  She had embarked on her relationship with her  partner  in  the
    full knowledge of that.

 9. The Appellant in her own name sought permission to appeal  which  on  5
    May 2016 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Landes granted because  Judge
    Kelly had arguably erred in law in her treatment of the relationship of
    the Appellant and her partner.  She had also arguably erred in  failing
    to consider the Appellant's partner had minor children from a  previous
    relationship living in the United Kingdom.

10. The Respondent filed a formal notice under  Rule  24  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and Ms Nizami  filed  a  skeleton
    argument to which I shall later refer.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

11. The Appellant and her husband were present  with  her  daughter  and  a
    family friend.  Other than to confirm her address she  took  no  active
    part in the proceedings. I explained to her the nature of an  error  of
    law hearing and the procedure to be followed.

Submissions for the Appellant

12. Ms Nizami submitted that the Judge had erred in considering the  appeal
    on the basis that the Appellant's  application  had  been  made  on  14
    February 2010: see paragraph 5(iv) of the Respondent's  reasons  letter
    of 21 August 2014.  The consequence of this was the Judge had found the
    Appellant's husband did not satisfy the definition of  a  "partner"  in
    paragraph GEN.1.2 of Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules. This was the
    essential point made  in  her  skeleton  argument.  The  error  was  of
    sufficient consequence to amount to a material error of law.

13. She continued that as  part  of  the  representations  leading  to  the
    decision under appeal the Appellant had sent through her solicitors  by
    a letter of 1 July 2014 what was described as a statement under Section
    120 of the 2002 Act. I noted a further copy had been  attached  to  the
    grounds of appeal.

14. The Respondent at paragraph 6 of the  reasons  had  accepted  that  the
    Appellant's application was effectively made on 1 July 2014.  The Judge
    had therefore erred at paragraph 25 of her decision by noting that  for
    the Appellant's partner to meet the requirements of the  definition  of
    Section GEN:2(iv) the relationship akin  to  marriage  needed  to  have
    commenced in or before 2008 but the Appellant's evidence  was  that  it
    had commenced in 2010: see paragraph 4 of her statement of 16  December
    2014.  If her partner met the definition or requirements of Appendix FM
    then the Judge was required to consider whether  Section  EX.1  applied
    and to  consider  whether  there  were  "insurmountable  obstacles"  as
    referred to in Section EX.2preventing the continuance  of  family  life
    outside the United  Kingdom.   The  error  was  compounded  because  it
    infected the Judge's assessment of the Appellant's claim under  Article
    8 of the  European  Convention  outside  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material error  of  law
    and should be set aside.

Submissions for the Respondent

15. Mrs Pettersen relied on the response filed under Procedure Rule 24  but
    quite properly accepted the submission that the decision of  21  August
    2014 was made on the basis of the further representations made in  2014
    which should be treated as a new application.

Consideration and Conclusion

16. I accept the submission made by Ms Nizami that the decision  now  under
    appeal was made in 2014 after further representations made in the  same
    year. Consequently,  the  Appellant's  relationship  with  her  partner
    needed to be assessed by reference to the two previous  years  and  not
    back to the years  previous  to  2010.   No  point  was  taken  by  the
    Respondent against this submission.  I find the  Judge  erred  in  this
    respect and that the consequence is the First-tier Tribunal's  decision
    contains a material error of law.  Both parties requested the matter be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision based  on  the
    finding that the Appellant and her partner entered into a  relationship
    akin to marriage on 21 September 2010 and  that  the  relationship  was
    genuine and subsisting at least up to 9 June 2016, being  the  date  of
    the error of law hearing in the Upper Tribunal.

17. The parties were not ready to proceed to  a  substantive  hearing.  The
    hearing  afresh  will  need  to  focus  on  the  circumstances  of  the
    Appellant,  with  a  view  to   an   assessment   whether   there   are
    "insurmountable obstacles" to her return with or without other  members
    of her family within the meaning of Section EX.2  of  Appendix  FM  and
    whether there are  "very  significant  obstacles"  to  the  Appellant's
    integration into Nigeria for the purposes of  paragraph  276ADE(vi)  of
    the Immigration Rules.  I take account of Section 12 of the  Tribunals,
    Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and  paragraph  7  of  Part  3  of  the
    Practice Directions of the Senior President and direct that the  appeal
    be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh on the  lines
    already indicated.

Anonymity

18. There was no request for an anonymity order and having  considered  the
    appeal I find none is warranted.


NOTICE OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law such that it is set  aside  subject  to  the  preservation  of  the
    findings mentioned above.

    No anonymity order is made.



Signed/Official  Crest                                            Date   29.
vii. 2016




Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
