
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/35324/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 June 2016                               |On 29 July 2016               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                               Mr H J E LATTER
                        (DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE)



                                   Between

                                 BEVI SUBROY
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr F Khan, Counsel, instructed by Direct Access
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1.   This is an appeal by appellant against a decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal issued on 29 October 2015 dismissing her  appeal  against
    the respondent's decision made on 27 August 2014 refusing her leave  to
    remain in the UK following representations made on her behalf  dated  4
    July 2014.

Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen  of  India  born  on  15  April  1979.   She
    married her husband, the sponsor, in India on 13 May 2007.   It was  an
    arranged marriage in  that  the  sponsor's  mother  and  aunt  met  the
    appellant and her parents and took her photographs back to the  UK  for
    the sponsor to look at and see if he liked her.  He then  travelled  to
    India with his mother and met the appellant at her parent's house where
    she lived with her parents and two brothers.   They  were  engaged  and
    subsequently married.

3.   The appellant successfully applied for entry clearance and entered  the
    UK on 3 August 2007 with entry clearance as a  spouse  valid  until  25
    July 2009.  On 23 July 2009 the appellant applied for indefinite  leave
    to remain but this was refused on 8 July  2010  as  the  appellant  was
    unable to meet the requirements of para 287(vi) of the  Rules,  failing
    to show sufficient knowledge of the English language and of life in the
    UK.  There was no appeal against that decision.  On 22  June  2011  she
    applied for leave to remain outside the Rules on compassionate grounds.
     That application was refused on  25  August  2011  with  no  right  of
    appeal.  A further application was made on 6 February 2012 for leave to
    remain as a spouse.  That application was refused  on  22  August  2012
    again with no right of appeal.  On  2  April  2014  the  appellant  was
    served with a notice that she was liable to detention and removal  from
    the UK and on 4 July 2014 additional grounds and  supporting  documents
    were submitted on her behalf asking for the  case  to  be  reconsidered
    under Article 8.

4.   The respondent considered the application under the  Rules  as  amended
    but was not satisfied that the appellant could  meet  the  requirements
    for leave to remain as a partner.  She had failed to submit  sufficient
    documentary evidence to show that she was in a subsisting  and  genuine
    marriage with  her  partner  and  was  therefore  unable  to  meet  the
    provisions of E-LTRP1.6.  The decision letter then  considered  whether
    she could meet the requirements for leave as a parent, something  of  a
    pointless exercise as the appellant had never  asserted  that  she  had
    children.  It then went on to consider para EX.1  and,  in  particular,
    whether there would be insurmountable obstacles to family life with her
    partner continuing outside the UK  in  accordance  with  para  EX.1(b).
    This provision could not in any event  be  met  in  the  light  of  the
    finding that the appellant  did  not  have  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with her partner, but  the  respondent  found  that  there
    would not be insurmountable obstacles to family life with  her  partner
    continuing outside the UK.   The  appellant  was  unable  to  meet  the
    private life requirements set out in para  276ADE(1)  and  it  was  the
    respondent's  view  that  there  were  no   exceptional   circumstances
    requiring  consideration  of  a  grant  of  leave  outside  the  Rules.
    Accordingly, the application was refused.

5.   The appellant appealed against this decision and her appeal was  listed
    for hearing on 5 October 2015. Her representative sought an adjournment
    as the sponsor  could  not  be  present  as  he  had  recently  started
    probationary employment. The case was adjourned to 8 August  2015  when
    the appellant's representative indicated that  his  position  was  such
    that he had to withdraw his representation.  The appellant applied  for
    an adjournment but that was refused for the reasons set out in  [2]  of
    the judge's decision.

The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

6.   At the hearing the appellant, the sponsor,  the  sponsor's  mother  and
    one of his sisters gave oral evidence, summarised at [6] - [14] of  the
    decision and the judge referred to further documentary evidence at [15]
    - [16].  The judge was not satisfied that the marriage was  genuine  or
    subsisting. He accepted that the marriage had been   arranged and  that
    the sponsor had travelled to India to meet the appellant.  They had not
    spent  time  alone  together  until  they  were  married.   There   was
    inconsistent evidence from the sponsor and the appellant about how many
    times the sponsor went to India before they became engaged, the  length
    of his stay, how many marriage ceremonies took place and  whether  they
    consummated the marriage in India or the UK.  He found  that  generally
    the evidence of the sponsor's mother-in-law and  his  sister  was  more
    consistent with the evidence of the appellant than  with  that  of  the
    sponsor.  He also noted that the sponsor left the hearing room as  soon
    as his oral evidence was completed to  return  to  his  employment  and
    commented that he did not observe any gestures of affection between the
    couple [17].

7.   The judge also commented that it  was  not  plausible  that  a  married
    couple of eight years would not both know and agree on whether  or  not
    they used any contraception, there being discrepancies on this issue in
    their evidence.  He said that apart from all  four  witnesses  agreeing
    that the sponsor and appellant  shared  a  bedroom,  the  evidence  was
    inconsistent as to the sleeping arrangements of the  other  members  of
    the family in the remaining two bedrooms before the  sister's  marriage
    in September 2015.  He did not accept the explanation that there was in
    effect a state of "musical bedrooms" as part of their Indian culture to
    explain the inconsistencies about who slept where.  He  commented  that
    another possible explanation for the  discrepancies  was  that  if  the
    sponsor and appellant were not sharing a bedroom or the sponsor did not
    reside at the premises, the witnesses each had to scramble to  come  up
    with an answer to divide the occupants of  the  house  other  than  the
    couple between the two remaining bedrooms [18].

8.   Evidence had been produced from the pastor of the church they  attended
    but that had not referred to the sponsor.  The evidence of the  sponsor
    residing  at  the  house  consisted  mainly  of  n-power  invoices  and
    Nationwide bank statements in the joint names of the couple  and  there
    was no explanation why the npower account was in their joint names when
    the house was in fact owned by the sponsor's  mother.   He  noted  that
    aside from cash or bank deposits and cash withdrawals  the  joint  bank
    statements did not contain any evidence of  wages  being  deposited  or
    withdrawals in the form of direct debits, charges  on  debit  cards  or
    cheques which would more strongly indicate that the account was used as
    part of a shared life together.

9.   He noted that the sponsor had been a student since 2011, a letter  from
    the University for the Creative  Arts  (UCA)  confirming  that  he  had
    started a BA (Honours) Fashion Atelier course expected to  end  in  May
    2015.  There were two letters generated at the request of the  sponsor:
    one from Electoral Registration in 2012 responding to  his  enquiry  to
    confirm that he was still at the same address and a second "To whom  It
    May Concern" 2015 letter from UCA in respect of his studies.

10.  The judge then  considered  a  letter  dated  16  June  2011  from  the
    appellant's then representatives, Gill, in support  of  an  application
    for further leave to remain based on a0rticle 8 which said:

         "The couple are living together in the UK. However, the couple  are
         not on speaking terms. Mr Subroy is staying in the family home  and
         giving no reason for why he is no  longer  communicating  with  his
         wife.  Mr Subroy's mother is very upset.  She  fully  supports  her
         daughter-in-law knowing that she has always been a devoted wife and
         has tried to speak to her son who refused to answer any questions.


         However, it is submitted that Mrs Subroy loves her  husband  dearly
         and believes the relationship is having  problems  at  present  but
         this is something she can sort out if she is allowed to continue to
         live in the UK."

11.  It was submitted before the judge that the breakdown  of  the  marriage
    was temporary.  He noted that the appellant and the two female  members
    of the family denied any estrangement whilst the  sponsor  agreed  that
    the relationship was strained at the time  but  that  they  were  still
    talking.  The  judge  was  not  satisfied  that  the  letter  could  be
    discounted as an error on the part of  the  representatives.   He  then
    said at [19]:

         "...Taking into account all of the circumstances of  this  case,  I
         find that by 2011 (if not sometime before), the marriage had broken
         down, the sponsor was not willing to communicate with the appellant
         (although it may well be the case that both the appellant  and  the
         rest of the sponsor's family wanted the couple to reconcile and the
         marriage to succeed). There are two persons in any marriage  and  I
         am not satisfied that the appellant has or  had  the  intention  to
         live together with the appellant as husband and wife.  He is in the
         invidious position where his mother who arranged the  marriage  and
         his five female siblings are very fond of the  appellant.   She  is
         helpful to her mother-in-law and the family as well as a  respected
         member of her church.  Due to the  material  discrepancies  in  the
         evidence, I cannot accept as credible the assertions of each of the
         witnesses that the marriage is genuine and subsisting.   I  am  not
         satisfied that the breakdown of  the  marriage  documented  by  the
         appellant's representatives in 2011 was temporary or that there was
         such a lasting (or any) reconciliation and that at the date of  the
         hearing there was a genuine and subsisting marriage."

12.  The  judge  therefore  found  that  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of Appendix FM including EX.1(b) as she  did  not  have  a
    genuine and subsisting   relationship  or  marriage  with  her  British
    partner or of para 276ADE(1). He was not satisfied that  the  appellant
    enjoyed a family life within article 8. Her close relationship with her
    adult sisters in-law and mother-in-law did not indicate any elements of
    dependency more than normal  emotional  ties  and  that  any  financial
    dependency was only  due  to  the  appellant's  precarious  immigration
    status.  However, he found that there was private life and  that  there
    would be a significant interference with it if the appellant were to be
    removed to India.  He noted that she had remained in the  UK  for  more
    than six years after her visa had  expired  and  three  further  failed
    applications.   Whilst expressing considerable  sympathy  for  her  the
    judge was not satisfied that the facts supported a conclusion that  the
    decision was disproportionate either in  terms  of  private  or  family
    life.

The Grounds and Submissions.

13.  In the grounds of appeal it  is  argued  that  the  judge  should  have
    granted an adjournment as the appellant needed more than a few days  to
    recover from being left unrepresented.  With regard to the letter  from
    Gill, he had failed to take into consideration the time  gap  since  16
    June 2011.  In the letter it  was  submitted  that  the  breakdown  was
    temporary and the judge should have given the benefit of the  doubt  on
    this issue.  It was further submitted that  the  judge  had  completely
    overlooked that the appellant  had  been  living  in  the  same  house,
    sharing a bedroom  with  her  husband  since  her  arrival.   This  was
    confirmed by all the witnesses apart from one who perhaps was  confused
    by the issue in any event. The relevant issue was whether she  and  the
    sponsor shared the same bedroom not how the other bedrooms  were  being
    shared.

14.  There had been questions about the use of contraception and  the  judge
    had failed to appreciate that when she had been  asked  that  question,
    she had been very embarrassed and did not  specifically  respond.    It
    was also illogical and subjective to assume that because they  had  not
    had children, the marriage was not subsisting.  Insofar as  there  were
    inconsistencies about the date of the engagement, she felt  there  must
    have been a misinterpretation as it was inconceivable  that  she  would
    have said that their engagement took place in September 2006. She  felt
    that the determination indicated indifference on the part of the judge.
    The fact that the sponsor did not consider her presence or look at  her
    on leaving overlooked the point that  he  was  in  a  rush  as  he  had
    recently been given employment with a  firm  of  international  repute.
    The fact that he attended the hearing showed that he cared for  her  as
    her husband.

15.  The grounds further argue that the  appellant  has  established  family
    and private life in the UK and whilst  she  appreciated  the  need  for
    immigration control, she argues that the judge did not  deal  with  the
    issues with due care and consideration.  In considering proportionality
    the judge had failed  to  consider  how  she  would  be  treated  as  a
    returning married lady. She would be shunned  by  a  very  conservative
    society and face total humiliation.

16.  Permission to  appeal  was  refused  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but
    granted by the Upper Tribunal for the following reasons:

         "The appellant is unrepresented.  It is arguable  that  the  First-
         tier Tribunal  Judge  took  into  account  matters  that  were  not
         relevant - in particular the perceived lack  of  affection  without
         putting such a matter to the appellant for explanation, the alleged
         discrepancy as to the date  of  the  engagement  and  the  intimate
         questioning that appears to have been conducted as to the  couple's
         sexual intimacy and use  of  contraception.   It  is  difficult  to
         understand why some evidence was given  more  weight   than  others
         given the broad consistency of some of the evidence.

         The appellant sought permission to appeal because of the lack of an
         adjournment and the short period of time that she  was  given  from
         being notified that  her  legal  representative  was  not  able  to
         represent her.  This is not arguable but   for  the  reasons  given
         above I grant permission in any event."

17.  Mr Khan referred me to the judgment of the Court of Appeal  in  Agho  v
    Secretary of State  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  1198.   He  submitted  that  the
    marriage had subsisted for almost eight years. It might well be that at
    points there were difficulties in the relationship  but  that  did  not
    mean that the marriage was not subsisting.  The evidence from  all  the
    witnesses was that the parties were living  under  the  same  roof  and
    sharing a bedroom.  A number of sensitive matters had  been  raised  at
    the hearing about whether or not the  parties  used  contraception  but
    such issues had to be set in the context of the evidence  as  a  whole.
    Whilst such not conceding the appeal, Mr  Walker  accepted  that  there
    might be concerns about whether  the  judge  had  properly  taken  into
    account the length of the marriage and whether all relevant issues  had
    been properly taken into account.

Assessment of whether there is an Error of Law

18.  The substance of the grounds on which permission to appeal was  granted
    are that the First-tier Tribunal reached a decision not  properly  open
    to it on the evidence, failed to take  into  account  relevant  matters
    such as the length of the marriage and the  cumulative  effect  of  the
    evidence of the witnesses or failed to give adequate  reasons  for  the
    decision.  The reasons the judge gave for finding  that  the  appellant
    had failed to show that there was a genuine and subsisting relationship
    are essentially based on the discrepancies between the evidence of  the
    appellant and the sponsor and the failure to deal adequately  with  the
    fact that the appellant's representative in 2011  had  written  to  the
    respondent indicating that the  parties  were  no  longer  on  speaking
    terms.

19.  Dealing firstly with the discrepancies in the evidence,  the  appellant
    said that they became engaged on 30 September 2006 whereas the  sponsor
    said it was in December 2006, the appellant that the marriage had  been
    consummated in India, whereas the sponsor said in the UK. According  to
    the appellant, contraception had not been discussed and  they  did  not
    use any during their entire married life whereas the sponsor said  that
    they had discussed the pill and condoms, which he used.  The  appellant
    when asked about the letter of June 2011 said  that  the  breakdown  in
    communication referred to did not happen and she did not know  why  her
    representative wrote this. The sponsor said  that  there  had  been  no
    breakdown in the marriage; the relationship had been strained but  they
    had still been talking.

20.  There clearly were discrepancies but the issue is the extent  to  which
    they undermine the evidence of the  appellant  and  the  sponsor  about
    whether the relationship is subsisting when assessed in the context  of
    the evidence as a whole.  The appellant gave evidence that the  sponsor
    had never asked her for a divorce and that they lived together  in  the
    UK in the same house  and  in  the  same  bedroom.   In  the  sponsor's
    evidence he said that it would be devastating for him if the  appellant
    was returned to India and asked how he felt about  the  appellant,  the
    sponsor replied that she was amazing and looked after  them  all  [11].
    In the appellant's witness statement she said that due to the sponsor's
    employment status and her immigration status, they had to put back  the
    idea of having children and like any young couple, they had  their  ups
    and downs but the downs had never been  strong  enough  to  lead  to  a
    separation.

21.  The letter of 16 June 2011 from Gill said that the couple were  not  on
    speaking terms but this was still in the context of the fact that  they
    were said to be living together in the UK and that the appellant  loved
    the sponsor dearly. She believed the relationship was  having  problems
    but that was something she could sort out if allowed to remain  in  the
    UK.  The judge did not accept that this letter was  written  due  to  a
    misunderstanding by the representatives of the situation  at  the  time
    and at the end of [19] he said that  he  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    breakdown of the marriage documented by the appellant's representatives
    in 2011 was temporary or that there  was  as  such  a  lasting  or  any
    reconciliation.  However, the letter did not go any further than saying
    that the couple were not on speaking terms, the sponsor was staying  in
    the  family  home  and  giving  no  reasons  why  he  was   no   longer
    communicating with his wife and that she believed that  this  could  be
    sorted out and that their temporary problems would be resolved.

22.  The factors identified by the judge and leading to the conclusion  that
    the marriage was no longer genuine or subsisting  were  potentially  at
    least capable of supporting such a finding but only in the  context  of
    an assessment of the evidence as a whole and in particular that of  the
    sponsor who attended the hearing and gave evidence  that  the  marriage
    was subsisting and  that  it  would  be  devastating  for  him  if  the
    appellant was returned to India, and also when asked if he  would  stay
    in the UK in such circumstances, he replied that it was a hard question
    but he would have to go to India, then saying that he did  not know  as
    he was born in the UK [11].

23.  The judge noted that the sponsor left the hearing room as soon  as  his
    evidence was completed to return to his employment and that he did  not
    observe any gestures of affection between  the  couple.  This  was  not
    referred to again when the judge  was  setting  out  his  findings  but
    nonetheless it appears, having specifically referred to this, to  be  a
    matter to which he attached weight.  It is not clear from the  decision
    whether the sponsor had an opportunity of responding to  what  was  the
    nub of the respondent's case that he was giving  false  evidence  about
    the state of the relationship.  In this context  the  judge  did  later
    comment that the sponsor was in the invidious position where his mother
    who arranged the marriage and his five female siblings  were  all  very
    fond of the appellant but it does not appear that this was put squarely
    to the sponsor in his evidence.

24.  In summary, I am not satisfied that the evidence tending to  show  that
    the marriage was not in fact subsisting was looked at in the context of
    the evidence from the witnesses that the  appellant  and  sponsor  were
    still married, legally at least, and there was consistent evidence that
    they continued to live  under  the  same  roof  and  share  a  bedroom.
    Further, the letter of 16 June 2011 has been treated as  evidence  that
    the marriage had broken down at that stage whereas it was evidence that
    the couple were not on speaking terms and having problems at that stage
    whereas the preponderance of the oral evidence at the hearing over four
    years later  was  that  the  parties  were  still  together.   Further,
    considerable caution must be exercised in  drawing  adverse  inferences
    from demeanour such as the sponsor's attitude to the appellant  at  the
    hearing and from answers to questions about intimate  personal  aspects
    of their relationship such as the use of contraception.

25.  In summary, I am not satisfied that all  relevant  matters  were  taken
    into account by the judge in the assessment of the evidence or that  he
    has given adequate reasons for rejecting of the core  elements  of  the
    oral evidence of the witnesses, in particular that of the sponsor.   At
    the hearing before me both representatives agreed that if there was  an
    error of law, the matter should be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal
    for a full rehearing. I agree that this is the  appropriate  course  to
    take.

Decision

26.  The First-tier Tribunal erred in law and the  decision  is  set  aside.
    The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a full rehearing.
    There is no anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal.





Signed        H J E Latter                            Date: 28 July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter



