
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/35718/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 January 2016                   |On 3 February 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     D G
                       (anonymity direction NOt MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Sreeraman, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S A Canter, Counsel instructed by Proficient
                    Immigration Services


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This matter comes before me pursuant to permission having been  granted
    by Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Zucker dated 6  November  2015.
    This is my extempore decision.  The appeal relates  to  a  decision  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Anstis whereby a Decision  and  Reasons  were
    promulgated on 28 July 2015.  The judge at the First-tier Tribunal  had
    made it clear that the appeal had been allowed  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.

2.   The  Secretary  of  State  promptly  appealed  against  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's decision and relied on two particular grounds:

    (1)  giving weight to immaterial matters and

    (2)   failing  to   give   adequate   reasons   on   material   matters
         (circumstances in Brazil).

3.   In readiness for this appeal the original Appellant, [DG],  has  lodged
    a Rule 24 reply.  That reply sets out in short that there has  been  no
    material or indeed any error of law in the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  It is said that the  issue  which  the  judge  had  to
    decide was in respect of the Immigration Rules, particularly  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) and whether or not there were "very significant obstacles
    to the applicant's integration into Brazil".

4.   At the hearing before me  this  morning  the  Presenting  Officer  very
    carefully and thoughtfully said that in reality she could take the case
    no further other than to rely on the original grounds  which  had  been
    drafted.  She said having now  seen  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge that it was clear  that  the  appeal  had  been  allowed
    pursuant to the Immigration Rules and not Article  8.   She  said  that
    there had been no public considerations viz. Section  117.   The  issue
    therefore was, in effect, one for me to consider.

5.   In reply on behalf of the original Appellant, Mr Canter  says  that  he
    was a little surprised when he saw the grant  of  permission  by  Judge
    Zucker.  He said that was because the grant  of  permission  states  at
    paragraphs 2 and 3 the following:

         "2.  The grounds submit that the judge's proportionality assessment
             was flawed.

         3.   It  is  arguable  on  the  facts  of  this  case  that  absent
             sufficient proof that there would be any  flagrant  denial  of
             the Appellant's human rights by the receiving state,  in  this
             case Brazil, there was no sufficient basis  for  allowing  the
             appeal."

6.   Indeed the grounds by the Secretary of State themselves  (although  not
    initially specifically referring to the Immigration Rules or Article 8)
    are indeed in the sort of language that one sees in respect of  Article
    8 and it is said at 1(c) of the grounds that  the  Secretary  of  State
    relies on the case of Bensaid.  It is said that the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge had erred in  not  considering  the  case  of  Bensaid  and  that
    therefore the decision was wrong in respect of Article 8.

7.   Insofar  as  ground  2  is  concerned  that  does  refer  to  paragraph
    276ADE(vi) and it is said that the judge had failed to identify and  to
    explain reasons why the  Appellant  could  not  return  to  Brazil  and
    receive treatment  there.   It  was  said  that  this  was  more  fully
    identified in the reasons for refusal letter.

8.   The difficulty, I suspect, that Judge Anstis had is that there  was  no
    Home Office Presenting Officer present at the hearing before him and it
    does not appear that there was any explanation as to why there  was  no
    representation or explanation from the Home Office, but in any event it
    is quite clear that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did  consider  the
    reasons for refusal letter and indeed it was considered in some detail.

9.   The real issue in this case  related  to  the  difficulties  which  the
    original Appellant was facing here in the United Kingdom  and,  as  the
    judge noted at paragraph 7:

         "From the refusal letter I take it that  the  Respondent  considers
         that the Appellant would only suffer 'initial  difficulty'  on  her
         return to Brazil and that although the Appellant may  experience  a
         degree of temporary hardship it is expected that these difficulties
         could be overcome, bearing in  mind  her  common  language  and  in
         particular her familiarity with Brazil customs and culture."

10.  The Appellant suffers with dementia.  The evidence in respect  of  what
    the judge was satisfied about showed some very significant difficulties
    arise  from  that  dementia.   The  Appellant  for  example  has   very
    significant problems in terms of memory.   She  is  not  even  able  to
    recall her family members and others.  For example, at paragraph  5(iv)
    it is said in the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision:

         "A letter from  Brent  Social  Services  saying  that  '[DG]  is  a
         vulnerable adult ... [DG] has been diagnosed with  Alzheimer's  and
         her retention is very poor.  She is at risk of wandering and can be
         very forgetful which puts her at risk of self-harm.'"

11.  The effects of Alzheimer's and dementia are well known.  As  the  judge
    noted here, it was not simply a case of whether or  not  treatment  for
    Alzheimer's or dementia is available  in  Brazil,  it  was  what  would
    happen if this particular  Appellant  on  these  particular  facts  was
    returned to Brazil. Although in the past  she  knew  where  her  family
    might be, she does  not  now.  This  Appellant  was  not  in  the  same
    situation as other returnees with family in their  home  country.   She
    would arrive in Brazil, in effect, not knowing where she is, not having
    the assistance available to her from family and thereby at a particular
    risk.

12.  It was  those  facts  that  enabled  the  judge  to  then  conclude  at
    paragraphs 11, 12 and 13 as follows when the judge said:

         "11. The Respondent has suggested that this difficulty will only be
             temporary but the Appellant's condition is not one that anyone
             has suggested will improve and if she is not able  to  explain
             herself on her return to Brazil it is  difficult  to  see  how
             there will be any improvement in her  personal  circumstances.
             On the contrary, without being able to explain the support she
             needs her circumstances are likely to worsen.

         ...

         13.  On that basis, I find  that  the  Appellant  would  face  very
             significant obstacles to her  integration  into  Brazil.   She
             would simply not be able to explain herself or  avail  herself
             of appropriate support in Brazil and there are no  friends  or
             family there who she is in contact with who could assist  her.
             Her appeal must succeed under the Immigration Rules."

13.  The reality of the argument from the Secretary of State is  that  there
    needed to be "a holistic assessment" of the factors and the background.
     That may well have been so in respect of an Article 8  assessment  but
    the judge made it clear that he was not  considering  this  case  under
    Article 8.  Instead it was an  appeal  allowed  under  the  Immigration
    Rules, and, as Mr Canter has rightly pointed out,  the  Upper  Tribunal
    has had cause to consider arguments in respect of the interrelationship
    between Section 117A to D  and  factors  relating  to  Article  8.   He
    reminds me of the case  of  Bossade  (ss.117A-D-interrelationship  with
    Rules) [2015] UKUT 00415 (IAC), a  decision  of  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Storey and Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson from 20 April last year, and  if
    I refer in particular to the judicial head note at paragraph 3,  it  is
    said as follows:

         "In the context of foreign criminal cases [I  interpolate  here  to
         say that this is not a foreign criminal case  but  nonetheless  the
         rest of this becomes relevant] (because  the  provisions  found  in
         Part 13 of the Rules are a complete code encompassing  both  stages
         of  the  Article  8  assessment),   this   means   that   Part   5A
         considerations have no direct role at the first stage when a  court
         or Tribunal is deciding whether an applicant meets the  substantive
         conditions of paragraphs 399 or  399A  of  the  Immigration  Rules.
         They only  have  direct  application  at  the  second  stage,  viz.
         assessment  under  the  Rules  that   involve   a   proportionality
         assessment: viz. paragraph 398 and (in revocation cases)  paragraph
         390A.  In cases other than those concerning deportation of  foreign
         criminals, where the Rules are not a complete code, it may still be
         necessary to conduct this  second  stage  outside  the  Rules:  see
         Secretary of State for the Home Department  v  AJ  (Angola)  [2014]
         EWCA Civ 1636 at [39]."

14.  Therefore, if this were an appeal under Article 8 there may  well  have
    been very different considerations.  Ultimately the judge very  clearly
    found, with the assistance that was available to her, that  there  were
    very significant obstacles to this Appellant integrating in Brazil.   I
    make it clear that this is not to hold against the Secretary  of  State
    that was the  failure  of  legal  representation  at  the  hearing  but
    nonetheless, making the best that the judge was able to of the  reasons
    for refusal letter and the evidence which was available to her she came
    to a lawful decision. It is not necessarily a decision which all judges
    would have made, but in my judgment it is clear that it is  a  decision
    which shows no error of law. Mere disagreement with the decision is not
    sufficient to overturn it. The Judge  did  give  adequate  reasons  for
    allowing the appeal and did consider the factors in respect of  section
    117 and did not have to specify each and every  part  of  it.   In  the
    circumstances the decision of Judge Anstis stands.

Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed. The original decision  of  the
First tier Tribunal Judge stands.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood

