
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/35490/2014
                                                               IA/35491/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 8 October 2015                    |On 26 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               YUVA RAJ PANDEY
                               SUSHMITA TINARI
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the respondents:   Dr D Chhetri, solicitor


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The Secretary of State is the appellant  in  these  proceedings  but  for
   convenience I will refer to the parties as they were  in  the  First-tier
   Tribunal.

2. The appellants are nationals of Nepal. They appealed  to  the  First-tier
   Tribunal against  the  decisions  of  the  Secretary  of  State  dated  9
   September 2014 to remove them  from  the  UK  under  section  10  of  the
   Immigration and Asylum Act 1999. Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Lingam
   allowed  the  appeals  and  the  Secretary  of  State  now  appeals  with
   permission to this Tribunal.

3. According to the papers before me the first appellant entered the  UK  in
   August 2009 as a Tier 4 General student.  He  and  the  second  appellant
   married in June 2014 and she is his dependant for the purposes  of  these
   proceedings. The appellant undertook a Business Management course  before
   going on to study an MSC in Healthcare at the University of West  London.
   On 3 September  2014  the  Secretary  of  State  decided  to  remove  the
   appellants. The notices served on the appellants advised that their right
   of appeal was exercisable after they had left the UK. In a letter dated 6
   October 2014 the Secretary of State  outlined  the  allegation  that  the
   first appellant had used a proxy test taker in  taking  an  English  test
   with the Educational  Testing  Service  (ETS).  The  appellants  appealed
   against the removal decisions and their notices of appeal  were  received
   on 8 September 2014.

4. First-tier Tribunal Judge Lingam issued a Direction on 18  May  2015  for
   the Secretary of State to file all relevant documentation relating to the
   appeals. The Secretary of State failed to do so and,  as  the  appellants
   did not appear at the oral hearing, the Judge determined the  appeals  on
   the papers before her on 10 June 2015. In the absence of  a  respondent's
   bundle the Judge considered that that the Secretary of State  had  failed
   to particularise the assertion that the first appellant  had  passed  his
   English language test using a 'proxy'.

5. The Secretary of State appealed against  that  decision  on  the  grounds
   that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  erred  in  considering  the  appeal
   because there was no jurisdiction for the First-tier Tribunal to hear the
   appeal as the appellants had no in-country right of  appeal  against  the
   removal directions. The grounds of appeal contend that section 10 (1) (b)
   of the Immigration Act 1999 provides that a person may be  removed  where
   leave to remain has been obtained by deception and that section 92 of the
   Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 provides that this  type  of
   immigration decision is only capable of an out-of-country appeal.  It  is
   contended that the First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in  failing
   to properly establish jurisdiction.

6. At the hearing before me Ms Willocks-Briscoe relied in  the  decision  in
   Mehmood & Another, R(on the application of) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 744 to
   support her submission that the section 10 decision invalidated the leave
   of the appellants and that the appellants therefore only have an  out-of-
   country right of appeal. She also relied on the decision in Virk & Others
   v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 652 to submit that statutory  jurisdiction  cannot
   be conferred by waiver or agreement or by the failure of the  parties  or
   the tribunal to be alive to the point and that it is open to  either  the
   First-tier  Tribunal  or  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  take  a  point  about
   jurisdiction even though it had not been raised.

7. Dr Chhetri referred to paragraph 49 of the Judgement  of  Beatson  LJ  in
   the decision in Mehmood where he states;

    "49.   It was common ground that it is only where there are "special or
    exceptional factors" that the court will permit a substantive challenge
    to a removal decision by the Secretary of State pursuant to section  10
    of the 1999 Act to proceed by judicial review rather than by the appeal
    channel provided by Parliament, here an out-of-country  appeal:  see  R
    (Lim) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2007] EWCA Civ 733,
    R (RK (Nepal)) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA
    Civ 359; and R (Anwar and Adjo) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2010] EWCA Civ 1279, reported at [2011] 1 WLR 2552. ...."

8. Dr Chhetri submitted that there are  exceptional  circumstances  in  this
   case in that the appellants were not given the opportunity  to  reply  to
   the allegations because the  Secretary  of  State  did  not  provide  the
   documents to the First-tier Tribunal. He submitted that  if  removed  the
   appellants will not get a fair trial as they would be  unable  to  access
   legal  advice.  He  submitted  that  the  appellant  and  his  wife   are
   undertaking university studies which would be disrupted  by  removal.  He
   also submitted that the appellant in the case of Mehmood  has  lodged  an
   appeal to  the  Supreme  Court.  He  further  submitted  that  the  first
   appellant has now submitted an application for leave to remain in the  UK
   on the basis of his fear of return to Nepal as a result of his  political
   activities. When I asked whether the appellants  had  sought  a  judicial
   review of the decisions in this case Dr Chhetri said that they had lodged
   JR applications in relation to the issue of  disclosure  of  evidence  in
   relation to the allegation of  deception  but  not  in  relation  to  the
   jurisdiction issue. He submitted that in all the circumstances there were
   special and exceptional circumstances why the appellants' appeals  should
   be considered in-country.

9. If jurisdiction does not  exist  in  law  it  cannot  be  'conferred'  or
   'accepted'. In Virk & Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department
   [2013] EWCA Civ 652 it was held that, although the Secretary of State had
   failed to  raise  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  issue  of  that
   Tribunal's jurisdiction to entertain an appeal, the  Upper  Tribunal  was
   entitled  to  dismiss  the  subsequent  appeal  against  the   First-tier
   Tribunal's decision on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal had not had
   jurisdiction, notwithstanding that the point had not been  raised  below.
   The Court of Appeal said at paragraph 23;

    "Statutory jurisdiction cannot be conferred by waiver or agreement;  or
    by the failure of the parties or the tribunal to be alive to the point.
    Although,  as  Longmore  LJ  pointed  out,  decisions   taken   without
    jurisdiction may in due course become irreversible, that point has  not
    been reached in this case. It was, in my judgment, open to  either  the
    FTT or the UT to take the point about jurisdiction notwithstanding  the
    failure of the Secretary of State to raise it herself."

10.  In the instant appeals there is nothing in  the  papers  before  me  to
   indicate that a duty judge considered the issue of jurisdiction. There is
   nothing to  show  that  the  Secretary  of  State  raised  the  issue  of
   jurisdiction in the First-tier Tribunal, in fact the Secretary  of  State
   did not provide any papers to the First-tier Tribunal at all.

11. However the refusal notices both told the appellants that they only  had
   a right of appeal after the departure from the UK under section 82(1)  of
   the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. The appellant's  appeal
   in this  case  is  limited  to  an  appeal  exercised  after  removal  in
   accordance with section 92 of the 2002 Act.

12. Dr Chhetri  submitted  that  the  appellant's  circumstances  amount  to
   'special or exceptional factors' as outlined in the decision in  Mehmood.
   However this submission can only be made in the  context  of  a  Judicial
   Review application seeking that remedy against a decision to remove where
   the right of appeal is only exercisable outside the UK.

13. In any event I do not accept that submission.  The  appellants  in  this
   case do not have any health problems. They did not submit any evidence to
   the Secretary of State or the First-tier  Tribunal  in  relation  to  any
   circumstances which would cause them difficulty in  returning  to  Nepal.
   They did not seek Judicial Review of the removal decisions. Whilst I note
   that the appellants have now made a  further  application  for  leave  to
   remain in the UK this is made on an entirely  different  basis  from  the
   application under appeal in this  case  and  on  the  basis  of  entirely
   different evidence.

14. In these circumstances I find that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  erred
   in failing to  consider  the  issue  of  jurisdiction  in  light  of  the
   assertion in the refusal notices that the appeals  are  only  exercisable
   out-of-country. I therefore set aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal in its entirety.

15. In these circumstances I find that the Judge made a  material  error  of
   law by failing to consider whether she had any jurisdiction to  hear  the
   appeal  before  purporting  to  allow  it.  I  find  that  there  was  no
   jurisdiction for all the reasons set out above and the  decision  of  the
   First-tier Tribunal is accordingly set aside and is remade by  dismissing
   the appeals.

Conclusion:

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error on a point of law.

There was no jurisdiction to hear the appeals and the decision of the First-
tier Tribunal is set aside and remade by dismissing the appeals.


Signed      Date: 23 November 2015

A Grimes

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


