
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/35125/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 January 2018                   |On 31 January 2018                   |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                           MUHAMMAD MUDASSIR KHAN
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Hossain, of Liberty Legal Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal Anstis (the judge), promulgated on 13 March 2017, in which
        he  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
        decision dated  11  December  2015  refusing  his  application  for
        Indefinite  Leave  to  remain  (ILR)  under  the   long   residence
        provisions of the immigration rules (paragraph 276B).






   Factual Background


     2. The appellant is a national of Pakistan, date of birth  1  February
        1977. He entered the United Kingdom on  31  July  2004  with  entry
        clearance as a student. He was granted further periods of leave  to
        remain following several applications that  were  made  before  the
        expiry of his leave, including an application made on  25  November
        2010 for leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student,  which  was
        granted until 11 February 2011.


     3. Although the  appellant  attempted  to  lodge  an  application  for
        further leave to remain on 7 February 2011,  this  application  was
        rejected as being invalid on 21 February 2011. The appellant made a
        further application on 23 February 2011 but this was also  rejected
        as invalid on 7 March 2011. A further application made on  20  June
        2011 was refused on 4 August 2011, as  was  a  further  application
        made on 8 August  2011  (rejected  on  27  September  2011).  On  7
        February 2012 the appellant lodged  an  application  for  leave  to
        remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student and this  was  granted  on  28
        December 2012, valid until 8 May 2014.


     4. On 27 September 2013 the appellant applied  for  a  residence  card
        pursuant to the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
        2006 (the 2006 regulations) based  on  his  relationship  with  his
        unmarried EEA national partner. He was issued with a residence card
        valid from 3 February 2014 to 3 February 2019. On 22 September 2014
        the appellant applied for ILR on the basis of his long residence.


     5. It is important at this stage to note some characteristics  of  the
        respondent's decision that led to the appeal before the  First-tier
        Tribunal.  Page  '1  of  10',  in  effect   the   covering   letter
        accompanying the decision, stated,

             We have considered your representations for  indefinite  leave
             to remain and have refused it. Your  human  rights  claim  has
             also been refused. If you believe we have made  an  error  you
             can appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

     6. In  her  decision  the  respondent  set  out  the  requirements  of
        paragraph 276B of the immigration  rules,  and  the  definition  of
        'continuous residence' contained in paragraph 276A. The  respondent
        accepted that the appellant had lawful leave in the UK from 31 July
        2004 until 11 February 2011. The respondent noted however that  the
        application to vary the appellant's leave made on 7  February  2011
        was rejected (by this I understand that  the  application  was  not
        accepted as having been validly made) because the requisite fee had
        not been paid. The respondent noted that the application made on 23
        February 2011 was also rejected as the appellant had not  completed
        mandatory sections of his application form. The respondent  was  of
        the view that the appellant had no  leave  from  21  February  2011
        until 28 December 2012, a period of  approximately  675  days.  The
        respondent was not therefore satisfied  that  the  appellant  could
        demonstrate 10 years continuous  lawful  residence  in  the  UK,  a
        requirement of paragraph 276B(i)(a).


     7. The  respondent  thereafter  considered  whether  to  exercise  her
        discretion in respect of breaks in lawful residence and  took  into
        account  the  appellant's  representations,   which   included   an
        assertion that his passport was lost in January 2011  and  that  he
        had to wait a long time to obtain a new  passport.  The  respondent
        was not however satisfied  that  it  was  appropriate  to  exercise
        discretion in the appellant's favour because his  explanation  bore
        no relationship to the reasons the applications were rejected.  The
        respondent additionally noted that the appellant had  not  provided
        any evidence that his unmarried EEA national partner  continued  to
        be a qualified person.


     8. The respondent went on to consider the application under  paragraph
        276ADE  (relating  to  the  appellant's  private  life)  and  under
        Appendix FM of the immigration rules, but concluded that he did not
        meet the  requirements  of  these  rules.  The  respondent  finally
        considered whether there were any exceptional circumstances  which,
        consistent with the right to respect for private and family life in
        article 8, might warrant a grant of leave  to  remain  outside  the
        immigration rules.  In  the  absence  of  any  evidence  that  such
        circumstances existed the respondent  did  not  consider  that  the
        appellant was entitled to a grant of leave to  remain  outside  the
        rules.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

     9. At the outset of the appeal before the  First-tier  Tribunal  there
        was a discussion relating to the scope of the appellant's rights of
        appeal. At one stage his representative accepted that the appellant
        was bound by the new  appeal  regime  brought  into  force  by  the
        Immigration Act 2014,  although  in  his  closing  submissions  the
        representative asserted that the appeal was governed by the  regime
        in place prior to the amendments as the appellant's application was
        made before April 2015 (it was in fact made on 22 September 2014).


    10. Under the heading  'Right  of  Appeal'  the  judge  considered  the
        transitional provisions governing the appropriate appeal regime. He
        made reference to the complex saving provisions in the  Immigration
        Act 2014 (Commencement No.3, Transitional  and  Saving  Provisions)
        Order 2014, as amended by the Immigration  Act  2014  (Commencement
        No.4, Transitional and Saving Provisions and Amendment) Order 2015.
        The judge noted that the  Commencement  No.4  Order  preserved  the
        previous rights of appeal where there is, "a decision  made  on  or
        after 6 April 2015... to refuse an application made before 6  April
        2015, where that decision is... to refuse to vary a person's  leave
        to enter or remain and where the result of that  decision  is  that
        the person has no leave to enter or remain; unless that decision is
        also a refusal of an asylum, protection or human rights claim."


    11. The judge considered that the EEA residents card did not amount  to
        "leave to remain" under the Immigration  Act  1971  because  rights
        accruing under European free movement law was a separate regime.


    12. At paragraph 10 the judge stated,

             The Appellant's only right to be in the United Kingdom at  the
             time of the application was on the basis of his EEA  rights  -
             so if they did not amount to leave to remain then the decision
             under appeal is not a refusal to vary leave to  remain,  since
             the Appellant did not have leave to remain in the first place.
             If his EEA rights do amount  to  leave  to  remain,  then  the
             decision under appeal does not  leave  him  without  leave  to
             remain. Either way, his case is  not  one  where  there  is  a
             "decision... to refuse to vary a person's leave  to  enter  or
             remain", and so it falls to be dealt with under the restricted
             appeal rights introduced by the Immigration Act 2014.

    13. The judge summarised the evidence given by the appellant from  [11]
        to [14].  The  judge  noted  the  appellant's  assertion  that  his
        passport and application papers relating to his application made on
        23 February 2011 were  lost  in  the  post  when  returned  by  the
        respondent,  and  that  he  had  to  obtain  fresh  copies  of  his
        educational  certificates  from  Pakistan  and  a   new   passport.
        Submissions made on behalf of the appellant centred on whether  the
        respondent had acted unlawfully  in  rejecting  the  February  2011
        applications as invalid. The legal representative claimed  to  have
        seen the appellant's  bank  statement  from  around  the  time  the
        application was declined for non-payment of fee. The  bank  account
        was said to show that the appellant had more than enough  to  cover
        any fee and, with reference to Basnet (validity  of  application  -
        respondent) [2012] UKUT 00113 (IAC), it was submitted that  it  was
        for the respondent  to  show  that  the  application  was  properly
        rejected as invalid. It was submitted that  the  judge  could  deal
        with the exercise of discretion by  the  respondent  in  accordance
        with her guidance under the immigration rules.


    14. The judge's reasoning is contained in a very brief  section  headed
        'Discussion and Conclusions'. It consists of  little  more  than  2
        paragraphs, which I set out below.

             21. The fundamental problem for the Appellant is that, as  set
             out above, this appeal falls to be dealt with  under  the  new
             appeals regime. A finding that, for instance, the decision  is
             not in accordance  with  the  immigration  rules,  or  not  in
             accordance with law, is simply not open to me. The appeal  can
             only be brought on human rights grounds.


             22. The difficulty that follows is that there  is  nothing  in
             this  appeal  which  engages  human  rights  grounds  for  the
             Appellant. He continues to have a full  right  to  reside  and
             work in the United Kingdom under the EEA Regs. It may well be,
             as Mr Chowdhury suggests, that indefinite leave to remain is a
             preferable status for the Appellant, but the fact  that  there
             may be a better status available for an Appellant as a  result
             of an appeal is not something which of  itself  engages  human
             rights.


             23. Since the appellant's Appeal does not engage human  rights
             grounds,  it  cannot  be  considered  further  and   must   be
             dismissed.

    15. The appeal was consequently dismissed.

The grounds of appeal and the error of law hearing

    16. The Grounds essentially contend that the judge failed to appreciate
        that an application for  ILR  is  a  human  rights  claim  and  his
        consequential failure  to  assess  the  appeal  with  reference  to
        paragraph 276B constituted a material legal error.  Nor  was  there
        any engagement with paragraph 276ADE or Appendix FM, despite  these
        having been relied on by the respondent in her Reasons For  Refusal
        Letter. The failure to consider the  appeal  under  paragraph  276B
        also meant that there were no factual findings in  respect  of  the
        appellant's contention that his application dated 7  February  2011
        was wrongly rejected as being invalid.


    17. In granting permission to appeal  the  Upper  Tribunal  noted  that
        there was some uncertainty as to  the  effect  of  the  appellant's
        concurrent right to remain (if any)  pursuant  to  the  Immigration
        (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 and it was  essential  to
        know the nature of the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.


    18. At the 'error of  law'  hearing  there  was  substantial  agreement
        between  the  parties.  Mr  Clarke,  representing  the  respondent,
        conceded that the decision  contained  material  legal  errors.  He
        accepted that an application pursuant to paragraph 276B constituted
        a human rights claim and that  the  judge  should  have  considered
        whether the appellant met the requirements of that paragraph,  with
        reference to paragraph 276A.


    19. I indicated that I was of the same  view  and,  having  heard  some
        further submissions as to  the  appropriate  course  of  action,  I
        indicated that, as there were no primary factual findings  at  all,
        including any findings in respect  of  the  Basnet  point,  it  was
        appropriate for the matter to be remitted  for  an  entirely  fresh
        hearing.

Discussion

    20. The judge was unarguably correct in  holding,  at  [10],  that  the
        appeal  fell  to  be  considered  under  the  new  appeals   regime
        introduced by the Immigration Act 2014. The  Immigration  Act  2014
        (Commencement  No.  4,  Transitional  and  Saving  Provisions   and
        Amendment) Order  2015,  2015  No.  371  (C.  18)  relates  to  the
        aamendments coming into force on 6th  April  2015.  It  amends  the
        earlier Commencement Order (No.3). At 8(2) it  reads,  in  material
        part,

             For article 9 substitute-


              "9.-(1) Notwithstanding the  commencement  of  the  relevant
             provisions, the saved provisions continue to have  effect  and
             the relevant provisions do not have  effect  so  far  as  they
             relate to the following decisions of the Secretary of State-


             ...


             (c)  a decision made on or after 6th April  2015  (so  far  as
             that is not a decision mentioned in sub-paragraph (a) or  (b))
             to refuse an application made before  6th  April  2015,  where
             that decision is-


                  (i)  to refuse leave to enter;


                  (ii) to refuse entry clearance;


                  (iii)    to refuse  a  certificate  of  entitlement  under
                  section 10 of the 2002 Act;


                  (iv) to refuse to vary a person's leave to enter or remain
                  and where the result of that decision is that  the  person
                  has no leave to enter or remain;


             unless  that  decision  is  also  a  refusal  of  an   asylum,
             protection or human rights claim.

    21. The appellant's previously issued leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  4
        (General) Student expired on 8 May 2014. At that stage he no longer
        had  leave  to  remain  (his  right  to  reside  flowed  from   his
        relationship with an EEA national, not as a result of  a  grant  of
        leave to enter or remain).  The  respondent's  refusal  was  not  a
        refusal to vary the appellant's leave and did  not  therefore  fall
        within the savings provisions. In any event,  the  application  for
        ILR under paragraph 276B was a human rights claim  and  would  have
        been subject to the new regime. The judge was therefore correct  in
        concluding that the appellant was subject to the new appeals regime
        and that he could only appeal on human rights grounds.


    22. The respondent's Policy guidance on the appeals  process  from  the
        Immigration Act 2014 includes a policy document entitled 'Rights of
        Appeal'. This states that it is, "Guidance on when there is a right
        of  appeal  against  decisions  in  immigration  cases,   including
        mechanisms to prevent repeat rights of  appeal  and  prevent  delay
        from appeals against unfounded claims." It indicates that  a  human
        rights claim includes an application made under paragraph  276B  of
        the immigration  rules.  This  is  not  surprising  given  that  an
        application under the 10-year  long  residence  rule  reflects  the
        likelihood that a person who has lawfully resided in the UK  for  a
        continuous period of 10 years would have established a  significant
        private life.


    23. Having found that the appeal is governed by the amendments  wrought
        by the Immigration Act 2014, and having properly concluded that the
        appeal could only be brought on human  rights  grounds,  the  judge
        failed to appreciate that an application made pursuant to paragraph
        276B of the immigration rules is a human rights claim and that  the
        refusal of such an application constitutes a  refusal  of  a  human
        rights claim. This much is  clear  from  the  Reasons  For  Refusal
        Letter itself which indicated that it was  a  refusal  of  a  human
        rights claim. The judge was therefore obliged to  consider  whether
        the appellant met the requirements of paragraph 276B.  The  failure
        by the judge  to  engage  with  the  appeal  under  paragraph  276B
        constitutes a material error of law. Under s.86 of the 2002 Act the
        tribunal must determine any matter raised as a  ground  of  appeal.
        The appellant  legitimately  raised  his  alleged  compliance  with
        paragraph 276B in his grounds of appeal and the judge  was  obliged
        to deal with this and consider the Basnet argument utilised on  the
        appellant's behalf.


    24. Nor did the judge consider the appeal  under  paragraph  276ADE  or
        engage in any article 8 assessment outside the  immigration  rules.
        In his statement the appellant maintained that he was "married"  to
        an EEA national and that their relationship was subsisting, and  he
        claimed to have integrated into British society and  had  developed
        good friendships. The judge was obliged  to  consider  whether  the
        respondent's decision was unlawful under section  6  of  the  Human
        Rights Act 1998 in light of these assertions.


    25. In the absence of any such consideration it is appropriate to remit
        the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  complete  fresh
        hearing before a judge other than judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
        Anstis.



Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal decision is vitiated by material errors of law.  The
case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh (de  novo)  hearing,
all issues open, to be heard by a judge other than Judge of  the  First-tier
Tribunal Anstis.


[pic]                               30 January 2018
Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
