
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/35641/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 December 2015                  |On 6 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                              GHAZALA BILQUEES
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Malik, of Counsel, instructed by Malik Law
                    Chambers Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan born on 24 September 1954  appeals
    with permission against a decision of Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    Monson who in a determination promulgated on 26  March  2015  dismissed
    the appellant's appeal against a decision of the Secretary of State  to
    refuse her leave to remain as a dependant relative.

2.   The applicant has visited Britain on a number  of  occasions  but  last
    entered as a visitor in December 2013.  In June 2014  she  applied  for
    further leave  to  remain.   Her  application  was  considered  by  the
    Secretary of State and refused on the basis that  the  applicant  could
    not meet the provisions of  paragraphs  276ADE(1)(iii),  (iv)  and  (v)
    and(vi).   It  was  considered   that   there   were   no   exceptional
    circumstances which would mean that the applicant should be allowed  to
    remain outside the Rules.

3.   In his determination Judge Monson set out his  findings  in  paragraphs
    23 onwards.  He accepted that the applicant wished to remain  with  her
    daughter and son-in-law in  Britain  but  concluded  that  taking  into
    account that the applicant had another daughter in Pakistan as well  as
    her son there - although he accepted that the applicant did not get  on
    with her daughter-in-law - and that money could be sent to her to  make
    her life more comfortable in Pakistan, not only could she  not  qualify
    under the Rules but also there  was  a  public  interest  consideration
    which weighed heavily against her -  in  this  regard  he  referred  to
    Section 117B of the 2002 Act.

4.   It was on that last point that permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Storey - he had considered the grounds  of  appeal
    which referred to the case of Dellah v SSHD (IA/08394/2014)  which,  in
    drafting the grounds of appeal Mr Malik, had stated had  been  reserved
    by the Upper Tribunal.

5.   At the hearing of the appeal before me  Mr  Malik  confirmed  that  the
    determination in that case had now been promulgated and that the  Upper
    Tribunal had concluded that it was appropriate to take into account the
    provisions of Section 117B when determining an appeal.

6.   He therefore accepted that the appeal should be  dismissed  but  stated
    that the decision in Dellah was being appealed to the Court  of  Appeal
    and therefore he asked me to note that  the  appellant's  position  was
    reserved pending a decision of the Court of Appeal.

7.   In these circumstances I have concluded that the decision of the  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal contains no  error  of  law  and  that  that
    decision shall stand.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

