

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/35298/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 14 July 2016                        |On 15 July 2016                     |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern

                                   Between

                                ISAAC BERCHIE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr E. Akohene of Afrifa and Partners, solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr C. Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                                  DECISION

   1. The appellant, who is a  citizen  of  Ghana,  arrived  in  the  United
      Kingdom in September 2012 and was admitted as a visitor. He overstayed
      that leave and on 4 August 2013 was served with notice of liability to
      be removed. On 6 June 2014 he applied for a residence card as the son-
      in-law of Mary Serwaa, a Dutch citizen. Ms Serwaa was born in Accra as
      a Ghanaian national but moved  to  the  United  Kingdom  after  having
      obtained Dutch citizenship.  Her  daughter  travelled  to  the  United
      Kingdom to join her as a dependant relative of an  EEA  national.  The
      appellant had not met either Mary Serwaa or her  daughter,  Antoinette
      Owusu, before they arrived in the United Kingdom.


   2. On 6 June 2014 the appellant applied for a residence card as the  son-
      in law of an EEA national  exercising  Treaty  rights  in  the  United
      Kingdom. The marriage between the appellant and Ms Owusu was  said  to
      be a proxy marriage conducted in Ghana on 1 March  2014  that  neither
      party attended, they both being in the United Kingdom at the time.  It
      is not suggested otherwise than that both the appellant and  Ms  Owusu
      possess Ghanaian nationality only.


   3. By a decision made on 26  August  2014  the  respondent  refused  that
      application on the basis that it  was  not  accepted  that  the  proxy
      marriage was a valid one. The respondent explained that there  were  a
      number of reasons for arriving at that conclusion. These included that
      a careful examination of the documents submitted  disclosed  that  the
      "signature in the husband and wife field does not match  that  of  the
      application form or passport"; the respondent did not accept that  the
      Customary  Marriage  certificate  had  been  validly   registered   in
      accordance with the Customary Marriage and Divorce (Registration)  Law
      1985;  the  essential  Statutory  Declaration  was  not  accepted   as
      sufficient evidence because no evidence had  been  provided  that  the
      appellant was related as claimed  to  the  person  identified  as  his
      uncle, and the burden of proving the fact that it is  a valid marriage
      is on the appellant."; similarly, no evidence  was  provide  that  the
      person described as Ms Owusu's father was related as claimed  so  that
      it was not accepted these  persons  were  entitled  to  represent  the
      absent parties for the purpose of the customary marriage.


   4. Thus, the issue to be resolved in the appeal that came  before  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Thew was said to be the validity or  otherwise  of
      the customary marriage. By a decision promulgated on 13 November  2015
      he dismissed the appeal but did so on the basis that:


           "I have no evidence before me  that  Dutch  law  recognises  the
           appellant's marriage as a valid marriage..."


   5.  Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Nicholson because, he considered:


           "It is arguable that where, as here, the marriage is between two
           non-EEA Ghanaian nationals, the validity of  their  marriage  is
           assessed solely by reference to Ghanaian law."


   6. Before the Upper Tribunal it is common ground and agreed  between  the
      parties that the judge erred  in  law  in  the  approach  he  took  in
      determining the appeal. Thus, the matter that is in issue between  the
      parties as a consequence of the decision under  appeal  has  not  been
      addressed. If matters rested there, the  answer  would  be  to  simply
      carry out the task that it was for the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  to
      accomplish and determine the appeal.


   7. However, matters do not rest there. At the beginning of this morning's
      hearing I asked Mr Akohene to explain how the appellant had any access
      at all to a right of residence recognised  by  the  Immigration  (EEA)
      Regulations 2006 ("the 2006 Regulations") or,  indeed,  the  Directive
      they implement into domestic law. Although he did not concede that the
      appellant had no right of residence on the basis of  his  marriage  to
      someone who herself is not an EEA  national  but  is  present  as  the
      dependant daughter of a mother who is, in  my  judgement  his  valiant
      attempt to construct a route to a right of residence  as  an  Extended
      Family Member of an EEA national cannot succeed. In order  to  explain
      why I must first set out to the extent relevant the provisions of  the
      2006 Regulations relied upon by Mr Akohene, those being Regulations 7,
      8 and 17. Ms Serwaa is working in the United Kingdom and so it is  not
      necessary to reproduce those  provisions  of  Regulation  7  that  are
      concerned with students, nor those provisions dealing with  accessions
      states:
           Family member
                7. -(1) Subject to paragraph (2), for the purposes of these
           Regulations the following persons shall be treated as the family
           members of another person-

                 (a) his spouse or his civil partner;

                 (b) direct descendants of his, his spouse or his civil
                 partner who are-

                       (i) under 21; or

                       (ii) dependants of his, his spouse or his civil
                       partner;

                 (c) dependent direct relatives in his ascending line or
                 that of his spouse or his civil partner;

                 (d) a person who is to be treated as the family member of
                 that other person under paragraph (3).

               (2) ...

               (3) Subject to paragraph (4), a person who is an extended
           family member and has been issued with an EEA family permit, a
           registration certificate or a residence card shall be treated as
           the family member of the relevant EEA national for as long as he
           continues to satisfy the conditions in regulation 8(2), (3), (4)
           or (5) in relation to that EEA national and the permit,
           certificate or card has not ceased to be valid or been revoked.

               (4) ...

           "Extended family member"
                8. -(1) In these Regulations "extended family member" means
           a person who is not a family member of an EEA national under
           regulation 7(1)(a), (b) or (c) and who satisfies the conditions
           in paragraph (2), (3), (4) or (5).

               (2) A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if
           the person is a relative of an EEA national, his spouse or his
           civil partner and-

                 (a) the person is residing in an EEA State in which the EEA
                 national also resides and is dependent upon the EEA
                 national or is a member of his household;

                 (b) the person satisfied the condition in paragraph (a) and
                 is accompanying the EEA national to the United Kingdom or
                 wishes to join him there; or

                 (c) the person satisfied the condition in paragraph (a),
                 has joined the EEA national in the United Kingdom and
                 continues to be dependent upon him or to be a member of his
                 household.

               (3) A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if
           the person is a relative of an EEA national or his spouse or his
           civil partner and, on serious health grounds, strictly requires
           the personal care of the EEA national his spouse or his civil
           partner.

               (4) A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if
           the person is a relative of an EEA national and would meet the
           requirements in the immigration rules (other than those relating
           to entry clearance) for indefinite leave to enter or remain in
           the United Kingdom as a dependent relative of the EEA national
           were the EEA national a person present and settled in the United
           Kingdom.

               (5) A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if
           the person is the partner of an EEA national (other than a civil
           partner) and can prove to the decision maker that he is in a
           durable relationship with the EEA national.

               (6) In these Regulations "relevant EEA national" means, in
           relation to an extended family member, the EEA national who is
           or whose spouse or civil partner is the relative of the extended
           family member for the purpose of paragraph (2), (3) or (4) or
           the EEA national who is the partner of the extended family
           member for the purpose of paragraph (5).
           Issue of residence card
                17. -(1) The Secretary of State must issue a residence card
           to a person who is not an EEA national and is the family member
           of a qualified person or of an EEA national with a permanent
           right of residence under regulation 15 on application and
           production of-

                 (a) a valid passport; and

                 (b) proof that the applicant is such a family member.

               (2) The Secretary of State must issue a residence card to a
           person who is not an EEA national but who is a family member who
           has retained the right of residence on application and
           production of-

                 (a) a valid passport; and

                 (b) proof that the applicant is a family member who has
                 retained the right of residence.

               (3) On receipt of an application under paragraph (1) or (2)
           and the documents that are required to accompany the application
           the Secretary of State shall immediately issue the applicant
           with a certificate of application for the residence card and the
           residence card shall be issued no later than six months after
           the date on which the application and documents are received.

               (4) The Secretary of State may issue a residence card to an
           extended family member not falling within regulation 7(3) who is
           not an EEA national on application if-

                 (a) the relevant EEA national in relation to the extended
                 family member is a qualified person or an EEA national with
                 a permanent right of residence under regulation 15; and

                 (b) in all the circumstances it appears to the Secretary of
                 State appropriate to issue the residence card.

               (5) Where the Secretary of State receives an application
           under paragraph (4) he shall undertake an extensive examination
           of the personal circumstances of the applicant and if he refuses
           the application shall give reasons justifying the refusal unless
           this is contrary to the interests of national security.

               (6) A residence card issued under this regulation may take
           the form of a stamp in the applicant's passport and shall be
           entitled "Residence card of a family member of an EEA national"
           and be valid for-

                 (a) five years from the date of issue; or

                 (b) in the case of a residence card issued to the family
                 member or extended family member of a qualified person, the
                 envisaged period of residence in the United Kingdom of the
                 qualified person,

           whichever is the shorter.

               (7) A residence card issued under this regulation shall be
           issued free of charge.

               (8) But this regulation is subject to regulation 20(1).
   8. It can be seen from these provisions that the appellant, as the son-in-
      law of an EEA  national,  cannot  bring  himself  within  any  of  the
      provisions of Regulation 7, which tells us who is, and so who is  not,
      a family member. Similarly, as  Mr  Akohene  conceded,  the  appellant
      cannot bring himself either within any provision of Regulation 8 as an
      Extended Family  Member.  Mr  Akohene's  submission  is  founded  upon
      Regulation 17(4). He argues that the appellant should  be  treated  as
      someone who became an Extended Family Member, as  a  relative  of  his
      wife's  mother,  upon  marriage  and  so  the  usual  requirement  for
      qualification as an  Extended  Family  Member  of  either  pre-arrival
      dependency or membership of the  EEA  national's  household,  both  of
      which are absent here, should be dispensed with.


   9. There are a number of reasons why  that  argument  must  be  rejected.
      First, there is simply no rational basis upon  which  one  can  simply
      sweep aside and disregard the provisions of Regulations 7  and  8  if,
      inconveniently, they do not deliver the outcome desired. In any event,
      even if one begins the analysis not by negotiating the  provisions  of
      Regulations 7 and 8 but  by  going  directly  to  Regulation  17,  the
      position is  no  different.  Regulation  17(1)  does  not  assist  the
      appellant because he is not a family member as defined  by  Regulation
      7. Nor is 17(2) engaged because this is not a case where  there  is  a
      retained right of residence. The opening  words  of  Regulation  17(4)
      make clear that it is concerned with the  respondent's  discretion  to
      issue a residence card to someone who  has  already  established  that
      they are an Extended Family Member. That directs us back to Regulation
      8, and possibly Regulation 7 if the nature of the relationship  is  in
      question, which provisions establish clearly that  this  appellant  is
      not an Extended Family Member and so the possibility of  the  exercise
      of discretion under regulation 17(4) to issue a residence card  simply
      does not arise.


  10. Mr Akohene advances one final  submission,  that  being  founded  upon
      Article 3(2) of the Citizen's Directive  2004/38/EC.  In  summary,  he
      argues that the purpose of the  Directive  is  to  facilitate  and  to
      eliminate any impedance to the free movement of EEA nationals. If  the
      EEA national in this case, who has accepted the appellant as  part  of
      her household in the United kingdom, is unable to take him  with  her,
      her rights of free movement will be  impermissibly  impeded.  However,
      when the provisions of the Directive are examined it is apparent  that
      such submission leads nowhere:
           "Article 2
           Definitions
           For the purposes of this Directive:
           1) 'Union citizen' means any person having the nationality of a
           Member State;


           2) 'Family member' means:
                 (a) the spouse;
                 (b) the partner with whom the Union citizen has contracted
                 a registered partnership, on the basis of the legislation
                 of a Member State, if the legislation of the host Member
                 State treats registered partnerships as equivalent to
                 marriage and in accordance with the conditions laid down in
                 the relevant legislation of the host Member State;
                 (c) the direct descendants who are under the age of 21 or
                 are the dependants and those of the spouse or partner as
                 defined in point (b);
                 (d) the dependent direct relatives in the ascending line
                 and those of the spouse or partner as defined in point (b);


           3) 'Host Member State' means the Member State to which a Union
           citizen moves in order to exercise his/her right of free
           movement and residence.

           Article 3
           Beneficiaries
           1. This Directive shall apply to all Union citizens who move to
              or reside in a Member State other than that of which they are
              a national, and to their family members as defined in point 2
              of Article 2 who accompany or join them.


           2. Without prejudice to any right to free movement and residence
              the persons concerned may have in their own right, the host
              Member State shall, in accordance with its national
              legislation, facilitate entry and residence for the following
              persons:



                 (a) any other family members, irrespective of their
                 nationality, not falling under the definition in point 2 of
                 Article 2 who, in the country from which they have come,
                 are dependants or members of the household of the Union
                 citizen having the primary right of residence, or where
                 serious health grounds strictly require the personal care
                 of the family member by the Union citizen;
                 (b) the partner with whom the Union citizen has a durable
                 relationship, duly attested.
                 The host Member State shall undertake an extensive
                 examination of the personal circumstances and shall justify
                 any denial of entry or residence to these people."


      Article 3(2) treads the same ground as covered by the 2006
      Regulations. The appellant cannot qualify either as a family member as
      defined in Article 2 nor as one of the "other family members" referred
      to in Article 3(2)(a) because absent is the prior dependency or
      membership of the EEA national's household.


  11. In any event,  it  can  be  seen  that  the  Tribunal  has  previously
      expressed the view that Article 3(2) of the Directive  does  not  give
      rise to any substantive rights of residence: see: India  [2007]  UKAIT
      00048.  AP  and  FP  (Citizens  Directive  Article  3(2);  discretion;
      dependence)


  12. For these reasons it is plain that no right of  residence  arises  for
      the appellant such as to be recognised by the  issue  of  a  residence
      card and so his application was one that was bound to fail  regardless
      of the view taken of the validity of his marriage. This means that the
      judge reached the right conclusion but for the wrong reasons. However,
      this is an appeal that is bound to fail because the appellant  is  not
      entitled to a residence card. Section 12(2) of the  Tribunals,  Courts
      and Enforcement Act 2007 provides that if  the  Upper  Tribunal  finds
      that the decision under appeal involved the making of an  error  on  a
      point of law the Upper Tribunal may, but need not, set  it  aside.  As
      the error made by the judge was not material to the outcome no  useful
      purpose would be served  by  re-determining  the  appeal  and  so  his
      decision to dismiss the appeal shall stand.

   Summary of decision:


  13. First-tier Tribunal Judge Thew did not make an error of law  that  was
      material to the outcome of this appeal and so the decision to  dismiss
      the appellant's appeal shall stand.
      Signed                 [pic]
                               Date:    14 July 2016

                                Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


