
[pic]
IAC-FH-LW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/35011/2015
                                                               IA/35013/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 21 June 2017                       |On 29 June 2017                       |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                    mrs sadia perveen (First Respondent)
              mr Muhammad Riaz Daud Chauhan (Second Respondent)
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Miss J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms H Masood, Counsel instructed by Smb Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The  appellant  in  this  case  is  the  Secretary  of  State  and  the
    respondents are Mrs Sadia Perveen and Mr Muhammad  Riaz  Daud  Chauhan.
    However, for the purposes of this decision I refer to  the  parties  as
    they were before the First-tier Tribunal where the appellants were  Mrs
    Perveen and Mr Chauhan.

 2. Mrs Perveen and Mr Chauhan are both citizens of Pakistan.  Mrs  Perveen
    made an application for leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  on  29
    September 2012 as an entrepreneur and the second appellant submitted an
    application as her  spouse.   Those  applications  were  refused  in  a
    decision dated 1 December 2015 by the Secretary  of  State  as  it  was
    considered that Mrs Perveen had submitted false documents  in  relation
    to her application.

 3. In a Decision and Reasons promulgated on 13 February 2017, Judge of the
    First-tier  Tribunal  McGrade  allowed  the  appellants'  appeal.   The
    Secretary of State appeals on the ground that the judge failed to  give
    reasons for findings on a material matter.

 4. In particular, it was noted that the judge had accepted  at  [14]  that
    the certificates dated 21 August 2012 from  Elizabeth  College  and  31
    October 2012 from Queensway College "have been obtained by  fraud"  and
    that  this  was  conceded  by  the  appellants'  representative.    The
    Secretary of State went on to submit that it was unclear how the  judge
    could then go on to find at [15] that the appellants had discharged the
    evidential  burden  to  demonstrate  that  certificates  had  not  been
    obtained by fraud.

 5. It was submitted, including by  Miss  Isherwood,  that  the  judge  had
    applied an inappropriately high standard of proof and had he  not  done
    so he would have come to the conclusion that the  first  appellant  was
    more likely than not to have cheated.  The  respondent's  position  was
    that whilst the Secretary of State accepted that the  ETS  verification
    system was not infallible, the Secretary of State maintained  her  view
    that it was adequately robust and rigorous.  The appellants replied  in
    the form of a skeleton argument dated 20 June 2017.

 6.  As  noted  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  respondent  served   a
    supplementary bundle the day before the hearing containing evidence not
    previously served in the form of witness statements from Mr  Millington
    and Miss Collings, as well as the witness statement of Henry  Rickshaw,
    annexes  and  Professor  French's  expert  report.    The   appellants'
    representative then provided, at the direction of  the  judge,  further
    closing submissions dated 18 January 2017 which the judge  referred  to
    in his decision.

 7. Although it might have been more clearly set out by  the  judge,  I  am
    satisfied that what he was referring to when he stated at [14] that the
    evidence was sufficient to discharge the evidential burden  of  proving
    that the certificates  had  been  obtained  by  fraud  which  had  been
    considered by the appellants, was the guidance from both the  Court  of
    Appeal and the Upper Tribunal in relation to how the  burden  of  proof
    operates where deception is alleged.

 8. SM and Qadir v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department  (ETS  -
    Evidence - Burden of Proof)  [2016]  UKUT  00229  (IAC)  discussed  the
    shifting burden of proof. This was summarised by Beatson LJ in  SSHD  v
    Shehzad [2016] EWCA Civ 615:

         "the Secretary of State bears  the  initial  burden  of  furnishing
         proof of deception, and that this burden is an 'evidential burden'.
          That means that, if the Secretary of State  provides  prima  facie
         evidence of deception, the burden 'shifts' onto the  individual  to
         provide  a  plausible  innocent  explanation,  and  that   if   the
         individual does so the burden 'shifts back'  to  the  Secretary  of
         State".

 9. I accept, contrary to what was alleged  in  the  Secretary  of  State's
    grounds of appeal, that the appellants' representative did not  concede
    that the TOEIC certificates had been obtained by fraud, which  was  the
    only issue on appeal.  Nor did the judge  specifically  find  that  the
    certificates "have been obtained by fraud".  The  concession  that  was
    made on behalf of the appellants in the closing written submissions (at
    paragraph 11) was that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  discharged  the
    evidential burden at the initial stage  (my  emphasis)  and  which  the
    Tribunal in SM and Qadir noted was a "comparatively modest  threshold".



10. What  this  meant  was  that  the  evidential  burden  shifted  to  the
    appellants to provide a plausible and innocent explanation.  The  judge
    considered the evidence of the appellants  which  included  their  oral
    evidence.  The judge acknowledged that it was  a  difficult  appeal  to
    determine ([20]) however, the judge made  findings  at  [15]  that  the
    first appellant had provided:

         "a reasonably detailed account of the circumstances  in  which  she
         sat the speaking tests, including how she travelled to the  venues,
         what she did once she got there, the layout of  the  room  and  the
         content of the speaking test itself.   This  is  supported  by  the
         second  appellant.   I  am  satisfied  the  explanation  given   is
         sufficient to discharge the evidential burden upon  the  appellants
         of providing a plausible explanation  that  the  certificate  dated
         21st August 2012 from Elizabeth College and 31st October 2012  from
         Queensway College have not been obtained by fraud."

11. Therefore the judge found the appellants credible.   In  reaching  that
    finding the judge carefully considered all the evidence, outlining both
    the positive and negative factors in favour and against the appellants'
    case.  This included that there was no need for the first appellant  to
    cheat and that the first appellant had relied on her qualifications  in
    Pakistan and the fact that she had previously passed at least two tests
    in English.  However, the judge considered that argument to be weakened
    by the fact that the first appellant on her own evidence had failed  to
    pass a test on 20 March 2012 at South Quay College.  The judge properly
    took into consideration that this could have given the first  appellant
    a motive to use a proxy to pass the  test.   The  judge  attached  less
    weight to the first appellant's description of the room  in  which  she
    sat on the basis that it was not in  dispute  that  she  had  failed  a
    speaking test in March 2012 and would have been able  to  describe  the
    layout of the room.  The judge also properly took into account that the
    allegations of the use of a proxy were made in respect of two tests not
    just one.

12. However, it was incumbent on the judge to consider all the evidence  in
    the round and I am satisfied, from a proper reading of his Decision and
    Reasons, that is what he did, given that he found both the witnesses to
    have provided a "reasonably plausible account" including of  the  steps
    they took when the tests were taken and that he  found  both  witnesses
    "reasonably credible".

13. Although the judge was criticised in the  grounds  of  appeal  for  not
    taking into account  the  content  of  the  "Panorama"  documentary  in
    relation to such proxy tests, this was not specifically  adduced/relied
    on in this appeal and it is not  enough  to  simply  allude  to  having
    provided a DVD of a documentary to "every hearing centre".

14. The matter of what weight to attach to evidence was one for  the  judge
    and he had the benefit of  hearing  oral  evidence,  including  it  was
    submitted,  lengthy  cross-examination,  from  the  appellants;  having
    weighed what he found to be difficult issues, decided in favour of  the
    appellants.

15. In doing so the judge criticised the evidence produced by the Secretary
    of State.  Whilst the judge accepted that there was  credible  evidence
    of widespread fraud in relation to speaking tests, the judge noted that
    the extent of the error rate in the verification process  used  by  ETS
    was in dispute.  Professor French's report, which the judge  considered
    and took into account, gave the possibility of false positives of  less
    than 2%.  Whilst the Secretary of  State  claims  that  the  judge  was
    looking for a conclusive standard of proof, I do not find  this  to  be
    the case in what was a very careful consideration by the judge  of  all
    the evidence,  including  that  it  appeared  to  the  judge  that  the
    possibility of a false positive result  being  obtained  could  not  be
    entirely  excluded  and  that  given  the  range  of  issues   present,
    "assessing this in percentage terms is very difficult"; the judge  took
    into account not only Professor French's report, but also the  detailed
    submissions  on  the  difficulties  with  that  report  made   by   the
    appellants' representative in her written submissions.

16. Whilst the judge reached a conclusion which might not have been reached
    by every Tribunal, it was one that was plainly  open  to  him  and  for
    which he gave adequate reasons.  The Tribunal  properly  addressed  the
    shifting burden of proof and ultimately found that the  respondent  had
    not demonstrated on a balance of probabilities that the first appellant
    failed to undertake the speaking tests personally  or  that  they  were
    fraudulently obtained.

Notice of Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  an  error  of
    law such that it should be set aside and shall stand.   The  appeal  by
    the Secretary of State is dismissed.

No anonymity direction was sought or is made.


Signed                                  Dated: 28 June 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appellants' appeal before the First-tier Tribunal is allowed, I  make
a full fee award.

Signed                                  Dated: 28 June 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

