
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/35915/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 August 2015                    |On 7 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                           AN IMMIGRATION OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                               MR RENY THOMAS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:  Mr F Singarajah, counsel instructed by Paul John & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal against the decision, promulgated on 18 March 2015,
       of First-tier Tribunal Judge Herlihy (hereinafter referred to as the
       FTTJ).

Background

    2. The respondent to this appeal was last granted leave to remain in the
       United Kingdom as a Tier 2 (General) migrant  on  22  July  2014.  He
       arrived in the United Kingdom on 23 July 2014 and was  refused  entry
       and his leave to remain cancelled under paragraph 321A(1) of  HC  395
       (as amended). The reason for that decision  is  that  an  immigration
       officer considered that the  respondent  had  obtained  his  previous
       grant of leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a Tier 4 migrant by
       deception. Reference was made to  an  "IETS  (sic)  certificate  from
       Cauldron College dated 16 July 2013. "

    3. At the hearing before the FTTJ, the respondent gave evidence, stating
       that he took three English language tests in 2013. The first  was  an
       IELTS in February  2013,  the  second  was  a  TOEIC  test  taken  in
       September 2013 and it is this test which is in issue and  lastly,  in
       December 2013 the respondent took a further IELTS because he needed a
       higher score in order to become a registered nurse.  The  FTTJ  noted
       that the only evidence to support the claim that the  respondent  had
       employed deception was a  single  spreadsheet,  which  contained  the
       respondent's details and that of the test centre. The FTTJ  concluded
       that there was a "total absence of evidence from ETS as to  how  they
       determined that the (respondent's) test was invalid" and she  allowed
       the appeal.

    4. The grounds of application  argue,  that  the  FTTJ  failed  to  give
       adequate reasons for  findings  on  a  material  matter,  namely  her
       finding that there was "no evidence" to support the conclusion in the
       spreadsheet. Reference was made to the  witness  statements  of  Home
       Office employees and an email from ETS Taskforce dated  10  September
       2014. It was argued that in order to be recognised as  invalid,  "the
       case" has to have been analysed  by  a  computer  programme  and  two
       "independent" voice analysts.   It  was  argued  that  had  the  FTTJ
       "properly" taken the evidence into account, the  outcome  would  have
       been the opposite.  It was also said that the FTTJ erred  in  failing
       to give adequate reasons for finding that a person who clearly speaks
       English would therefore have no reason to secure  a  test  result  by
       deception.

    5. FTTJ Nicholson granted permission, making reference to R (oao) Gazi v
       SSHD (ETS-JR) 2015 UKUT 00327, on the basis that it was  arguably  an
       error of law for a FTTJ to conclude that the generic evidence is  not
       evidence supporting the conclusions in the spreadsheet.

    6. The respondent did not lodge a Rule 24 response.

    7. At the  hearing  before  me,  Mr  Duffy  argued  that  the  FTTJ  had
       overstated the case and  was  mistaken  regarding  the  Secretary  of
       State's evidence. She  had  not  understood  that  voice  recognition
       software was used; that there was only a 2 per cent margin of  error;
       that the respondent's voice would have been matched with someone else
       who took the tests or perhaps the  respondent  had  taken  tests  for
       others. He submitted that it would have been  open  to  the  FTTJ  to
       reach the same decision on the evidence, if she had expressed herself
       differently. He urged me to find there to be a material error of  law
       and to set aside the decision for a rehearing.

    8. Mr Singarajah took me through aspects  of  the  FTTJ's  decision  and
       referred to the decisions in Gazi, Budathoki (reasons for  decisions)
       [2014] UKUT 00341  (IAC)  and  MR  (permission  to  appeal:Tribunal's
       approach) Brazil [2015] UKUT 00029. In essence, he argued that  there
       was no doubt as to  why  the  FTTJ  had  preferred  the  respondent's
       evidence and that the appellant's grounds amounted to  no  more  than
       disagreement with the decision.

    9. In reply, Mr Duffy agreed that the FTTJ was entitled to look  at  the
       evidence of both the Secretary of State and the respondent and  weigh
       them up, however, the FTTJ had discounted the  respondent's  evidence
       and was wrong to say there was no evidence.  The  appearance  of  the
       respondent's name on the spreadsheet before the FTTJ meant  that  the
       evidence set out in what he accepted were generic witness statements,
       applied to the respondent.

   10. At [7.10] of the decision and reasons the FTTJ  refers  to  a  "total
       absence of evidence from ETS as  to  how  they  determined  that  the
       (respondent's) test was invalid." While this  is  a  strongly  worded
       finding, I take this to mean that the FTTJ found  that  the  evidence
       from the Secretary of State, in the form of the  generic  statements,
       did not directly relate to the respondent's particular test results.

   11. The FTTJ recognised in her decision that there was evidence,  in  the
       form of a spreadsheet, which related to the respondent. But that  was
       all the evidence before her which related to  the  respondent's  test
       results. There was no evidence as to how it was  concluded  that  the
       respondent's name was on the list of invalid tests.

   12. I have taken into consideration what Mr Duffy said about  the  2  per
       cent margin of error, however I have also  taken  into  consideration
       the findings  in  Gazi  regarding  the  limitations  of  the  generic
       evidence and the methods used to conclude that applicants have used a
       proxy test taker.

   13. I find that the FTTJ balanced the generic evidence against the weight
       of the respondent's evidence and attached weight to the inclusion  of
       the respondent's name on a spreadsheet. Between  [7.3-7.9]  the  FTTJ
       assesses all the evidence  before  her  and  at  7.10  sets  out  her
       conclusions. She preferred the  evidence  of  the  respondent,  which
       included his oral evidence, his unchallenged high scores in an  IELTS
       examination taken shortly after the disputed  test  results  and  his
       ability to give evidence in English without difficulty. I  find  that
       the FTTJ was entitled to reach the conclusions she did.

   14. While the findings of the FTTJ were concise,  the  losing  party  was
       left in no doubt as to why it had lost. I find that  the  appellant's
       arguments in this case amount to little more than a disagreement with
       the FTTJ's view of the generic evidence and her  ultimate  conclusion
       in this case.

Conclusions

    1) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of
       an error on a point of law.

    2) I uphold the decision of the FTTJ.


  Signed:  Date: 30 August 2015


  Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara
