
IAC-BH-PMP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/35107/2014
                                                               IA/35105/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke        |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 29th May 2015                     |On 11th June 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT


                                   Between

     DR AWAIS AHMED    First Appellant
     NADRA YOUNAS Second Appellant
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Sarwar of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. On 22nd January 2015 Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Osborne  gave
    permission to the appellants to appeal against the decision of Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal J S Law who dismissed the appeals  against  the
    decisions of the respondent to refuse leave to remain on the  basis  of
    private and family life under Article  8  applying  the  provisions  of
    Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

 2. This matter first came before the Upper Tribunal on 9th April 2015 when
    it was adjourned by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Coates  in  order  that
    Counsel representing the appellant at the hearing before the First-tier
    Tribunal could provide a statement to indicate whether or  not  he  had
    raised an additional ground of appeal on the basis of ten  years'  long
    residence arising under paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules at that
    hearing.  At the commencement of the hearing before me Mr Sarwar handed
    to me a statement  by  Raja  Rashid  dated  28th  May  2015.   In  this
    statement Mr Rashid indicates that  he  was  Counsel  representing  the
    appellant before the First-tier Tribunal and that  he  had  raised  the
    issue of long residence under paragraph 276B "throughout the course  of
    the hearing" and the Home Office Presenting Officer,  Mr  Malcolm,  had
    made submissions  on  the  issue.   Mr  Rashid  also  claims  that  his
    submissions to the Tribunal detailed how  it  was  contended  that  the
    appellants met the requirements of paragraph 276B.

 3. The grounds of application which Judge Osborne  thought  were  arguable
    can be summarised as follows.  It was argued that the judge  had  given
    inadequate consideration to the appellants' human rights arising  under
    both Article 8 and Article 9 of the ECHR and had failed to consider and
    give weight to the first appellant's ten years' lawful residence in the
    United Kingdom for the purpose  of  paragraphs  276B  to  276D  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  Specifically, the judge failed to consider  medical
    evidence  regarding  spinal  muscular  atrophy  (SMA)  from  which  the
    appellants' son suffered and also failed to  consider  the  son's  best
    interests  in  the  light  of  his  health  condition.    Further,   no
    consideration was given to the appellants' custom to visit the grave of
    their deceased first child.

Error on a Point of Law

 4. Mr Sarwar made initial submissions by confirming that the grounds  were
    relied upon.  He also contended that, in relation to the  interests  of
    the appellants' surviving  child,  the  judge's  consideration  of  the
    respondent's obligations under Section 55 of the  Borders,  Citizenship
    and Immigration Act 2009 was inadequate.  He also  submitted  that  the
    judge had failed to  consider  objective  material  about  the  child's
    illness particularly that contained in the NHS letter at page 47 of the
    bundle stating  that  no  treatment  was  available  anywhere  for  SMA
    although it could be managed successfully in UK.

 5. Mr McVeety conceded that the judge had not specifically dealt with  ten
    years' long residence under the  Immigration  Rules  but  thought  this
    might be because of the respondent's refusal decision of  5th  December
    2013 relating to the first  appellant's  earlier  application  on  this
    basis. This stated that the appellant did  not  have  leave  from  30th
    November 2006 to 19th February 2010, a period of three  years  and  two
    months which would have broken  the  ten  years'  continuous  residence
    period.  My attention was also drawn to the  decision  of  the  Supreme
    Court in Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74  which  concluded  that  there  was  no
    irrationality in a conclusion that it was in a child's best interest to
    go with his or her parents to the country  of  origin  even  if,  other
    things being equal, it was in the best interests of children to  remain
    in the United  Kingdom  to  obtain  such  benefits  as  healthcare  and
    education.

 6. Additionally, Mr McVeety submitted that the judge  had  considered  the
    health issues of  the  surviving  child  and  reached  the  conclusion,
    available to him, that the levels set by N v UK - 26565/05 [2008]  ECHR
    453 (27 May 2008) were not reached.  In  relation  to  the  claim  that
    Article 9 was also infringed because of the parties' inability to visit
    their child's grave he indicated that this could be overcome by visits.



 7. At the conclusion of submissions both representatives  submitted  that,
    if an error on a point of law was found, the matter would be dealt with
    more appropriately by a fresh hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

Conclusions

 8. The decision of the First-tier Judge is detailed  and  contains  cogent
    reasoning for conclusions reached. However, although it is evident that
    the claim of ten years' residence was put to the judge as there is more
    than one reference to the issue (e.g. paras 13 and  15),  the  decision
    does not show that the judge examined any  of  the  detailed  arguments
    which might have shown lawful residence for  that  period  or  that  he
    reached any specific conclusion under the Immigration Rules about it.

 9. According to the statement from Counsel, such arguments were put and Mr
    McVeety agrees that the decision shows they were not considered in  the
    context of paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules.  Indeed,  paragraph
    13 suggests that the judge had concluded that the first  appellant  had
    already resided legally in the United Kingdom for a period in excess of
    ten years.  If that is  so,  then  the  judge  should  have  considered
    whether or not he could examine the application of  paragraph  276B  in
    force at time of the respondent's decision on the basis set out  in  RM
    (Kwok On Tong: HC 395 para 320) India [2006] UKAIT 00039.  The omission
    amounts to an error on a point of law.

10. I should point out that I am unable to  accept  Mr  McVeety's  argument
    that the judge  may  have  had  in  mind  the  earlier  refusal  of  an
    application made by the first appellant on  the  basis  of  ten  years'
    continuous residence dated 5th December 2013 and so  did  not  need  to
    refer to the long residence claim.   That  is  because  the  judge  was
    evidently of the view that the first appellant had been lawfully in the
    United Kingdom for ten years even if no reasons were given to  overcome
    the respondent's conclusion that the appellant actually  had  no  leave
    for three years and two months during the ten year period.

11. The judge's failure to consider the application of  paragraph  276B  of
    the Immigration Rules means that the decision  should  be  re-made  for
    that reason.  However, I  have  also  considered  whether  the  judge's
    consideration of human rights issues  is  inadequate  as  alleged.   In
    isolation, inadequacies in consideration of  the  human  rights  claims
    might not appear to be material.  The best interests of  the  surviving
    child have been considered against the background of  the  respondent's
    obligations under Section 55  and,  certainly,  having  regard  to  the
    conclusions of the Supreme Court in Zoumbas, it is difficult to see how
    the judge could be wrong to conclude  that  his  best  interests  could
    properly be met  by  him  remaining  with  his  parents.   However,  at
    paragraph 18, the judge states that there was no  independent  evidence
    to establish whether or not the medical resources in Pakistan would  be
    adequate in the light of the child's SMA condition.   In  this  respect
    the judge does not show that specific consideration was given to all of
    the medical evidence set out in Appendix B to  the  appellants'  bundle
    covering the availability of treatment for the disease.  The judge also
    fails to give specific consideration  to  the  appellants'  claim  that
    their removal will stop them  visiting  the  grave  of  their  deceased
    child.  The judge does not specifically refer  to  this  issue  in  the
    context of either Article 8, generally, or Article 9  even  if,  as  an
    isolated issue, it is difficult to see how it could amount to a  breach
    of Article 8 or Article 9 rights  such  as  to  make  the  respondent's
    decision disproportionate when return visits would be possible.

12. In any event the ten year residence issue requires examination and only
    if that cannot avail the appellants will it be  necessary  to  look  at
    human rights issues.  It is, therefore,  appropriate  that  the  matter
    should be re-heard afresh before the First-tier Tribunal when  evidence
    on both matters can be called.  This conclusion accords with  paragraph
    7.2(a) of the Practice Statement for the First-tier and Upper  Tribunal
    made by the Senior President on 10th February 2010.

DIRECTIONS

13. The appeal is to be heard afresh before the First-tier Tribunal sitting
    at Stoke on 2nd November 2015.

14. The appeal should not be put before First-tier Tribunal Judge J S Law.

15. An Urdu interpreter will be required.

16. The time estimate is two hours.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt
