

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/35218/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 28 April 2015                     |On 12 May 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                     SL
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Maguire,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Morocco, born on 3  August  1987.   On  8
    April 2013 she  was  granted  limited  leave  to  enter  the  UK  until
    8 October 2013 as a visitor.   On  8  October  2013  she  applied  for
    variation of her leave to enter or remain, based upon her  relationship
    with Mr H ("the sponsor").  He is a  citizen  of  Sudan  who  has  been
    recognised as a refugee in the UK.

 2. In a letter dated  12  December  2013  the  respondent  considered  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules, Appendix  FM,  and  refused  the
    application for the following reasons.  Although the  application  says
    that the appellant and her partner have not  previously  been  married,
    her UK marriage certificate gives her marital status as divorced.   She
    had not provided "evidence that these  relationships  had  broken  down
    permanently" so the Secretary of State was "not satisfied that you  can
    meet  E-LTRP.1.9  of  the  Immigration  Rules."   The  minimum   income
    threshold requirement was not met.  The appellant was in the  UK  as  a
    visitor and therefore could not qualify for leave.  Exception EX.1  did
    not apply because although relocating to Morocco might cause "a  degree
    of hardship" for the sponsor, the Secretary of State was not  satisfied
    that there were any insurmountable obstacles.  The  application  failed
    to meet the private life requirements (as to which the appellant raises
    no significant dispute).  Finally, the respondent found no  exceptional
    circumstances to warrant consideration outside the Rules.

 3. By the time the appellant's  appeal  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Doyle on 17 December 2014 she and her husband had a  child,  born
    on 13 April 2014, who is a UK citizen.  She conceded that she could not
    meet the requirements of the Rules but submitted that there were  "good
    arguable reasons for considering her case outwith the Rules" (paragraph
    8).

 4. In his determination, promulgated on  29  December  2014,  Judge  Doyle
    found no such good arguable reasons,  but  that  even  if  there  were,
    "After considering all of the factors in the evidence  which  weigh  in
    the appellant's favour,  I  would  still  find  that  the  respondent's
    decision is not a disproportionate breach of the right to  respect  for
    either private or family life" - paragraph 15(m).

 5. Mr Winter applied to amend the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal.
     Mr Matthews had no objection.  The amended grounds are as follows:

         Ground 1

         1  The FtT erred in law at paragraphs 12(f), (g), (i), (j), (k) and
             (m) by failing to conduct  the  assessment  on  the  basis  of
             separation of the family.  The FtT has proceeded  entirely  on
             the basis that the appellant's husband and child can  go  with
             her to live in Morocco.  That approach ignores the  fact  that
             the child is British and the husband has indefinite  leave  to
             remain and appears prima facie entitled to be naturalised as a
             British citizen; it fails to  consider  that  the  refusal  of
             leave may result in the indefinite separation  of  the  family
             and whether that indefinite separation can be justified  as  a
             proportionate interference with  their  fundamental  right  to
             cohabit as a couple and as a family.  By ignoring  the  rights
             flowing from the child's nationality and the husband's  status
             and assuming they must go to Morocco to preserve  family  life
             is an error of law.  The FtT assumes that Morocco must  accord
             its nationals a right  which  the  Immigration  Rules  do  not
             accord to British nationals or those with indefinite leave  to
             remain, namely an unqualified right to be joined in Morocco by
             a non-national spouse (with the  spouse  being  able  to  find
             employment) and child (see Gulshahbaz Ahmed Mirza v  Secretary
             of State for the Home Department [2015] CSIH 28  at  paragraph
             20  per  Lord  Eassie.)   Further  and  in  any   event,   the
             appellant's spouse and child fall into the concession given in
             Ogundimu (Article 8-New Rules) [2013] Imm AR 422 at  paragraph
             112.)   Such  a  concession  renders  the  FtT's  findings  at
             paragraph 12(h) erroneous in law.

         Ground 2

          2. The FtT has erred in law at paragraph 12(i)  in  appearing  to
             rely on insurmountable obstacles.  This is simply a factor.  A
             disproportionate decision or measure is not to be  equipirated
             with the existence of an "insurmountable obstacle" (see Mirza,
             supra at paragraph 20 per Lord Eassie.)  Further, the FtT  has
             erred at paragraph 12(k) by failing to recognize that there is
             no prior threshold which  dictates  whether  the  exercise  of
             discretion  should  be  considered;  rather  the  nature   and
             assessment and the reasoning which are called for are informed
             by threshold considerations,  those  threshold  considerations
             include (a) whether an arguable basis for the exercise of  the
             discretion has been put  forward;  (b)  whether  the  relevant
             factors have already  been  assessed;  (c)  whether  a  repeat
             evaluation is  unnecessary  (see  R  (on  the  application  of
             Ganesabalan) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
             [2014] EWHC 2712 (Admin) at paragraph 23-32  per  Deputy  High
             Court Judge Fordham QC; Singh v Secretary  of  State  for  the
             Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 75.)  The factors relied  upon
             demonstrated there was an arguable basis for the  exercise  of
             discretion.  If that is not correct, then in terms  of  ground
             1, the FtT has erred in finding  that  there  is  not  a  good
             arguable case.  The FtT erred by  failing  to  recognise  that
             features, aspects of features  and  combinations  of  features
             already addressed, whether in full or in part, by reference to
             the Immigration Rules do not in principle become irrelevant to
             the discretion  and  the  evaluation  of  proportionality  for
             Article 8 purposes (see Ganesabalan, supra at paragraph 33-37;
             Muhammad  Irfan  Khan  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
             Department [2015] CSIH 29 at paragraph 11  per  Lord  Eassie.)
             Further it is unclear what the FtT means at paragraph 12(g) in
             finding that the fact the parties have different nationalities
             is not a reason to ignore the Immigration Rules.   It  appears
             the FtT has  erred  in  law  by  concentrating  on  the  wrong
             question.  It is not a question of  ignoring  the  Immigration
             Rules but whether  the  decision  is  disproportionate  having
             regard to all relevant factors.

         Ground 3

          3. The FtT erred in law at paragraph 12(1).  Although immigration
             control is relevant to the economic well-being of the  UK,  it
             is still necessary to make a judgment as  to  how  significant
             the aim, and how far the removal of the particular claimant in
             the circumstances of his case is necessary to promote that aim
             when viewed in the context of  other  material  considerations
             outlined above (see for example Mansoor, supra  at  paragraphs
             35 per Blake J.)  The  FtT  erred  by  failing  to  make  this
             judgment.   Further  the  FtT  erred  in  law  by  failing  to
             recognise that the facts in FK and OK Botswana v Secretary  of
             State for  the  Home  Department  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  238  were
             materially different where the parties involved did  not  have
             British nationality or indefinite leave to remain.

 6. In a Rule 24 response to the grant of permission  dated  2  March  2015
    (filed prior to amendment of the  grounds)  the  respondent  argues  as
    follows:

         ...

          2. In  a  detailed  and  comprehensive  determination  the  judge
             considered the factual background of this  case,  applied  the
             ratios of relevant case law and concluded by  giving  adequate
             reasons that the appellant cannot  succeed  under  the  Rules.
             The judge at paragraph 15(m)  also  concluded  that  he  would
             dismiss the appeal even if he  were  to  consider  the  matter
             outside the Rules as  the  respondent's  decision  was  not  a
             disproportionate  breach  of  the  appellant's  rights   under
             Article 8 of ECHR.  This finding was open to the judge.

          3. There is a remedy for  this  appellant  and  that  is  if  the
             appellant chooses  to  do  so  to  make  the  necessary  entry
             clearance application when the family is in a position to meet
             the requirements of the Rules.

Submissions for appellant.

 7. Mr Winter referred firstly to Ogundimu at paragraphs 108 and 112.   The
    respondent had conceded that it was  not  reasonable  to  expect  a  UK
    citizen spouse to relocate outside the EU where there was in addition a
    UK citizen child.  In this case the  spouse  has  indefinite  leave  to
    remain and the child is a UK citizen, so  the  circumstances  are  very
    close.  Mr Winter acknowledged that in AQ (Nigeria) and  Others  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 250 it was recorded at paragraph 62 that  the  respondent  did
    not concede "that there would never be circumstances in which it  would
    be proportionate to require the British child of  a  non  EU  carer  to
    relocate with that carer to a country outside the EU."  At paragraph 64
    the Court said that "the question whether in  a  deportation  case  the
    proportionality assessment should proceed on the basis that  a  British
    child may be required to leave the EU with his non EU carer (so  as  to
    render proportionate the interference  with  family  life)  must  await
    argument on a future occasion."  Mr Winter submitted that the Court had
    not been referred to Ogundimu.

 8. Mr Winter next referred to part 5A, section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act:

         In the case of a person who  is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where:

          a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
             with a qualifying child, and

          b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
             United Kingdom.

 9. He submitted that the provision is determinative  in  a  case  such  as
    this, involving a qualifying child.  The important facts were that  the
    sponsor has indefinite leave to remain and having been recognised as  a
    refugee from Sudan, he cannot return there.   He  does  not  share  the
    appellant's country of origin.  He has prima facie become  entitled  to
    naturalisation as a British citizen.  The child is a  UK  citizen.   On
    the basis of the concession in Ogundimu the child cannot reasonably  be
    expected to leave the UK.

10. Alternatively, Mr Winter sought to build his case on  Mirza  and  Khan.
    He referred also to Asif Ali  Ashiq  [2015]  CSIH  31,  which  he  said
    diverged from Mirza and Khan, in  particular  at  paragraph  24,  which
    lists factors relevant in accordance with ECtHR jurisprudence and finds
    it appropriate for a judge to place particular weight on the precarious
    nature of a party's immigration status at the  time  of  marriage.   In
    Khan, however, the Court found that such precarious immigration  status
    was not of such significance that some exceptional circumstances had to
    be found before an infringement of Article 8 might  arise.   Mr  Winter
    said that insofar as different divisions of the  Inner  House  came  to
    different conclusions, then the decisions  in  MS  and  in  Ashiq  were
    generally in line with the authority of the Court of Appeal in  England
    and Wales, but he invited me to prefer and apply the decisions in Mirza
    and Khan.  He said that taken together those  authorities  showed  that
    Grounds 1 and 3 disclose error of law.

11. I queried whether it is an error to  proceed  on  the  basis  that  the
    appellant's spouse may move to Morocco, because it is generally for  an
    appellant to establish the primary facts on which an Article  8  breach
    may occur.  Mr Winter founded upon the observation at paragraph  20  of
    Mirza that the respondent [wrongly] assumed that the spouse might  live
    in Pakistan, although a similar right was not accorded to UK  nationals
    by the Immigration Rules to be joined by a non-national spouse.

12. Finally, Mr Winter said that on  either  or  both  of  those  lines  of
    submission the decision should be reversed.

Submissions for respondent.

13. Mr Matthews firstly submitted that section 117B(6) is not  to  be  read
    outside the context of the rest of Part 5A  of  the  2002  Act  or  the
    context of the Immigration Rules.  It does not strike out the  specific
    requirements of the Immigration Rules or exclude  consideration  of  an
    appellant's  immigration   history,   English   language   requirements
    financial  provisions,  current   immigration   status   at   time   of
    application, and so on.  The correct general approach to a case outside
    the Rules is now set out in numerous cases including most  recently  in
    Scotland Ashiq and in England SS (Congo) and  Others  [2015]  EWCA  Civ
    387.  SS at paragraph 32 recognises that the Immigration Rules seek  to
    reflect a fair balance of interests under Article 8 in the general  run
    of cases and that the Rules thus "provide  significant  evidence  about
    the relevant public interest considerations  which  should  be  brought
    into account when a court  or  tribunal  seeks  to  strike  the  proper
    balance of interests under Article 8 in making its own  decision."   At
    paragraph 33 the Court held that although a test of exceptionality  did
    not apply in every case falling within Appendix FM "it is  accurate  to
    say that the general position  ...  is  that  compelling  circumstances
    would need to be identified to support a claim for grant  of  leave  to
    remain outside the new Rules and  Appendix  FM."   This  reflected  the
    formulation in Nagre which had been approved in MS and  in  a  line  of
    authority in the Court of Appeal.  The present appellant could not meet
    the terms of the Rules due to her capacity here as  a  visitor.   There
    was a longstanding public interest consideration in the Rules that such
    "switching" should not be permitted.  She failed to show that she could
    meet  financial  requirements.   Notwithstanding  Mirza  and  Khan  the
    criterion of an "unjustifiably harsh outcome" was approved in MS.  That
    point was not obiter.  Insofar as there was any relevant difference the
    Upper Tribunal should follow MS,  Ashiq  and  the  consistent  line  of
    authority in the Court of Appeal rather than Mirza and Khan.  The Rules
    struck the appropriate balance.

14. Ogundimu, a decision of the  Upper  Tribunal,  did  not  take  the  law
    further than before.  The respondent was not bound  by  any  concession
    which would require the present appeal to be granted.  Matters stand as
    set out in the Court of Appeal decision in AQ.  It is  now  plain  from
    statute that there are circumstances where it may be  found  reasonable
    to expect a qualifying child to leave the United Kingdom.  That is  the
    question posed by section 117B(6).  That question may  be  answered  by
    reference to the respondent's guidance.  At paragraph 11.2.3  there  is
    the heading, "Would it be unreasonable  to  expect  a  British  citizen
    child to leave the UK?"  The guidance is  that  the  assessment  should
    always be on the basis "that it  would  be  unreasonable  to  expect  a
    British citizen child to leave the  EU  with  that  parent  or  primary
    carer", but that section is for cases considered within the Rules.  The
    scheme of the guidance is that cases outside the Rules fall under 11.3,
    "Exceptional circumstances relating to a child's best interest":

         Where the applicant does not meet the requirements  of  the  family
         and private life rules, refusal of the application will normally be
         appropriate, but in every case falling for refusal under the  Rules
         the decision maker must  consider  whether  there  are  exceptional
         circumstances warranting a grant of leave  to  remain  outside  the
         Rules.   Occasionally  these  exceptional  circumstances  will   be
         obvious, but generally it is for the applicant to raise them.

15. The phrase "exceptional circumstances" in the guidance equated  to  the
    phrase "compelling circumstances" in SS.  The facts here were that this
    was a very young child, very likely  entitled  to  three  nationalities
    [Morocco, Sudan and the UK], with a parent subject to removal  who  has
    not been here for a particularly long period, and at a  time  when  the
    child's life was essentially focused on  its  parents.   The  appellant
    accepted that she could not meet the terms of the Rules,  and  even  if
    she were to apply out of country, it appeared  she  would  probably  be
    unable to succeed, because the sponsor's circumstances  fell  short  of
    the income threshold.  The First-tier Tribunal had gone squarely to the
    correct question, which was whether or not it would be  reasonable  for
    the child to leave the UK - paragraph 14(h).  The  answer  reached  was
    not legally erroneous.

16. On the wider argument, Mr Matthews submitted that although the Division
    of the Court deciding Mirza and Khan  found  the  term  "insurmountable
    obstacles" to be inappropriate, that was not the consistent approach of
    the Inner House in other cases including Ashiq.  There was no error  of
    law to require the determination to be set aside.

Reply for appellant.

17. Mr Winter in reply said that the respondent's argument arose  primarily
    from applying the Rules, but the most important consideration  was  now
    in section 117B(6).  As primary legislation that takes precedence.   If
    the application of that subsection were to  render  redundant  a  large
    part of the Rules and guidance, so be it.  He accepted that  11.2.3  of
    the respondent's guidance is intended for cases within the  Rules,  but
    said that nevertheless it was apt to govern the question of when  a  UK
    citizen child may reasonably be required  to  leave  the  country.   To
    apply that part of the guidance gave the  answer  required  by  section
    117B(6).  On cases falling outside the  Rules,  the  guidance  at  11.3
    required "exceptional circumstances", which  was  not  the  test.   The
    guidance was therefore misconceived and was not a  good  reference  for
    what should be found to be reasonable.

18. On conflict of authority, Mr Winter said on reflection  that  Khan  and
    Mirza, rather than Ashiq, were in line with the reconciliation  of  the
    various cases in Ganesabalan and Singh.

19. The respondent did not have the authority of the courts to reverse  the
    concessions recorded in the cases leading up to Ogundimu and so  should
    continue to be bound by those concessions.

20. Although the appellant did not meet the terms of the  Rules,  her  case
    did not present features which went significantly  against  the  public
    interest.  She had been here lawfully as a visitor at the time  of  her
    marriage  and  when  she  made  the  application   leading   to   these
    proceedings.  There was no adverse immigration history.   Although  she
    could not meet the strict income threshold she  and  her  husband  were
    able  to  show  that  they  could  establish  financial   independence.
    Applying section 117B(6) in the proper light the  determination  should
    be set aside and reversed.

Decision.

21. In so far as there is any conflict of authority which may  be  relevant
    to whether the First-tier Tribunal's determination errs in law, I  find
    that MS, Ashiq and the line of authority in the  Court  of  Appeal  are
    consistent and ought to be followed, rather than  Mirza  and  Khan  (in
    which Part 5A of the 2002 Act did not arise for consideration).

22. The appellant's first argument is in essence that  the  appeal  had  to
    succeed because it is never reasonable to expect a UK citizen child  to
    leave the UK.  Such a clear principle would be easy to  apply.   If  it
    exists, it should be readily identifiable in some or  all  of  statute,
    the Immigration Rules, the case law, and the respondent's policies  and
    guidance.  I have been shown that there  is  any  such  principle.   If
    there were, there would  be  no  sense  in  section  117B(6)  posing  a
    question.  No source discloses a single answer to the question.   There
    is no principle that Article 8 always overrides the  Immigration  Rules
    to prevent removal of the parent of a UK citizen child.

23. The judge was not referred to the  respondent's  guidance.   I  do  not
    agree that the guidance has to be read as binding the respondent to one
    answer.  That is not its structure or intent.  The use  of  one  phrase
    rather than another of the many which may be applied should not be over-
    analysed.  It does not appear unreasonable to have a policy of refusing
    cases which  do  not  meet  the  Rules  unless  there  are  exceptional
    circumstances.

24. The judge had to decide whether  on  the  facts  of  the  case  it  was
    reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.  The answer he  reached
    left nothing relevant  out  of  account,  and  was  open  to  him.   It
    discloses no legal error.

25. The grounds query the burden of establishing  whether  the  appellant's
    husband was able legally to move to Morocco.  The  Court's  observation
    at paragraph 20 of Mirza does not  seem  to  be  the  product  of  live
    debate.  The appellant in this case was  on  notice  from  the  refusal
    letter of the respondent's position.  She did not present  evidence  in
    the First-tier Tribunal that her husband might not be able to  move  to
    Morocco, nor did she submit that there should  be  presumed  to  be  an
    impediment unless the respondent proved otherwise.  The grounds attempt
    to make a point which was not put to the First-tier Tribunal, and which
    I think is in any event doubtful.

26. The grounds in my view seek to overcomplicate  the  issue  of  how  the
    judge ought to have approached the ultimate  proportionality  question,
    again in ways which are not said to have been argued in the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Macdonald's Immigration Law and Practice, 9th ed., vol 1, at
    paragraph 7.96 and  footnote  10  understandably  finds  unhelpful  the
    recent proliferation of formulae.  What the grounds obscure is that (as
    pointed out in the Rule 24 response) the judge made it  entirely  clear
    at paragraph 15(m) what his final assessment was, whether considered in
    or out of the Rules, through one or two stages,  or  applying  whatever
    formula.  The  appellant's  complaints  are  of  form  rather  than  of
    substance.   The case was an anxious one for the appellant and sponsor,
    but  it  presented  no  feature  which  is  unusual  or  which  is  not
    contemplated by the Rules.

27. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

28. Neither party made any submissions about anonymity.  An  order  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal remains in place.






           [pic]


           7 May 2015
           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




