
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/35403/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at The Royal Court of Justice,      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|Belfast                                   |                                  |
|On 1 August 2016                          |On 13 September 2016              |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                                  Aimee [G]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Gavin, instructed by Francis Hanna & Company
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of the Philippines, born  in  1975.   On  12
    August 2013 she applied for a derivative residence card as the  primary
    carer of a British citizen residing in the UK  -  her  child,  born  17
    August 2006.  The child's father is a British citizen.

 2. The Secretary of State refused this application in  a  decision  of  29
    August 2014.  The appellant appealed such decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and that appeal was heard on 23 February  2015  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Fox and dismissed in a decision promulgated on 24  March
    2015. Judge Fox refused claims that: (i) the appellant was entitled  to
    a derivative residence card; and, (ii) that the SSHD's  decision  would
    lead to a breach of Article 8 ECHR.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Holmes granted permission to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal in a decision of 21 May 2015.  The  appeal  came  before
    the President of  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  19  October  2015  but  was
    adjourned to await the decision of the Court of Appeal in Amirteymour &
    Ors [referenced in the Upper Tribunal as (EEA  appeals;  human  rights)
    [2015] UKUT 466]. Although the Court of Appeal  has  yet  to  determine
    Amirteymour it has now ruled on the legal issue therein in its decision
    in TY (Sri Lanka) [2015] EWCA Civ 1233.

 4. At the outset of the hearing Mr Matthews properly accepted,  on  behalf
    of the SSHD, that the issue of whether the  appellant  is  her  child's
    'primary carer' had not been dealt  with  lawfully  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  I concur with this view.

 5. In short, it was the  appellant's  case  that  the  child's  father  is
    severely disabled and unable to look after their  son.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal rejected this assertion. In doing  so  it  is  clear  that  it
    either failed to take into  account,  or  misdirected  itself  to,  the
    evidence before it.

 6. At paragraph 11 of its decision the First-tier Tribunal  states,  inter
    alia:

         "There is no clinical evidence to corroborate the appellant's claim
         that the partner would be  unable  to  look  after  his  son.   DLA
         documentation only confirms the amount of money Mr Attree receives.
          It does not help with identifying what restrictions, if any,  that
         Attree has in the activities of his daily life.  In the absence  of
         any information to the contrary I must find that Mr Attree  has  no
         material restrictions preventing him from fulfilling  the  role  of
         carer for his child."

 7. In fact, there was clear evidence before the First-tier Tribunal,  both
    medical and in the form of DLA documentation, relating to exactly  this
    issue;  such  documentation  providing  support  for  the   appellant's
    contention as to the disabilities, and abilities, of Mr Attree.  It  is
    unnecessary in light of Mr Matthews concession  to  set  this  evidence
    out.

 8. Furthermore, in paragraph 12 of its decision  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    'observed' that Mr Attree did not give any evidence as to his inability
    to physically assist in the raising of his child.  Once again, however,
    this observation is inaccurate  -  this  evidence  being  found  in  Mr
    Attree's witness statement.

 9. Despite the aforementioned that the FtT's decision contains an error of
    law, Mr Matthews maintained that such decision should not be set aside.
    In support of this submission attention  was  drawn  to  the  following
    conclusion of the First-tier Tribunal, found in  paragraph  13  of  its
    decision:

          "...there are others in the United Kingdom who can provide  family
         support assistance and maintenance for [the child]"

10. The aforementioned conclusion is, however, itself legally  flawed.  The
    starting point in the First-tier Tribunal's mind for the assessment  of
    the level of additional support required by 'other' family  members  in
    order to bring the child's overall care package up to the  level  which
    would not  necessitate  its  departure  from  the  EU  is  its  earlier
    conclusion  that  there  is  no  material  limitation  on  Mr  Attree's
    abilities to fulfil the role of carer for his child [paragraph 11].  In
    other words, the finding in paragraph 13 relied upon by Mr Matthews  is
    itself infected by the error Mr Matthews has  conceded  exists  in  the
    assessment of Mr Attree's caring abilities.

11. For all these reasons I find that the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
    contains an error of law capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal
    and I set it aside.

12. Both parties agreed that the appeal should be remitted  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal to be considered on a de novo basis.  I agree  that  that
    is so.  The matter should be remitted to  a  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal other than Judge Fox to be determined afresh,  save  that  the
    First-Tier Tribunal shall not consider whether the SSHD's decision will
    lead to a breach of Article 8, in light of the decision in TY

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal's decision contains  an  error  of  law  capable  of
affecting the outcome of the appeal.  I therefore set it aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  judge  other  than
Judge Fox to determine afresh.

Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
2 August 2016












