
[pic]
IAC-AH-CO-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: ia/35173/2014
                                                               ia/35175/2014
                                                               ia/35176/2014
                                                               ia/35177/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18th January 2016                 |On 1st March 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                         Ms Christine Williams-Brown
                          Mr Michael Anthony Brown
                                    [F B]
                                   [M A B]
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr C Emezie, Dylan Conrad Kreolle, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



The Appellant

 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the  Secretary  of
    State but nonetheless I shall refer to the parties as they were  before
    the First-tier Tribunal that is Messrs Brown as the appellants and  the
    Secretary of State as the respondent.

 2. The Secretary of State against appealed against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal which allowed the  appeals  of  the  appellants  on
    human rights grounds.

 3. The background to this appeal is that on 10th April 2015 a decision was
    promulgated  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and   there   followed   an
    application for permission to appeal form lodged by  the  Secretary  of
    State  but  within  that  application  there  was  an  application  for
    amendment of the determination under Rule 60 of the AIT Procedure Rules
    2005.  In fact that application should have been made by way of Rule 31
    of the Tribunal  Procedure  Rules  2014  whereby  it  states  that  the
    Tribunal may  at  any  time  correct  any  clerical  mistake  or  other
    accidental slip.  The application submitted by the Secretary  of  State
    was that the decision  to  allow  the  appeal  on  the  asylum  grounds
    appeared to be a "slip of the pen" amenable to amendment under the Slip
    Rule "please treat this an application  for  the  determination  to  be
    amended pursuant to Rule 60(1) of the 2005 Procedure Rules."

 4. What muddied the water was that in addition  to  the  above  there  was
    added to the application the following statement

         "For the avoidance of doubt, no issue was taken  with  the  judge's
         additional or alternative decision to allow the  appeals  on  human
         rights grounds".

 5. As a result of that application dated  16th  April  2015  the  Tribunal
    issued a further determination, promulgated on 23rd  June  2015,  still
    allowing the appellant's appeals on human rights grounds only.

 6. The judge recorded that the first appellant  Mrs  Williams-Brown  first
    entered the United Kingdom in January 2001 on a six  month  visit  visa
    and she was joined in the UK by her partner  the  second  appellant  Mr
    Brown.  At that time the first appellant  Mrs  Williams-Brown  had  two
    children [TR] her child by a previous relationship and [MB]  her  child
    by the second appellant.  The family were believed to have  entered  as
    visitors for six months and overstayed.  A  third  appellant  [FB]  was
    born on 1st July 2004 and [MAB], the fourth appellant, was born on 22nd
    February 2006.  Both the third and fourth appellants were born  in  the
    UK.  It transpired that in 2013, both [TR] and  [MB]  were  granted  30
    months' leave to remain, but the respondent following  a  human  rights
    application refused leave to remain for the  four  appellants  in  this
    appeal, that is the parents and two younger children.

 7. The Secretary of State refused their application for leave to remain on
    the basis of Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE.   The  matter  was  also
    considered by the respondent outwith the Rules because  of  exceptional
    circumstances.  The Secretary of State considered that  the  appellants
    could not succeed under the partner route as they  were  both  Jamaican
    citizens and they did  not  meet  the  eligibility  requirements  under
    Appendix FM because they did not meet EX.1 as the  Secretary  of  State
    considered it was reasonable for the two younger  appellants  to  leave
    the UK for Jamaica.  The Secretary of State  considered  that  although
    that might cause a degree of  hardship  there  were  no  insurmountable
    obstacles under paragraph EX.2 which would prevent them from continuing
    their relationship in Jamaica.

 8. Each appellant was considered separately.

 9. The matter came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal who allowed the
    appeal and the Secretary of State appealed on the basis that the  judge
    had  made   a   material   misdirection   of   law   in   relation   to
    "reasonableness."

10. It was  asserted  that  the  judge  concluded  that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable for the third and fourth appellants to leave  the  UK  [79],
    and therefore it followed that Section 117(6)(b) enabled the appellants
    one and two to remain in the UK to look after the  younger  appellants.
    It  was  contended  that  the  judge's  assessment  [84]  of  what  was
    reasonable in the instant appeal was "superficial" and "goes go no  way
    to identifying and explaining those factors that  outweigh  the  cogent
    public interest in maintaining  effective  immigration  control."   The
    judge considered that the sins of the parents should not be  attributed
    to the minors but this was not part of the  assessment  of  what  their
    best interests were.  The best interests were the starting point of the
    judge's assessment what was then was required was an assessment of what
    was reasonable.  The judge conflated these two concepts and this was  a
    material misdirection of law.

11. Mr Avery submitted that there had been no consideration of the parents'
    background further to EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874 albeit  that
    the judge had noted that background at paragraph 75.  The  parents  had
    no basis on which to remain in the UK.  At paragraph 61  if  the  judge
    had considered reasonableness he would have factored in the  fact  that
    the parents had no status there was no mention  of  Azimi-Moayed.   The
    consideration was fundamentally flawed.

12. With reference to the background of the events, regarding the  previous
    confirmation that no issue was previously taken with the judge allowing
    the appeal on human rights grounds, there was no abuse of  process  and
    this was a misunderstanding of the approach.

13. Mr Emezie submitted that there  were  two  preliminary  issues  one  of
    whether the Secretary of State was entitled to apply for permission  to
    appeal on different grounds or rather a second  time  around  following
    the representation made in April 2015 whereby she  had  submitted  that
    there was no human rights error.  Secondly the application was  out  of
    time.  Mr Emezie however noted that the decision had been sent on  23rd
    June and the application for permission to appeal was dated 10th July.

14. Further to Rule 33 -  Application for permission to appeal to the Upper
    Tribunal

    "(1) A party seeking permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  must
    make a written     application to the Tribunal for permission to appeal



    (2)  subject to paragraph (3) an application under paragraph  (1)  must
    be provided to the Tribunal so  that  it  is  received  no  later  than
    fourteen days after the date on which the party making the  application
    was provided with written reasons for the decision."

    ...

    (4)  The time within which a party may apply for permission  to  appeal
    against an amended notice of decision runs from the date on  which  the
    party is sent the amended notice of decision.

15. I am not persuaded that this application was made on different  grounds
    or out of time.  The First-tier Tribunal decision is  dated  23rd  June
    2015 and an amended notice of decision was sent out on 23rd  June  2015
    by the Tribunal.  The receipt of  the  application  for  permission  to
    appeal is dated 6th July 2015 and is within the fourteen days envisaged
    by the Rules. Further to Rule 33(4) "the time within which a party  may
    apply for permission to appeal against an amended  notice  of  decision
    runs from the date on which the party is sent  the  amended  notice  of
    decision."

16. On careful consideration of the alleged permission  to  appeal  by  the
    respondent this is clearly stated to be an application for an amendment
    of determination under the Slip Rule.  Although there appeared to be no
    challenge to the human  rights  grounds  I  do  not  accept  that  this
    constituted an application for a permission to appeal  and  it  is  the
    application  dated  6th  July  2015  which  formally   constitutes   an
    application for permission to appeal.  It is the substance not the form
    which should be considered.

17. That said I turn to the substance of the appeal  and  accept  that  the
    Secretary of State is merely attempting to re-argue the merits  of  the
    case.  On reading of the decision as a whole the judge clearly set  out
    the facts and considered the case of the children first and their  best
    interests which is what he should do.  There was no  challenge  to  the
    effect that the judge should look at the matter outside the Immigration
    Rules or classify the children as  qualifying  children  under  Section
    117B(6).

18. As Mr Avery states it is not the case,  as the judge directed  that  if
    he

         "Reached the conclusion in all the circumstances of this case  that
         it was not reasonable to expect the children to  leave  the  United
         Kingdom then the first and second appellants  would  succeed  under
         Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act."

    The judge must undertake an exercise in assessing proportionality, once
    he realises the best interests of the children, as to whether it  would
    be reasonable to expect the children to leave the United Kingdom.

19. Nonetheless the judge did refer himself to the  Immigration  Rules  and
    considered Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration  Act
    2009 at paragraphs 59 and 60.  He identified that the best interests of
    the children are to live and be brought up with the parents and he also
    directed clearly that a child's best interests could be  outweighed  by
    the cumulative effect of other considerations such as  the  maintenance
    of immigration control, precarious immigration status or criminality.

20. At paragraph 64 the judge makes an assessment of the children and finds
    that one is 9 years old and one is 10 years old and they both live with
    their parents in a close family.  I  also  noted  that  the  two  elder
    siblings had been granted limited leave to remain for 30 months with  a
    view to applying for further leave to remain.

21. The judge recorded that the children were both at school and doing well
    and did not wish to return to Jamaica.  He considered  that  they  were
    not young children and their wishes should be considered  at  paragraph
    69.

22. The judge also factored in the more complicating factor of the  illness
    of the child's father who had  suffered  a  stroke  and  was  receiving
    rehabilitation and who had significant cognitive impairment.  The judge
    noted at paragraph 70 that "clearly both children  will  have  suffered
    upset and concern because of their father's illness  and  that  if  the
    children were returned it would mean the split up of the family."

23. The judge did take into  account  the  public  interest  and  noted  at
    paragraph 72 identified that there were

         "A number of public interest considerations which I  have  to  take
         into account in the balancing exercise.  The first of these is  the
         maintenance of effective immigration control.  The second is that a
         person seeking to enter or remain in the UK should  speak  English.
         In this case both children and both parents speak English."

    He also found that the family were not  financially  independent.   The
    judge noted

         "75. In regard to the latter two factors, the  question  arises  of
             whether  the  best  interests  of  the  children  are  to   be
             determined without reference  to  the  immigration  status  of
             either parent.  Lord Justice Christopher Clarke certainly took
             the view in the case of EV (Philippines v Secretary  of  State
             for the Home Department [2014] EWCA  Civ  874  that  the  best
             interests of the child are to be determined without  reference
             to the immigration status of  either  parent.   However,  Lord
             Justice Lewison in the same case appeared to suggest that  the
             evaluation of the  best  interests  of  the  child  should  be
             evaluated  based  on  'real  world  facts',  i.e.   that   the
             immigration   status   of   the   parents   did   come    into
             consideration."

    I find in particular at paragraph 75 that the judge took  into  account
    the immigration status of the parents.  He was  not  paraphrasing  Lord
    Justice Lewison  without  intending  to  import  that  factor  into  an
    assessment of the case in this appeal.

24. The judge did consider at paragraph 79 whether it would  be  reasonable
    for the two children to leave the United Kingdom bearing in  mind  that
    they had been here for ten and nine years respectively  and  they  knew
    nothing but the United Kingdom.   The judge also balanced in the factor
    that there had been no criminality in the family  but  that  there  was
    certainly a burden on the tax payer.

25. It may be unfortunate that the judge expressed himself in the way  that
    he did in stating that

         "... for all the  reasons  I  have  already  given,  I  would  have
         considered that the balancing exercise came down in favour  of  the
         two children in this case and would  have  upheld  the  appeals  on
         behalf of the children"

    and at paragraph 84

         "As I have upheld the appeals of [FB] and  [MAB]  it  follows  that
         under Section 117B(6) I consider that it is appropriate  to  uphold
         the appeals of both parents, the first  and  second  appellants  as
         both children are qualifying children and I consider that it  would
         not be reasonable to  expect  the  children  to  leave  the  United
         Kingdom.  That means that the appeals on behalf of  the  first  and
         second  appellants  must  succeed  under  Section  117B(6)  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002."

26. Although this would appear to be  somewhat  misconceived  there  is  no
    doubt from Treebhawon and Others (Section 117B(6))  [2015]  UKUT  00674
    that

         "(i) Section 117B(6) is  a  reflection  of  the  distinction  which
             Parliament has chosen to make between persons who are, and who
             are  not,  liable  to  deportation.  In  any  case  where  the
             conditions enshrined in section 117B(6)  of  the  Nationality,
             Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  are  satisfied,  the  section
             117B(6) public interest prevails  over  the  public  interests
             identified in section 117B (1)-(3).

         (ii) Section 117B(4) and (5) are not parliamentary prescriptions of
             the public interest. Rather, they operate as  instructions  to
             courts  and  tribunals  to  be  applied  in  cases  where  the
             balancing exercise is being conducted in  order  to  determine
             proportionality under Article 8 ECHR, in cases where either of
             the factors which they identify arises."

27. EV (Philippines) can be entirely distinguished in this case because  in
    that case the children were Philippine nationals who had only  been  in
    the country for three to four  years.   In  this  case  the  judge  had
    clearly identified that the children had been in the UK for over  seven
    years and had also identified that  under  Section  117B(6)  that  they
    would be classified as qualifying children.  That was not the  case  in
    EV (Philippines).

28. Crucially it is not the case that the judge did not take  into  account
    other balancing factors in relation to  the  public  interest  and  was
    clearly aware that none of the family were  British  citizens  and  all
    were Jamaican citizens.  Although the judge stated [58]  that  he  must
    allow the appeal with regard to Section 117B(6), that is not what he in
    fact did because he factored in the various issues not least the length
    of time the children had been here, the ill-health of  the  father  and
    the prospect of the family being separated.  The judge established  the
    best interests of the children and considered that as a factor  in  the
    decision of whether it was reasonable to expect the  children  and  the
    family to remove from the  United  Kingdom.   The  judge  undertook  an
    assessment of proportionality which is what he was required to  do  and
    gave reasons for finding as he did and stated  at  [77]  that  'Section
    117B considerations could not be  ignored'  which  indicates  that  the
    judge did not treat Section 117B as the deciding factor.  He also found
    that the family were close, that it was in the best  interests  of  the
    children to remain  and  be  brought  up  by  their  parents,  to  have
    stability [61], and noted the length of time the children had  been  in
    the United Kingdom.   The judge did carry out a balancing  exercise  as
    he was required to do.

29. For  all  these  reasons  I  find  that  although  there  may  be  some
    misdirection in the law it is not material to the decision when read as
    a whole and the decision shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 29th February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

