
[pic]

Upper Tribunal    Appeal Numbers: IA/35661/2014
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    IA/35666/2014
     IA/35669/2014
     IA/35670/2014
     IA/35672/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10th November 2015                         |On 12th January 2016          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                                     SRP
                                     RKP
                                Vrp (A MINOR)
                                prp (a minor)
                                Hrp (A MINOR)
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr R Sharma, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms J Anderson, Counsel instructed by the Government
                    Legal Department

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appeal  of  a  husband  and  wife  and  their  three  minor
    children, born between 2005 and 2011 against the decision of the First-
    tier  Tribunal  dismissing  their  appeals  against  the   respondent's
    decision to refuse them leave to remain in the United Kingdom on family
    and private life grounds pursuant to Article 8 ECHR, either  within  or
    outwith the Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended).  All members of  the
    family are Indian citizens with no other  citizenship,  but  the  three
    children were born in the United Kingdom.

Background

 2. The parents came to the United Kingdom as visitors on 5 October 2004 at
    which point the wife must have been about six months pregnant with  the
    first of their children:  the  eldest,  H,  is  now  10.   The  younger
    children are 7 and 4 years old.   The eldest child,  H,  was  therefore
    due to be born during the parents' 6 month visitors' leave, and was  so
    born.

 3. The parents did not embark for India when  their  visit  visa  expired.
    They overstayed and after six years they applied for leave to remain on
    Article 8 grounds which was refused on 23 August 2010.  On 6  September
    2010 the husband and wife were served with a form  IS.151A  and  on  28
    March 2012 the family, having not embarked, made a further  application
    under Article 8 which was refused under the new Rules  on  5  September
    2014 following a judicial review, a  consent  order  and  agreement  to
    provide an appealable decision.  This appeal is the appeal against that
    decision.

 4. After the decision to refuse leave  to  remain  under  Article  8,  but
    before the hearing, the child H made an application under Section 14 of
    the British Nationality Act for British citizenship, on the basis  that
    she had attained the age of 10 years and had not been absent  from  the
    United Kingdom for more than 90 days in her 10 years.  That application
    was subsequently successful, but that is not, for the  reasons  that  I
    will explain, relevant to this error of law decision.

First-tier Tribunal decision

 5. The First-tier Judge dismissed the appeals both under  the  Immigration
    Rules and on human rights grounds.  The judge found  on  a  preliminary
    issue that the version of the Rules applicable to the analysis  of  the
    position of H, and by inference the rest of the family, was the version
    which applied after 13 December 2012.  At paragraph 9 of  her  decision
    she recorded that the only one of the appellants who contended that she
    could succeed under the Rules was the eldest child and that "the  other
    appellants could not succeed under the Rules  unless  they  could  show
    that it was not reasonable for [H] to leave the UK".

 6. The children's links to the United Kingdom are summarised at paragraphs
    32 - 34 of the First-tier Tribunal decision:

         "32. Following Azimi-Moayed, as a starting point, I find that it is
             in H's best interests to remain with her parents and  if  they
             are to be removed, she should also be removed unless there are
             reasons to the contrary.  I  find  that  it  is  in  H's  best
             interests to continue her education in the UK.  She  is  doing
             very well at school and is in year 5.  She plays the  clarinet
             and is a valued member of the orchestra.   She  has  developed
             social, cultural and educational ties and has lived in the  UK
             all the 10 years of her life.

         33.  However, there are compelling reasons why it is appropriate to
             disrupt those ties.  I accept that  children  are  not  to  be
             blamed for the errors of their parents, but H is still  of  an
             age where her focus is primarily with the  family  unit.   She
             has been at school for six years, but has  not  yet  completed
             her primary education.  Her schooling would be disrupted,  but
             she understands Gujarati even  though  she  chooses  to  speak
             English, and would be able to adapt to life in India with  the
             support of her parents who spent the majority of  their  lives
             there.  H is not at a critical stage of her education and  she
             could continue her education in India.

         34.  H's application for British citizenship is still  outstanding.
             I find on the evidence before me that the Fifth Appellant  has
             failed to show that it would not be unreasonable  for  her  to
             leave the UK."

 7. The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  went  on  to  consider  the  family's
    circumstances in the United  Kingdom,  the  length  of  time  that  the
    children had spent  in  the  United  Kingdom,  and  the  parents'  poor
    immigration  history.   She  had  regard  to  Section   117B   of   the
    Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.   She  dismissed  the
    appeals on all grounds.

Permission to appeal

 8. The appellants appeal with  permission  and  their  challenges  are  as
    follows:

      1) Failure to consider the correct Rule.  There is an error of law  in
         paragraphs 22 - 25 of the decision, because neither party drew  the
         judge's attention to HC 820, but since all that did was  to  remove
         the transitional provision relied upon, such error of  law  is  not
         material and I make  no  more  of  it  than  that.   I  have  heard
         extensive submissions from both parties but that is  simply  a  bad
         point.

      2) The best interests of H.  In  her  decision  the  First-tier  Judge
         recognised that educationally it was in the best interests of H  to
         remain in the United Kingdom but considered that it  would  not  be
         unreasonable to expect her to leave the United Kingdom and live  in
         India with her parents and family and  that  she  could  not  bring
         herself within paragraph 276ADE for that reason.  At  the  date  of
         decision H still had  only  one  nationality:  she  was  an  Indian
         citizen.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted  on  the  basis  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in applying Singh v The Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department [2015] EWCA Civ 74, because the rule change in question post-
    dated the application made by these appellants; and in  addition,  that
    arguably the First-tier  Tribunal  had  erred  in  its  application  of
    section 117B and the application for British citizenship made on behalf
    of the 10 year old child, B.



Discussion

Section 3(2) of the Immigration Act 1971

10. Section 3(2) provides as follows:

         "(2) The Secretary of State shall from time to time (and as soon as
         may be) lay before Parliament statements of the rules,  or  of  any
         changes in the rules, laid down by him as to  the  practice  to  be
         followed in the administration of this Act for regulating the entry
         into and stay in the United Kingdom of persons required by this Act
         to have leave to enter, including any rules as to  the  period  for
         which leave is to be given and the conditions  to  be  attached  in
         different circumstances; ...

         If a statement laid before either House of  Parliament  under  this
         subsection is disapproved by a  resolution  of  that  House  passed
         within the period of forty days beginning with the date  of  laying
         (and exclusive of any period during which Parliament  is  dissolved
         or prorogued or during which both Houses  are  adjourned  for  more
         than four days), then the Secretary of State shall as soon  as  may
         be make such changes or further changes in the rules as  appear  to
         him to be required in the circumstances, so that the  statement  of
         those changes be laid before Parliament at latest by the end of the
         period of forty days beginning with the date of the resolution (but
         exclusive as aforesaid)."

11. Mr Sharma sought to persuade me that  during  the  negative  resolution
    period, 40 days from the date  when  a  Statement  of  Changes  to  the
    Immigration Rules was laid before Parliament under Section 3(2) of  the
    Immigration Act 1971, the proposed changes were  of  no  effect.   That
    argument cannot succeed: it is clear from the language of  the  statute
    that the effect of the negative resolution procedure is to provide  for
    the making of further changes  in  the  Rules  where  either  House  of
    Parliament passes a negative resolution within the period  of  40  days
    beginning with the date of laying.  The original Statement  of  Changes
    is not invalidated by such a resolution, or the section would have said
    that it was.

12. A Statement of Changes laid before the House  for  negative  resolution
    remains valid unless and until it is replaced by  the  respondent,  the
    amendments to be laid before the House within the  period  of  40  days
    from the first laying of the Statement  of  Changes.   Accordingly  the
    argument which Mr Sharma sought  to  advance  under  Pankina  and  Alvi
    cannot succeed because the passages relied upon  in  that  decision  do
    not, in fact, support the argument, and because it is contrary  to  the
    plain language of the statute.

Reasonableness of H's removal

13. The child H is a qualifying child because she has lived in  the  United
    Kingdom for more than 7 years and section 117D(1)(b) applies.  Applying
    section 117B(6), if it is not reasonable  to  expect  H  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom, then the public interest does not require  the  removal
    of her parents, and by implication, her  younger  siblings  also.   The
    presence in the  United  Kingdom  of  this  family  will  turn  on  the
    reasonableness of the respondent's decision to remove H.

14. The appellants assert that the First-tier Tribunal failed  to  consider
    the evidence of H's links to  the  United  Kingdom.  That  evidence  is
    before me: it is sparse, consisting of Year 2  school  reports  showing
    that the child is doing quite well at school,  which  have  been  taken
    into account in the finding  that  it  is  in  her  best  interests  to
    continue to be educated in the United Kingdom, and  also  a  number  of
    formulaic letters from members of the family and  friends  which  state
    that the children have no knowledge of India and that the children "are
    all well-settled in the United Kingdom having been  born  and  educated
    here.  They know nothing of India and have no contact  with  anyone  as
    they do not know anyone back in India".  On the basis of that evidence,
    the summary at paragraph 32-33 deals adequately with the links which  H
    has to the United Kingdom, particularly as she was not  here  lawfully,
    such that section 117B(4) requires me to  give  little  weight  to  her
    private life in the United Kingdom.

15. The appellants argued that  "beyond  their  parents  having  overstayed
    there are  no  real  further  aggravating  factors  (e.g.  no  criminal
    activity)".   It  does  appear  that  the  parents  have  been  working
    illegally and the overstaying in this case is for  a  very  significant
    period.  Both  overstaying  and  working  without  leave  are  criminal
    offences and the appellants have a poor  immigration  history  on  that
    basis.

H's future British citizenship

16. The main argument relied upon by the appellants relates to  H's  future
    British citizenship, the application for which was pending at the  date
    of hearing but had not even been submitted at the date of  decision  or
    date of application.  It is difficult to see how an  application  which
    had  not  been  made  when  the  respondent  made  her  decision  could
    constitute an error in the respondent's decision but even if that  were
    possible the First-tier Judge clearly had the citizenship  position  in
    mind.  I have been guided by the decision of the Court of Appeal in  in
    Odelola v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2008]  EWCA  Civ
    308 which held that an application should be determined on the basis of
    the law and facts as they stood at the date of decision.

17. I do not consider  that  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  gave  inappropriate
    weight to the future citizenship element of the factual matrix. It  did
    not and could not form part of the respondent's decision,  because  the
    application had not then been made.  Even if it had, until  citizenship
    was granted, there could be no certainty that H would become a  British
    citizen at any future date, or indeed, how long that  might  take.  The
    question of the weight to be given to an individual factor is primarily
    one for  the  fact-finding  judge  at  first  instance  and  I  am  not
    satisfied, despite Mr Sharma's arguments that inappropriate weight  was
    given to the pending citizenship application.  It is right that  H  now
    is a British citizen and it remains open  to  her  to  make  a  further
    application for leave to remain on that basis.



Irrationality in First-tier Tribunal reasoning

18. The final challenge is one of rationality.  The appellants relied  upon
    the length of time that H had  spent  in  the  United  Kingdom,  having
    regard to the Upper Tribunal's decision  in  Azimi-Moayed   and  others
    (decisions affecting children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197 (IAC).
     They further contended that the second  child's  length  of  residence
    would soon be such  that  she  also  fell  within  the  7-year  period:
    however, that was not the case at the date of decision or the  date  of
    hearing and is not relevant for the purposes  of  this  decision.   The
    guidance given by the Upper Tribunal in Azimi-Moayed was as follows:

         "i) As a starting point it is in the best interests of children  to
         be with both their parents and if both parents  are  being  removed
         from the United Kingdom then the starting point  suggests  that  so
         should dependent children who form part of their  household  unless
         there are reasons to the contrary.

         ii) It is generally in the  interests  of  children  to  have  both
         stability and continuity of social and  educational  provision  and
         the benefit of growing up in the cultural norms of the  society  to
         which they belong.

         iii) Lengthy residence in a country other than the state of  origin
         can lead to development of social  cultural  and  educational  ties
         that it would be  inappropriate  to  disrupt,  in  the  absence  of
         compelling  reason  to  the  contrary.  What  amounts  to   lengthy
         residence is not clear cut  but  past  and  present  policies  have
         identified seven years as a relevant period.

         iv) Apart from the terms  of  published  policies  and  rules,  the
         Tribunal notes that seven years from age four is likely to be  more
         significant to a child that the first seven  years  of  life.  Very
         young children are focussed on  their  parents  rather  than  their
         peers and are adaptable.

         v) Short periods of residence, particularly ones without  leave  or
         the reasonable expectation of  leave  to  enter  or  remain,  while
         claims are promptly  considered,  are  unlikely  to  give  rise  to
         private life deserving of respect in  the  absence  of  exceptional
         factors. In any event, protection of  the  economic  well-being  of
         society amply justifies removal in such cases."

    In this case, the eldest child has been in the United Kingdom for  less
    than 7 years  after  age  4.   She  had  no  leave  and  no  reasonable
    expectation of leave to enter or remain. The respondent and the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  were   entitled   to   conclude   that   it   was   not
    disproportionate to expect her to return and live in the country of her
    nationality.

19. For the  appellants,  Mr  Sharma  accepted  that  paragraph  35  of  EV
    (Philippines) & Ors v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014]
    EWCA Civ 874 governs their case:

         "34.     In determining whether or not,  in  a  case  such  as  the
         present, the  need  for  immigration  control  outweighs  the  best
         interests of  the  children,  it  is  necessary  to  determine  the
         relative strength of the  factors  which  make  it  in  their  best
         interests to remain here; and also to take account of  any  factors
         that point the other way.

         35.      A decision as to what is in the best interests of children
         will depend on a number of factors such as (a) their age;  (b)  the
         length of time that they have been here; (c)  how  long  they  have
         been in education; (c) what stage their education has reached;  (d)
         to what extent they have become distanced from the country to which
         it is proposed that they return; (e) how renewable their connection
         with it may be; (f) to  what  extent  they  will  have  linguistic,
         medical or other difficulties in adapting to life in that  country;
         and (g) the extent to which the course proposed will interfere with
         their family life or their rights (if they  have  any)  as  British
         citizens.

         36.      In a sense the tribunal is concerned with how emphatic  an
         answer falls to be given  to  the  question:  is  it  in  the  best
         interests of the child to remain? The longer  the  child  has  been
         here, the more advanced (or critical) the stage of  his  education,
         the looser his ties with the country  in  question,  and  the  more
         deleterious the consequences of his return, the greater the  weight
         that falls into one side of the scales. If it is overwhelmingly  in
         the child's best interests that he should not return, the  need  to
         maintain immigration control may  well  not  tip  the  balance.  By
         contrast if it is in the child's best interests to remain, but only
         on balance (with some factors pointing the other way),  the  result
         may be the opposite."

    He contended that the appellants' circumstances should be distinguished
    on the facts.

20. I am not satisfied on the basis of the  argument  before  me  that  the
    judge misapplied the guidance in EV  (Philippines),  nor  that  in  her
    decision, she was not entitled to make and rely on findings of fact  as
    at the date of hearing, concerning the reasonableness of these children
    relocating to the country of their nationality with their  parents.   A
    challenge to a finding of fact must meet the standard set in R (Iran) &
    Ors v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982 at
    paragraph 90(2), that is, that no  reasonable  judge  on  the  evidence
    before them could have reached that  decision,  or  that  there  is  no
    evidence to support the decision made, or that the  reviewing  Tribunal
    cannot understand the reasoning of the fact-finding Tribunal.  None  of
    those considerations applies here.  I am satisfied that the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's reasons for reaching  the  conclusions  she  did  were
    proper, intelligible, and adequate to support her conclusions.

Zoumbas argument

21. Finally the appellants seek to distinguish the decision  in  Zoumbas  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC 74 that:

         "24. There is no irrationality in the conclusion that it was in the
         children's best interests to go with their parents to the  Republic
         of Congo. No doubt it would have been possible to have stated that,
         other things being equal, it was  in  the  best  interests  of  the
         children that they and their parents stayed in the  United  Kingdom
         so that  they  could  obtain  such  benefits  as  health  care  and
         education which the decision-maker recognised might be of a  higher
         standard than would be available in the  Congo.  But  other  things
         were not equal. They were not British citizens. They had  no  right
         to future education and health care in this country. They were part
         of a close-knit family with highly educated parents and were of  an
         age when their emotional needs could only be fully met  within  the
         immediate family unit. Such integration as had occurred into United
         Kingdom society would have been predominantly  in  the  context  of
         that family unit. Most significantly, the decision-maker  concluded
         that they could be removed to the Republic of Congo in the care  of
         their parents without serious detriment  to  their  well-being.  We
         agree with Lady Dorrian's succinct summary of the position in  para
         18 of the Inner House's opinion.

         25.  Finally, we  see  no  substance  in  the  criticism  that  the
         assessment of the children's best interests was flawed  because  it
         assumed that their parents would be  removed  to  the  Republic  of
         Congo. It must be recalled that the decision-maker began by stating
         the conclusion and then set out the reasoning.  It  was  legitimate
         for the decision-maker to ask herself first whether it  would  have
         been proportionate to remove the parents if they  had  no  children
         and then, in considering the best interests of the children in  the
         proportionality exercise, ask whether their well-being altered that
         provisional balance.  When  one  has  regard  to  the  age  of  the
         children, the nature and extent of their  integration  into  United
         Kingdom society, the close family unit  in  which  they  lived  and
         their Congolese citizenship, the matters on which Mr Lindsay relied
         did not create such a strong  case  for  the  children  that  their
         interest in remaining in the United Kingdom could  have  outweighed
         the considerations on which the decision-maker relied  in  striking
         the balance in  the  proportionality  exercise  (paras  17  and  18
         above). The assessment of the children's  best  interests  must  be
         read in the context of the decision letter as a whole."

22. The Zoumbas decision is binding upon this Tribunal.   At  the  date  of
    decision, the evidence of links between  this  family  and  the  United
    Kingdom was thin.  The parents' immigration history is  unedifying  and
    the links between the child H and the United Kingdom in particular  are
    no more than the usual  schooling  links.   There  is  no  evidence  of
    friendship or other strong connections outside the family circle.  I am
    satisfied that there are no Nagre  exceptional  circumstances  in  this
    case.  It may be that a further application can be made in  due  course
    in reliance on the line of authorities beginning with ZH (Tanzania) and
    the new citizenship acquired by the eldest child but that was  not  the
    case at the date of hearing in the First-tier Tribunal and the decision
    which the First-tier Judge made was unarguably open to her.

23. This is a decision which it was open to the First-tier Judge  to  make.
    There is nothing in either the nationality point or the point as to the
    Rules.

Decision

24. There is no material error of law in  the  First-tier  decision  and  I
    dismiss these appeals. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  shall
    stand.

    Date:          8  January  2016                  Signed:   Judith   AJC
    Gleeson
                                                   Upper   Tribunal    Judge
Gleeson
