
[pic]
IAC-AH-sar-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/35120/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 February 2016                   |On 23 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

                                    MS NB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Amunwa of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269)  I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or a court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings
    or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify the original appellant.  This direction  applies  to,  amongst
    others, all parties.  Any failure to comply with this  direction  could
    give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

 2. This is an appeal by the appellant against a decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal dismissing her appeal against a decision  taken  on  11  March
    2014 to refuse her application for indefinite  leave  to  remain  as  a
    spouse of a British citizen.

Background Facts

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Nepal who was born on 17 April 1987.  She
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 24 September 2009 with leave to  enter
    as a Tier 4 (General) Student.  Further leave as a Tier 4  Student  was
    granted until 30 January 2012.  On 25 July 2011 the  appellant  applied
    for further leave to remain as the  spouse  of  a  person  present  and
    settled in the United Kingdom  following  her  marriage  to  Mr  MJ,  a
    British citizen, on 14 September 2010.  This application was successful
    and she was granted leave to remain until 12 August 2013.  On 10 August
    2013 the  appellant  applied  for  indefinite  leave  to  remain.  This
    application was refused on 11 March 2014 and a decision  was  taken  to
    remove her by way of directions under Section 47  of  the  Immigration,
    Asylum  and  Nationality  Act  2006.   The   respondent   refused   the
    application because the appellant's husband had  written  to  say  that
    their  marriage  had  broken  down  and  he  no  longer  supported  her
    application.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision to the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  In a determination promulgated on 7 May 2015 First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Kelly dismissed the appellant's appeal.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge found that the appellant had not  established  that  her
    relationship with Mr J was caused to permanently break down before  the
    end of her last period of leave as a result of  domestic  violence  and
    therefore the judge found that the  appellant  has  not  satisfied  the
    requirement under paragraph 289A(iii).  The judge went on  to  consider
    the appellant's case under Article 8 in respect of  her  private  life.
    The judge found that the appellant does not meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE finding that there were not very significant obstacles
    to her integration in Nepal.  The judge considered Article 8 outside of
    the Immigration Rules finding  that  following  the  breakdown  of  her
    marriage the appellant no longer enjoys sufficient  family  or  private
    life in the UK such that Article 8 is engaged at all.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  On 13
    July 2015  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Colyer  refused  the  appellant
    permission to  appeal.   The  appellant  renewed  her  application  for
    permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.   On  11  September  2015
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman granted the appellant permission to
    appeal.  In the grant of permission Judge Chapman set out that  it  was
    arguable that the judge had erred materially in law in making selective
    findings and failed to  make  a  finding  as  to  whether  or  not  the
    appellant was subjected to domestic violence  by  her  former  husband.
    The grant of permission also sets out that  it  is  arguable  that  the
    judge erred in failing to consider and apply the provisions of  Section
    117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 when assessing
    proportionality.

The Hearing before the Upper Tribunal

 6. Mr Amunwa submitted a skeleton argument and bundle  of  authorities  on
    the day of the hearing.  The skeleton  argument  contained  grounds  in
    relation to the appellant being a vulnerable witness and Article 8.  No
    appeal had been made on the basis that the appellant ought to have been
    considered by the judge as a vulnerable witness and there was no appeal
    against the Article 8 findings.  Two separate sets of grounds of appeal
    had been lodged and these arguments were not  contained  in  either  of
    them.  No application had been made to amend  the  grounds  of  appeal.
    When I raised this with Mr Amunwa he indicated that he wished  to  make
    such an application now.  He submitted that although it was not  argued
    before the First-tier Tribunal Judge that the appellant ought  to  have
    been considered as a vulnerable witness the guidance  produced  by  the
    President should have been applied by the judge as a matter of  course.
    The judge has to have regard to it.  He submitted that in  the  grounds
    of appeal there is a reference to Section 117B and that, he  submitted,
    is to be implied to be in reference to Article 8.

 7. Ms Fijiwala opposed the  amendment.   She  submitted  that  these  were
    factors that were not raised before the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  not
    raised in the grounds of appeal.  She submitted that the respondent was
    ambushed having only become aware of these  arguments  on  reading  the
    skeleton argument today.

 8. I refused the application to amend the grounds of appeal in relation to
    Article 8.  No appeal was lodged against the findings of the judge with
    regard to Article 8.  Two  separate  sets  of  grounds  of  appeal  for
    permission were lodged and in neither of those  was  there  any  appeal
    against  the  Article  8  findings.   I  allowed  the  application  for
    amendment on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal Judge ought to have
    considered whether or not  the  appellant  was  a  vulnerable  witness,
    however in light of the  fact  that  the  respondent  has  not  had  an
    opportunity to consider this  issue  I  directed  that  the  respondent
    provide written submissions within  seven  days  of  the  date  of  the
    hearing.  The appellant then has three days  in  order  to  respond  to
    those submissions.

Summary of the Submissions

The Appellant's Submissions

 9. I permitted the appellant to amend the grounds of appeal to  include  a
    new ground of appeal essentially that the judge should have applied the
    Joint Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010; Child, vulnerable  adult
    and  sensitive  appellant  guidance'  (the  'guidance')  on  vulnerable
    witnesses because a person presenting with assertions of  sexual  abuse
    would be  prima  facie  within  the  guidance.   Mr  Amunwa  relied  on
    paragraphs 14 and 15 of the guidance and for the need for the  evidence
    to be treated in  light  of  the  vulnerability  of  the  witness.   He
    submitted that  the  judge  ought  to  have  taken  into  account  that
    vulnerability where there  were  discrepancies  in  the  evidence.   He
    submitted that the Tribunal also needs to record  whether  or  not  the
    judge found the appellant to  be  vulnerable.  Mr  Amunwa  referred  to
    paragraph 31 of the Tribunal decision where the judge acknowledges that
    relationships are complicated, however he submitted that this does  not
    go far enough. This is the only  recognition  by  the  judge  that  the
    appellant's relationship and  her  account  of  it  might  be  open  to
    different  interpretations.   His  submission  was   that   the   judge
    throughout takes against the appellant on the  basis  that  she  should
    have told the Home Office in March 2014.  He said the key point  as  to
    why consideration ought to be given to the vulnerability of  a  witness
    is to remind judges that people  who  have  experienced  abuse  do  not
    necessarily behave  or  make  disclosures  at  the  relevant  time.  He
    submitted that had this been taken into account the  judge  would  have
    considered more fairly when the disclosure was made.

10. It is asserted in the grounds of appeal that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's determination is perverse as she dismissed the  appeal  on  the
    basis that she found the credibility of the appellant to be  undermined
    by the discrepancy between her account and that of her friend Ms K.  It
    is asserted that the judge was selective in her approach regarding  the
    evidence of the appellant and that of her friend. Mr  Amunwa  submitted
    that this was an unusual case in that rather than the  appellant  being
    found to have embellished  her  case  it  was  the  other  witness  who
    embellished the case.  He submitted that at paragraph  31  there  is  a
    theme in the First-tier Tribunal judgment as to why he disbelieved  the
    appellant.  The judge set out that  she  asserted  that  sometimes  her
    husband was controlling but other evidence suggested sometimes that  he
    was not. He asserted that a victim of  domestic  violence  may  present
    their case in this way.

11. In the renewed grounds to appeal the appellant relies on the case of JL
    (Domestic violence: evidence and procedure) India [2006]  UKAIT  00058,
    in  particular  the  head  note  which  reads:  'Evidence  of  domestic
    violence.  If (but only if) there has been  a  valid  application,  the
    Immigration Judge is not confined on an appeal to the evidence required
    by the Secretary of State, nor is  an  appeal  bound  to  fail  if  the
    required evidence has not been produced.' It is  asserted  that  weight
    could  have  been  given  to  the  correspondence  sent  to   Hampshire
    Constabulary to show that the appellant was not fabricating  her  claim
    concerning her husband's recording  of  her  in  the  bathroom.  It  is
    submitted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge took issue with the timing
    of the appellant's claim to domestic violence and it is  asserted  that
    the judge failed to consider the fact that the Tribunal was the correct
    medium for the appellant to explain the domestic violence and that  the
    respondent should have interviewed her or investigated the matter  with
    her after her husband had written to the Home  Office  regarding  their
    marriage.

12. Mr Anumwa submitted that the  judge,  at  paragraph  34,  outlines  the
    position that there is no  documentary  evidence.   He  submitted  that
    there was evidence and that the judge  ignored  the  letters  from  the
    solicitors to Hampshire Constabulary, there  was  no  consideration  of
    those documents. He indicated that the appellant now has a response  in
    respect of  this  incidence.   The  judge  erred  in  considering  what
    material was there to independently verify  the  claim.   He  submitted
    that this is an error of law that taints the decision as a whole.

13. It is asserted that the judge failed to make any findings in respect of
    the  appellant's  statement  that  she  could  have  remained  in   the
    matrimonial home with  her  husband  when  her  application  was  still
    outstanding and wait for the grant of indefinite leave.

14. It is asserted that the judge did not take into account  the  mandatory
    provisions of Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 (the '2002 Act') when determining the weight to  be  given  to
    the public interest when assessing proportionality.

The Respondent's Submissions

15. A skeleton argument was submitted in response to the amendment  to  the
    grounds of appeal. The respondent asserts that there was no documentary
    evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal  judge  to  suggest  that  the
    appellant was a vulnerable witness. It is asserted  that  the  guidance
    defines what is meant by a vulnerable witness and that the  appellant's
    claimed vulnerability does not factor into the definition and therefore
    the judge did not need to have regard to the guidance. It is  submitted
    that paragraphs 14-15 of  the  guidance  only  is  relevant  where  the
    appellant has been identified as a vulnerable witness.

16. The respondent filed a  Rule  24  (of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008) response. It is  submitted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision is detailed, the judge considered all  the  evidence,
    applied the relevant case-law and  gave  satisfactory  reasons.  It  is
    submitted in the reasons for refusal response that it is not clear  how
    application of s 117B of the 2002 Act would assist the  appellant.  The
    respondent submits that the judge correctly applied the ration of Singh
    [2015] EWCA Civ 74. S 117B only applies where there was a venture  into
    a freestanding Article 8 proportionality assessment.

17. In relation to credibility she relied on the Rule 24 response  and  the
    detailed decision of the First-tier Tribunal when  refusing  permission
    to appeal.  She submitted that the judge is entitled to  attach  weight
    to the discrepancies that emerged in  oral  evidence.   The  judge  was
    entitled to take into account and attach credence to  the  evidence  of
    the witness K over the appellant.  There was a clear discrepancy  which
    enabled the judge to consider there were credibility issues.  The judge
    said, at paragraph 14, that the appellant asserted that her husband had
    never hit her, whereas at 25 the judge sets out that the witness K said
    that he had hit and kicked her.  This witness  was  relied  on  by  the
    appellant and the judge was therefore entitled to consider her evidence
    fully and attach weight to it.

18. With regard to the submission that if the  appellant  lacked  integrity
    she could have stayed  in  the  matrimonial  home  until  she  got  her
    refusal, she submitted that this  is  merely  a  point  that  is  being
    reargued having been found against  the  appellant  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.

19. She submitted that at paragraph 30 the judge was entitled to take  into
    consideration that the appellant  did  not  notify  the  respondent  of
    changes  in  her  circumstances.   She  submitted  that  although   the
    appellant raises this as a point regarding a  vulnerable  witness,  the
    judge referred both to the position in March 2014  and  September  2014
    when the appellant had not thought to  tell  the  respondent  that  her
    circumstances  had  changed.   He  was  entitled  to  find  that   this
    undermined her credibility.

20. At paragraph 31 the judge found that she was able to attend college and
    take employment.  He noted that there was nothing in  the  evidence  of
    the witness K that the appellant was forced to  accompany  her  husband
    when he was working driving buses.  She submitted that  the  judge  set
    out at paragraph 34 that he took into consideration that there  was  no
    legal requirement  for  documentary  evidence,  however  he  was  quite
    entitled  to  consider  that  one  would   normally   expect   to   see
    corroborating evidence in a case such as this.

21. The judge was aware that the  letters  to  the  Hampshire  Constabulary
    existed, he referred to them at paragraph 10.  She submitted  that  the
    judge could not make findings as these letters  only  established  that
    information has been sought, they cannot take the appellant's claim any
    further.  She also submitted  that  there  was  no  evidence  that  the
    letters were sent.

Discussion

Vulnerability of the Appellant

22. It is contended that  the  judge  ought  to  have  applied  the  'Joint
    Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010; Child,  vulnerable  adult  and
    sensitive appellant guidance' (the 'guidance') and that the  judge  did
    not  adequately  consider  the  vulnerability  of  the  appellant  when
    assessing her general credibility. The  appellant  was  represented  by
    counsel at the First-tier Tribunal hearing.  There  was  no  submission
    before the First-tier Tribunal that  the  appellant  was  a  vulnerable
    witness. She does not fall to be considered  as  a  witnesses  that  is
    vulnerable 'by definition' as she does not fall within the meaning of a
    vulnerable adult in s59 of the Safeguarding Vulnerable Groups Act  2006
    or as a 'sensitive witness'  which  is  defined  as  meaning  an  adult
    witness where the quality of evidence is likely  to  be  diminished  on
    account of fear or distress in  connection  with  giving  evidence.  In
    identifying witnesses outside those 'by definition' categories it would
    be a matter  for  a  judge  to  consider  on  the  basis  of  evidence,
    submissions and/or the witness's demeanour and responses given in  oral
    evidence as to whether or not the witness  was  to  be  regarded  as  a
    vulnerable witness. No evidence was provided  that  would  have  raised
    issues as to the vulnerability of the witness such as  medical  reports
    etc. There is nothing in the grounds to suggest that  the  witness  had
    difficulty in giving evidence at  the  hearing.  I  do  not  accept  Mr
    Amunwa's submission which was essentially that an assertion  of  sexual
    abuse gives rise to  an  automatic  presumption  that  the  witness  is
    vulnerable. In any event I do not consider that even if  the  appellant
    had  been  treated  as  a  vulnerable  witness  the   extent   of   the
    discrepancies  and  the  nature  of  those  discrepancies  between  the
    evidence of Ms K and the appellant (considered below) could  have  been
    explained by or resulted from the appellant's vulnerability. I  do  not
    consider that the judge materially erred in law by failing to  consider
    the guidance.



Assessment of credibility

23. The appellant has a high hurdle to overcome  in  order  to  demonstrate
    that the First-tier Tribunal's decision  is  perverse.   The  appellant
    asserts that the judge has been selective in his approach regarding the
    evidence of the witness Ms K and the appellant.   The  judge  sets  out
    from paragraph 11 to paragraph 22 in considerable detail  the  evidence
    of the appellant.  The judge then sets out from paragraphs 23 to 26 the
    evidence of the three witnesses called on behalf of the appellant.  The
    judge has set out from paragraph 29 his reasons for  reaching  the  his
    conclusions.

24. At paragraph 31 the judge set out certain of the discrepancies  in  the
    evidence presented by the appellant and Ms K:

         "... On the one hand, she painted Mr J as a person  who  sought  to
         "control" her and who refused to let her go to college or  to  work
         or stay in touch with others. On the other hand, Ms K said that the
         appellant attended college twice a week throughout  the  time  that
         she lived with her and the Appellant herself said she was  able  to
         undertake two separate periods  of  employment  at  the  care  home
         during the course of their marriage. Ms K  did  not  refer  to  the
         Appellant being forced to accompany Mr J to  work  as  he  drove  a
         bus."

25. Those discrepancies led the judge to consider that  the  appellant  had
    not given an accurate description of her life with Mr J.  Having  found
    that the appellant had not given an accurate description  of  her  life
    the judge sets out at paragraph 32:

         "I also found the credibility of the appellant's case as a whole to
         be undermined by the discrepancy between  the  appellant's  account
         that Mr J never raised a hand to her or assaulted her, and  Ms  K's
         evidence that she had witnessed Mr J kicking, hitting and  slapping
         her".

26. Although the grounds assert that Ms  K  had  probably  embellished  her
    statement to make things better for the appellant, she was called as  a
    witness in support of the appellant's case by the appellant.  The judge
    was entitled to take into consideration the discrepancies between  that
    evidence and that of the appellant and to conclude that they undermined
    the credibility of the appellant's case as a whole.

The timing of the domestic violence claim

27. Although the appellant's evidence was that she finally  left  Mr  J  in
    March 2014. The judge notes at paragraph 30 that the letter from  Mr  J
    withdrawing his support for the  appellant's  application  is  dated  5
    November 2013.  The judge notes  that  this  suggests  that  they  were
    living apart by that time. The judge considered that at no  time  prior
    to the refusal or prior to September 2014  did  the  appellant  get  in
    touch with the respondent and when she did contact the respondent  this
    was for the purpose of finding out whether  her  application  had  been
    decided, not to notify them that she was separated from Mr J. The judge
    did not accept that this failure could be explained by  the  suggestion
    that she had other things on her  mind  and  found  that  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect the appellant to have advised  the  respondent  of
    her changed personal circumstances. The judge considered it significant
    that the appellant's claim to be a victim of domestic violence was  not
    raised until it was clear that there was no other basis upon which  her
    application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom might succeed. Mr
    Amunwa submitted people who have experienced abuse do  not  necessarily
    behave or make disclosures at the relevant time. Whilst I  accept  that
    submission as a general proposition,  the  judge  had  the  benefit  of
    seeing and hearing the appellant giving evidence at  the  hearing  when
    assessing her overall credibility. This was one factor in reaching  the
    overall conclusion that the appellant had not satisfied  him  that  the
    relationship had broken down as a  result  of  domestic  violence.  The
    findings reached by the judge  were  reasonably  open  to  him  on  the
    evidence.

Appellant could have remained in family home

28. It is asserted that the judge failed to make any findings in respect of
    the  appellant's  assertion  that  she  could  have  remained  in   the
    matrimonial home with  her  husband  when  her  application  was  still
    outstanding.  There is no requirement on a judge to  make  findings  on
    every specific assertion made by the appellant.

Documentary evidence

29. The grounds assert that the judge ought not to have weighed against the
    appellant the lack of documentary evidence and the appellant relies  on
    the case of JL.  It is asserted that the judge could have placed weight
    on the correspondence that might have come from Hampshire  Constabulary
    to show that the appellant was not fabricating her claim concerning her
    husband's  recording  of  her  in  the  bathroom.   This  is   entirely
    speculative. All that was in  front  of  the  judge  were  two  letters
    writing to ask for information. They do not establish anything. In  the
    absence of the evidence the judge was quite entitled not to  place  any
    weight  on  the  letters.   At  paragraph  34  the  judge   took   into
    consideration that there  was  no  legal  requirement  for  documentary
    evidence.

Section 117B of the 2002 Act

30. There is no appeal against the findings of the  judge  in  relation  to
    Article 8, however the appellant asserts that the judge  erred  by  not
    taking into account the mandatory provisions of  Section  117B  of  the
    2002 Act.  The judge considered the appellant's case  under  Article  8
    outside the Rules but concluded that she no  longer  enjoys  sufficient
    family or private life in the UK such that Article 8 is engaged at all.
     There being no appeal against that finding, there was  no  requirement
    for the  judge  to  consider  the  statutory  provisions  contained  in
    Sections  117A  to  D  of  the  2002  Act  (see  Bossade   (ss   117A-D
    interrelationship with Rules) [2015] UKUT 00415 (IAC)).  It is only  in
    conducting the proportionality exercise that the provisions in  Section
    117B come into play.  In any event, those provisions would not  provide
    any assistance to the appellant as her status in the UK has always been
    precarious and therefore little weight would have been attached to  her
    private life.

31. The findings of the judge were ones that were open to him to come to on
    the evidence before him.  There are no material errors of  law  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal decision.

Notice of Decision

The appellant has not discharged the burden upon her of showing  that  there
is any material error of law in the First-tier  Tribunal  decision,  without
which that decision is not susceptible to being set aside.   The  appeal  is
therefore dismissed.  The decision of the respondent stands.


Signed   P M Ramshaw   Date 20 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw

