

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/35749/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Sheldon Court             |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24 June 2014                               |On 25 June 2014              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                              QASEER UL HASSAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Ruperalia, Just Legal Group
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant argues that First-tier Tribunal  Judge  North  failed  to
    observe the norms of procedural fairness when  conducting  the  hearing
    that took place on 12 February 2014 because he failed  to  ensure  that
    the appellant had an opportunity to address the evidence relied  on  by
    the Secretary of State.

 2. The appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  against  the  immigration
    decision of 17 September 2014 refusing the appellant  leave  to  enter.
    The UK Border  Force  relied  on  information  contained  in  an  email
    exchange with the appellant's college that the appellant had failed  to
    attend his course or to complete assignments.  The appellant sought  to
    rebut the allegations made by the immigration authorities  but  without
    sight of the email exchange was in difficulty because  it  was  unclear
    who had provided the adverse information.

 3. The judge's record of proceeding clearly indicates  that  Mr  Ruperalia
    advised him that he had not had sight of the documents.   Mr  Ruperalia
    made this comment at the start of the  hearing  whilst  the  judge  was
    checking what documentary evidence was available.  Mr Ruperalia asserts
    that the judge said the evidence would be made available to him but  it
    never was.  The judge  relied  on  the  evidence  when  dismissing  the
    appeal.

 4. The respondent's bundle  contains  correspondence  between  Just  Legal
    Group and the UK Border Force that clearly shows that requests for  the
    relevant documents had been made.  Although the UK Border Force replied
    and provided some documents, the email  exchange  was  never  provided.
    That is the only document in which it is possible to  identify  who  in
    the appellant's college had provided the information to the  UK  Border
    Force.

 5. Mr Smart agreed that Judge North's failure  to  take  into  account  Mr
    Ruperalia's difficulties was a procedural  error  that  amounts  to  an
    error on a point of law because the appellant did  not  know  the  full
    case against him and was not given an effective  opportunity  to  rebut
    the allegations made.  Mr Smart agreed that the determination could not
    be defended and he did not seek to do so.

 6. In light of these comments,  which  I  agree  with,  I  find  that  the
    determination contains and error on a point of  law  and  must  be  set
    aside.  As the appellant has not had a fair opportunity to  defend  his
    case in the First-tier Tribunal it is appropriate that this  matter  is
    remitted to that Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

 7. The appeal can be heard by any First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  other  than
    Judge North.

 8. I mention, merely to record the following that  Mr  Smart  provided  Mr
    Ruperalia with a copy of the respondent's bundle  at  the  end  of  the
    hearing.

Decision

The determination of Judge North contains an error on a point of law and  is
set aside.

The original appeal is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh
decision.



Directions for the remitted hearing

    . The appeal can be heard by any First-tier Tribunal  Judge  other  than
      Judge North.

    . The appeal will be listed after six weeks in order that the  appellant
      has time to contact his college and obtain rebuttal evidence, if any.

    . The appellant is to notify the First-tier Tribunal if  an  interpreter
      is required for the remitted hearing.

    . Other directions may be set by the First-tier Tribunal.










Signed
 Date 24.06.2014
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
