
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/35292/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 March 2015                              |On 25 March 2015              |
|Oral Determination                            |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                            Mr Peter Gyau Appiah
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Wells, Counsel instructed by Maliks and Khan
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with  permission  against  the  determination  of
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cary  promulgated  on  17  September  2014
    dismissing his appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State to
    refuse to issue him a residence card as confirmation of  his  right  of
    residence as a family member who had retained the  right  of  residence
    pursuant to the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006.
    In light of the subsequent developments in this case it is  unnecessary
    to go into detail regarding that decision suffice it to  say  that  the
    judge concluded that the appellant was not entitled  to  the  residence
    card requested, given that he was not satisfied  that  the  appellant's
    wife was a qualified person within the meaning of Regulation 6  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 at  the  time  of
    her divorce in September 2012 and that therefore the appellant was  not
    residing in the United Kingdom in accordance with the 2006  Regulations
    at the date of the termination of his marriage.

 2. The appellant applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    which was on 30 December 2014 granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Storey,
    who noted:

         "It is arguable  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  should  not  have
         followed the decision in Amos given the reference made by the Court
         of Appeal in NA [2014] EWCA Civ 995 and it cannot be excluded  that
         the eventual ruling of the CJEU on the questions  in  NA  may  mean
         that the appellant can rely on retained rights.  Further, it is not
         even clear to me that the  appellant  needs  to  rely  on  retained
         rights since if his wife acquired a right  of  permanent  residence
         prior to divorce proceedings then so did  the  appellant  and  that
         right can only be lost by absence abroad of two years."

    He directed that the matter should then be booked for a case management
    hearing.

 3. At the hearing it was accepted between the parties that the  judge  had
    erred in his decision and had failed to take into account that  it  may
    not have been necessary for the appellant to show  that  his  wife  had
    been working at the date of the divorce as, by that time, she had  been
    resident here and working for well in excess of  five  years.  On  that
    basis she (and the appellant as her dependant) would have acquired  the
    right  of  permanent  residence  prior  to  divorce  proceedings  being
    instituted.  Accordingly I am satisfied, and  as  both  parties  agree,
    that there determination did involve the making of an error of law.  It
    is therefore necessary to remake the decision.

 4. I am indebted to Mr Whitwell for handing up a  letter  dated  20  March
    2015 which sets out a brief chronology reciting that:

      a) the applicant and his wife were married on 14 November 2003;

      b) the applicant was granted a residence card on 20 February 2006

      c)  the  applicant's  wife  applied  for  a  document  certifying  her
         permanent residence on 9 February 2011, it being granted on 25  May
         2011.

 5. The letter reads materially:

         "On this chronology and mindful of Diatta v Land Berlin [1985} ECR,
         [1985] EUECJ R-267/83, it would appear to be the position that  the
         Aappellant acquired a permanent right of residence on 25 May  2011,
         prior  to  divorce  proceedings  being   concluded,   pursuant   to
         Regulation  10  of  the  Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
         Regulations 2006, as amended.  It is noted there is no evidence  to
         suggest the Appellant has left the United Kingdom for a  period  in
         excess of two years.

         Whilst it is noted in the above-mentioned Direction that  reference
         is made to 'divorce proceedings' and 'the  date  of  initiation  of
         divorce  proceedings',  the  respondent  did  not   challenge   the
         appellant's ability to meet Regulation  10(d)  of  the  Immigration
         (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006  with  reference  to  her
         previous consideration of 2 August 2014."

 6. In light of this information I consider  that  the  appeal  has  to  be
    remade allowing the applicant's appeal on the basis that as it  appears
    from this information he was at the material  time  a  person  who  had
    acquired the right of permanent residence.  On that basis the appeal is
    allowed.

 7. In the circumstances, it would be sensible for  the  appellant  now  to
    apply for a document confirming his right of permanent residence  under
    the EEA Regulations.

Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2. I remake the decision by allowing the appeal under the EEA Regulations.





Signed        Date:  23 March 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

