
[pic]
ST

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/35169/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 24 November 2015                  |On 30 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                               JAHANGIR ASHRAF
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Haji, counsel, instructed by J R Jones,
                    Solicitors (Birmingham).
For the Respondent:    Mr Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This matter comes before me for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law in  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge G McWilliams ("the FTTJ") promulgated on 8 May 2015,  in
    which he dismissed the appellant's appeal against the  refusal  of  his
    application for  a  residence  card  under  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (the EEA Regulations).  The appellant's
    application had been made on 7 March 2014 and refused by the Respondent
    on 7 August 2014.

 2. No anonymity order was made in the First-tier  Tribunal  and  none  has
    been requested before me. I therefore see no need for such an order.

 3. The respondent refused the application because she considered that  the
    marriage of the appellant and his spouse was one of  convenience.   She
    conducted  a  "language  test"  with  the  appellant  and  his   spouse
    apparently with the  intention  of  continuing  to  a  formal  marriage
    interview. In the event,  the  language  test  was  concluded  and  the
    respondent decided, because of the quality of the appellant's  and  his
    wife's responses, that this was not a genuine marriage.

 4. The appellant was granted permission to appeal because it  as  arguable
    there was procedural unfairness resulting from the  FTTJ's  failure  to
    adjourn and his placing weight on the extracts of interviews  with  the
    respondent when those interviews could  not  be  seen  in  full  or  in
    context.

Submissions on Error of Law

 5. Ms Nath submitted that the FTTJ  should  have  received  the  interview
    record or allowed the appeal because the respondent had not  discharged
    the burden of proof. The ICD.4605 (summary of interview) was, she said,
    a summary of the matters raised in the language  test;  it  was  not  a
    record of interview.  It was not suggested by the  appellant  that  the
    hearing before the FTTJ had been unfair; the procedural unfairness  was
    the failure of the respondent to provide an interview  record  and  the
    fact that insufficient evidence had been adduced to raise  a  suspicion
    of a marriage of convenience.

 6. Mr Nath submitted  that  the  FTTJ  had  appropriately  relied  on  the
    evidence of interview, all of which had been  disclosed.  He  submitted
    the interview record was sufficient to justify the FTTJ's findings.  He
    accepted that the questions posed of the parties were  not  related  to
    their marriage but designed to establish the quality of  their  English
    language skills; he accepted that the refusal had been based solely  on
    the parties' lack of communication skills. Mr Nath accepted  there  may
    be a material error of law in paragraph 24 of the FTTJ's  determination
    in that he appeared to have made a decision as to the  purpose  of  the
    marriage without making a finding as to whether  there  was  sufficient
    evidence for the burden of proof passing from  the  respondent  to  the
    appellant.

Error of Law decision

 7. Papajorgji (EEA spouse - marriage of convenience)  Greece  [2012]  UKUT
    00038 (IAC) makes it clear in the headnote that there is no  burden  at
    the outset of an application  on  a  claimant  to  demonstrate  that  a
    marriage to an EEA national  is  not  one  of  convenience.   The  FTTJ
    correctly refers to Papajorgji (his paragraph 22) noting that,  in  the
    first  instance,  the  burden  of  proof  rested  on  the   respondent.
    Nonetheless there is  an  error  of  law  in  the  FTTJ's  findings  at
    paragraphs 23 and  24,  where  he  considers  the  European  Commission
    guidance and the appellant's documentation. He concludes  paragraph  24
    by stating "having regard to this evidence and taking  account  of  the
    said Guidance criteria, the Tribunal considered it  likely  that  there
    had been an abuse of Community rights".  There is no indication in  the
    FTTJ's decision and reasons that the FTTJ had first made a  finding  as
    to whether the respondent had discharged the burden  of  proof  on  the
    issue of suspicion. According to Papajorgji (paragraph  14)  he  should
    have considered whether there were "factors  which  support  suspicions
    for believing the marriage is one of convenience. Translated  into  the
    technical language of the English law of procedure and  evidence,  that
    means that there is an evidential burden on the respondent. If there is
    no evidence that could support a conclusion that the marriage is one of
    convenience, the appellant does not have to deal with  the  issue.  But
    once the issue  is  raised,  by  evidence  capable  of  pointing  to  a
    conclusion that the marriage is one  of  convenience,  it  is  for  the
    appellant to show that his marriage is not one of  convenience.".  Thus
    he comes to a conclusion about  the  nature  of  the  marriage  without
    considering the evidence adduced by the respondent  and  on  which  the
    respondent bases her suspicions, namely the  outcome  of  the  language
    test (which, according to the reasons for refusal letter, is  the  sole
    basis for the decision to refuse).  The issue  at  that  stage  of  the
    FTTJ's decision should have been whether there was sufficient  evidence
    for a finding to support the respondent's claimed reasonable  suspicion
    of a marriage of convenience.  The failure of the FTTJ  to  follow  the
    guidance in Papagorgji is a material error  of  law  which  might  have
    affected the outcome insofar as the respondent's burden  of  proving  a
    reasonable suspicion is concerned.

 8. It was submitted by the appellant's representative that I should decide
    the matter immediately without  remittal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    which would entail further costs for the appellant; she relied  on  the
    submissions  made  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Mr  Nath,  for   the
    respondent, submitted that the mater should be remitted either  to  the
    respondent for a fresh  decision  to  be  made  or  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

Discussion and Decision

 9. It is not in dispute that the  appellant  and  his  sponsor,  Ms  Vanda
    Paritska,  an  EEA  national,  are  married.  Nor  has  the  respondent
    challenged the finding of the  FTTJ  that  Ms  Paritska  is  exercising
    Treaty rights in the UK.

10. The respondent states in the reasons for refusal letter that "Based  on
    the information detailed in immigration/police reports the Secretary of
    State has sufficient evidence to believe that the  marriage  undertaken
    on 4th March 2014 to Vanda Paritska is one of convenience for the  sole
    purpose of you remaining here in the Unite Kingdom.".   I am told  that
    no such reports  exist.  Thus  the  sole  basis  for  the  respondent's
    decision is the evidence of the language test.

11. At the conclusion of the second bullet point in the reasons for refusal
    letter, the respondent states "After this, it was deemed that  you  and
    your sponsor are unable to converse in a common language and so  cannot
    be part of a genuine subsisting relationship".  Whilst  that  paragraph
    of the letter  refers  to  the  parties  having  attended  a  "marriage
    interview" it is clear from the documents relating to that  "interview"
    that no  marriage  interview  took  place.  Rather,  the  parties  were
    subjected to a "language test" which they were deemed to have "failed".
     The interview record sheet states "interview did not proceed, language
    tested  and   failed.   Cancelled   with   SCW   agreement.   Lack   of
    understanding".  The document states that the interview  was  concluded
    at 0920 hrs; thus it lasted only 20 minutes. A second document produced
    by the respondent, ICD.4605, under the  heading  "Evidence  to  support
    recommendation", lists a summary of the "information ... obtained" from
    the appellant and his spouse during  language  testing.   Each  of  the
    parties was asked to make a number of statements to the  other.   These
    were not questions, according to the Summary Sheet.  Furthermore,  they
    did not relate to the quality of their relationship or their  marriage.
    The following are examples of the statements put to the appellant:

        "1/.      Tell your wife that you are considering buying a new  car,
         could she help you with an application for the finance.

         2/.      Tell your wife that you had a visit from  the  electricity
         supplier today, and that they have offered you free solar panels on
         the roof to help with your bills.

         3/.      Tell your wife that friends are coming from Pakistan, they
         are students and you have offered them a place to stay for the next
         6 months.

         ..."

12. There is no evidence as to the context in which these  statements  were
    made or what the parties were asked to do as a result  of  being  given
    the  statements  by  their  spouse.  Whilst  the  summary  states  "the
    following are the six responses to the above statements",  this  is  of
    little assistance, because the statements are not set out as questions.
    It is  not  clear  from  the  respondent's  documents,  what,  if  any,
    questions were asked of the appellant or his wife.  Furthermore, all of
    the information which one party was asked to  give  to  the  other  was
    hypothetical in nature and bore no relation to their marriage or  their
    relationship.

13. Given the lack of  context,  the  lack  of  evidence  as  to  what  the
    appellant and his spouse were  told  about  the  interview  by  way  of
    explanation (for example, that  it  was  a  language  test  and  not  a
    marriage interview), or what they were asked to do during the "test", I
    am unable to give  weight  to  the  limited  records  provided  by  the
    respondent.  Furthermore,  I  note  that  the  "reasons  for  interview
    referral" states "Section 24, unable to converse in the same  language"
    which suggests that a decision had been taken on the couple's  language
    and communication skills prior to that typed  record  being  made.  The
    manuscript notes of the interviewing officer are of  little  assistance
    because they are merely in note form and are thus an incomplete  record
    of what was said to the appellant and sponsor by way of explanation  of
    the purpose of the interview and its content.

14. I take into account the totality  of  the  evidence  available  to  and
    adduced by the respondent, including that relating to  the  appellant's
    immigration history and the "language test", but I do not consider that
    the respondent has demonstrated, on the balance of probabilities,  that
    there are reasonable grounds to suspect that the  marriage  is  one  of
    convenience, entered into  for  the  predominant  purpose  of  securing
    residence rights (Papajorgji and IS (marriages of  convenience)  Serbia
    [2008] UKAIT 31).

15. Given these findings, there is  no  requirement  on  the  appellant  to
    demonstrate that his marriage is not one of convenience.

16. I preserve the findings of the FTTJ  with  regard  to  the  appellant's
    spouse exercising Treaty rights at the date  of  his  decision.  I  set
    aside the decision of the FTTJ to the effect that the marriage was  one
    of convenience and find that the  respondent  has  not  discharged  the
    burden of proof in that regard.  It follows that the  decision  of  the
    respondent is in breach of the EEA regulations.

Decision

17. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  involve  an
    error on a point of law.

18. The findings of  the  FTTJ,  with  regard  to  the  appellant's  spouse
    exercising Treaty rights, shall stand.

19. I set aside the FTTJ's decision insofar as it relates to the nature  of
    the appellant's marriage.

20. I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it.


Angela M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black   Date 24 November 2015



Fee Award

The FTTJ did not make a fee award. However, the appeal has  been  successful
on the grounds claimed and the appellant is therefore entitled  to  a  whole
fee award of any fee paid or payable.


Angela M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black   Date 24 November 2015
