
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA359872014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3rd June 2016                              |On 15th June 2016             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     upper tribunal DEPUTY judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

               The SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              SYED BASIT HASAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Norton, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No representation


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Herbert  OBE)  which  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 11th  November  2015  allowed  Mr  Syed  Hasan's  appeal
    against the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  to  refuse  to  issue  a
    residence card to him as the extended family member of his sister  (the
    Sponsor) an  EEA  national  exercising  treaty  rights  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

 2. In this decision I shall refer  to  the  Secretary  of  State  as  "the
    Respondent" and to Mr Hasan as "the  Appellant"  which  reflects  their
    respective positions before the FtT.  The issue before the FtT was  one
    of dependency under the Regulation 8(2) of the 2006 EEA Regulations.

 3. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan. The sponsor  is  a  citizen  of
    Sweden. She gained Swedish citizenship around 2010. She was married  to
    a Swedish national but that marriage ended in  2013  and  she  and  her
    husband are now divorced.  The Appellant claims  that  his  sister  has
    been supporting him since she became a Swedish  national  and  that  he
    shared the same household with her when she visited Pakistan  on  leave
    from Sweden.

 4. The sponsor entered the  UK  sometime  in  August  2013  and  commenced
    employment here. At the time of her entry she was not divorced from her
    husband, although they had separated from  each  other.  The  Appellant
    entered the UK in December 2013,a few months after  his  sister,  on  a
    visit visa valid until February 2016. In June 2014 he applied  for  the
    Residence card.

 5. In addition to his claim that his sister has been supporting him  since
    she acquired her Swedish nationality, he says he relies  upon  her  for
    his essential needs in the United Kingdom. This is  a  continuation  of
    the reliance he had upon his sister, whilst he  was  in  Pakistan.   It
    does appear (from the papers) that the Appellant is a married man  with
    a child.

 6. The FtT allowed the Appellant's appeal in the following terms.  At [41]
    the judge said this:

             "The Appellant's Sponsor left Pakistan for the United  Kingdom
             in August 2013 and therefore immediately prior to her  leaving
             Pakistan the Appellant was in residence  with  her.   When  he
             arrived in the United Kingdom in December 2013 that  residence
             and dependency has continued to this date."

    At [42] the judge said this:

             "I  am  satisfied  that  there  is  overwhelming   documentary
             evidence that he has continued to be reliant upon her for  his
             essential needs in the United Kingdom and was reliant upon her
             consistently whilst in Pakistan.

         [43] I am  also  satisfied  that  they  formed  part  of  the  same
             household both in Pakistan and that he continues to do  so  in
             the United Kingdom."

    The judge then concluded his decision with  "  a  notice  of  decision"
    saying,

             "I therefore allow this appeal under Regulation  8(2)  of  the
             Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 for  the  reasons  set  out
             above."

    The Respondent sought permission  to  appeal  on  the  basis  that  the
    judge's decision  was  flawed,  because  of  inadequate  reasoning  and
    secondly because of a failure to consider Regulation 17(4) of  the  EEA
    Regulations 2006 when purporting to "allow" the appeal in the terms  he
    did.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by FtT Judge  Ford  in  the  following
    terms:

         "1.  The Respondent seeks permission to appeal in time,  against  a
             decision of First-tier Tribunal (Judge Herbert OBE)  dated  11
             November  2015  whereby  it  allowed  the  Appellant's  appeal
             against the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  to  refuse  his
             application for a Residence card as the dependent  of  an  EEA
             national (his sister).

          2.  It is argued that Judge Herbert  erred  in  finding  that  the
             Appellant shared a household with his sister in the UK because
             they entered into a joint tenancy shortly after he arrived  in
             the country.  This is  not  arguable.   Because  this  is  not
             arguable, it is immaterial  whether  Judge  Herbert  may  have
             erred in finding that the Appellant and his  sister  shared  a
             household in Pakistan because they shared the ground floor  of
             the former family home when she visited Pakistan for between 6
             to 8 weeks each year.

          3.  It is arguable that Judge Herbert may  have  made  a  material
             error of law in relation to dependency.  It is  arguable  that
             it is not sufficiently clear that he was  satisfied  that  the
             Appellant was  dependent  on  his  sister  for  his  essential
             needs."

 8. Thus the matter  comes  before  me  to  decide  initially  whether  the
    decision of the FtT involved the making of an error of law such that it
    needs to be set aside.

UT Hearing/Error of Law Hearing

 9. I heard submissions from Mr Norton on behalf of  the  Respondent.   The
    Appellant attended in person with his sister (the Sponsor).  Mr  Norton
    kept briefly to  the  lines  of  the  grounds  seeking  permission  and
    identified that there are two  strands  to  the  Secretary  of  State's
    application:

       . In line with the grant of permission, the FtT erred  materially  in
         that the judge's reasoning of dependency (which is the  core  issue
         of this appeal) is lacking and therefore renders the whole decision
         defective.

       . If I were not  persuaded  by  that  failure,  then  the  judge  has
         materially erred his conclusion when he has  purported  "to  allow"
         this appeal under Regulation 8(2) of the EEA Regs 2006.  The  judge
         is not  entitled  to  do  that  because  he  fails  to  acknowledge
         Regulation 17(4) of the Regulations, whereby the Secretary of State
         has a discretion on whether or not to issue a Residence card.   The
         judge has failed to consider  the  case  law  of  Ihemedu  (OFMs  -
         meaning) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00340.

    Mr Norton submitted that when the two grounds were considered together,
    this rendered the whole decision defective. It should be set aside  and
    the decision remade.

10. I heard from the Appellant who attended unrepresented.  I explained the
    procedure to both him and his sister. The Appellant said that he wanted
    to rely upon what was before the First-tier Tribunal and that the First-
    tier Tribunal's decision should stand.  He emphasised  that  he  relied
    upon his sister for his support.

Error of Law

11. I find force in Mr Norton's submissions.  Taking the second point  made
    by Mr Norton first, it is incontrovertible that the judge has erred  in
    purporting to allow this appeal outright as  he  did  under  Regulation
    8(2) of the EEA Regulations 2006.  The Secretary  of  State  retains  a
    discretion under Regulation 17(4) on whether in all  the  circumstances
    it is appropriate to issue a residence card.  This involves  her  in  a
    fact-finding exercise.  The most that the FtT could do,  based  on  its
    fact finding, is to find that the decision of the Secretary of State in
    refusing the Residence card is not in accordance with the law.

12. Therefore so far as that matter is concerned,  I  find  the  judge  has
    fallen into error.

13. So far as the issue of dependency is concerned, I find that  the  judge
    erred in that he has given insufficient reason  to  show  that  he  has
    engaged  with  the  inconsistencies  identified  in  the   Respondent's
    decision letter. Nor has he given proper reasons why  he  accepted  the
    Appellant as credible in relation to the core issues  set  out  in  the
    Appellant's claim in the light of those inconsistencies.

14. For example at [37] the FtT does not fully address  the  issue  of  the
    Appellant's previous Visa Application Form apparently failing  to  make
    any reference to the Sponsor providing some of his sources of income.

15. Equally at [42] the  FtT  refers  to  being  satisfied  that  there  is
    overwhelming documentary evidence that the Appellant  continues  to  be
    reliant upon the Sponsor for support and essential needs.   It  is  not
    clear from such a broad statement what it is the judge is referring  to
    in terms of "overwhelming documentary evidence", since  none  has  been
    specified.

16. I am aware that the judge heard the  Appellant  and  his  Sponsor  give
    evidence and it was  for  him  to  assess  credibility  based  on  that
    evidence.  However where there are  inconsistencies  in  that  evidence
    based on what the Appellant has said at various  times  and  which  are
    highlighted by the Respondent, it was incumbent on the  judge  to  make
    clear findings why facts were  found  to  be  credible  notwithstanding
    those inconsistencies.

17. This I find the judge has failed to do and  this  failure  renders  the
    decision unsustainable.  I am satisfied  therefore  that  the  decision
    contains material error of law and I hereby set it aside on  the  issue
    of dependency as well as the Regulation 17(4) issue.

18. Mr Norton urged that if I find material error  the  appropriate  course
    would be for the appeal to be remitted to the FtT for  a  rehearing  of
    the Appellant's claim.  The Appellant when asked, repeated his  earlier
    claim and said that the decision of the FtT should stand.

19. I agree with Mr Norton that a rehearing is the  appropriate  course  in
    this matter.  I direct a full rehearing in the First-tier Tribunal with
    no findings of fact in the original decision preserved.

Notice of Decision

The FtT's decision involved the making of an error on a  point  of  law.   I
set aside the decision and remit this matter to the FtT (not  Judge  Herbert
OBE) for a full rehearing with no findings of fact preserved.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed   C E Roberts                    Date          14 June 2016


Upper Tribunal Deputy Judge Roberts
