
IAC-PE-SW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/35049/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th February 2015                         |On 18th February 2015         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

                         MR Malik Shahzad Ahmad Awan
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Logan Counsel instruct M-R Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, Mr Malik Shahzad Ahmad Awan, date  of  birth  19  August
    1979 is a citizen of the Pakistan.

 2. I have considered whether any of the parties to the present proceedings
    requires the protection of an  anonymity  direction.   Taking  all  the
    circumstances into account including the impact that these  proceedings
    have upon the interests and rights of two children, I do  not  consider
    it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 3. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the Decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge G Bruce promulgated on 13th November  2014.   The  judge
    dismissed the appeal of the  Appellant  against  the  decision  of  the
    Respondent dated 29th April 2014 to refuse the  Appellant  a  Residence
    Card as evidence that he was entitled to reside in the  United  Kingdom
    as a extended family member [or other family member] of an EEA national
    under Regulations 8 and 12 of the Immigration [EEA] Regulations 2006.

 4. On 7th January 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Cox granted permission to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  In granting permission to  appeal  Judge
    Cox ruled that the Judge Bruce's findings and decision  on  the  rights
    under the EEA Treaties and Regulations was fully  justified  and  could
    not be challenged.

 5. Judge Cox only gave permission on Article 8 grounds in that Judge Bruce
    had not assessed the Appellant's position under Article 8 of the  ECHR.
    The  Appellant  was  applying  for  a  Residence  card  under  the  EEA
    Regulations. Where the Regulations require a specific  relationship  to
    enable an individual to claim EEA dependent's rights, Article 8  cannot
    replace that requirement.

 6. Judge Bruce found that the Appellant had not been a member of  the  EEA
    national household nor been financially dependent upon the EEA national
    in Pakistan prior to coming to the UK. The EEA national in question was
    Mr Un Nabi a cousin of the Appellant. The findings of  fact  have  been
    fully justified by the judge and there is no ground for  reviewing  the
    findings made. The judge was entitled to conclude  that  the  Appellant
    and his family were not extended family  members  under  Regulation  8.
    Leave was not granted on any ground relating to  the  EEA  Regulations.
    That did not stop the Appellant's representative from  seeking  to  re-
    open the arguments.

 7. The Appellant first came to the United Kingdom on  26  July  2010.  The
    Appellant was given leave to enter as a partner of his wife, who was in
    the UK as a Tier 4 Migrant under the points based  system.  That  leave
    was valid until 22 March 2011.

 8. After his leave expired the  Appellant  made  application  for  further
    leave on 18 May  2011  as  the  partner  of  a  Tier  4  Migrant.  That
    application was refused. The Appellant made a  further  application  as
    the partner of a Tier 4 Migrant on 30 October  2012.  That  application
    was also refused on 30 May 2013. Therefore the Appellant  has  not  had
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom since the 22nd March 2011.

 9. Having been refused leave under the Immigration Rules, on  10  February
    2014 the Appellant made application for a residence card as a dependent
    extended family member of an EEA  national  exercising  treaty  rights.
    That application was refused by the Respondent on 29  April  2014.  The
    Notice of Decision  refusing leave contains the following:-

        As you appear to have no alternative basis of stay  in  the  United
        Kingdom you should now make arrangements to leave. If you  fail  to
        make a voluntary departure a separate decision may  be  made  at  a
        later date to enforce your removal from  the  United  Kingdom.  Any
        such  decision  and  associated  appeal  rights  will  be  notified
        separately.

10. The Appellant appealed against the decision to refuse him  a  Residence
    Card. His appeal was dismissed by Judge Bruce.

11. The Appellant is married. His wife and two children, both of whom  were
    born in the UK, are dependents  on  this  application,  as  appears  in
    paragraph 2 of Judge Bruce's decision. The whole family are in the  UK.
    The Appellant's wife appears originally to have been a Tier  4  Student
    Migrant. It does not appear that she  currently  has  leave  under  the
    Immigration Rules.

12. The Appellant and his wife are both nationals of Pakistan. Neither  the
    Appellant nor his wife has or at any stage had settled  status  in  the
    UK. The Appellant's wife being a Tier 4 Migrant may have had leave  but
    at no stage was she settled or a citizen of the UK.

13. During the course of the hearing before me Counsel  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant claimed that the two children were English, because they were
    born in England and were attending schools in England. Whilst  I  would
    not necessarily  accept  that  the  children  are  English,  much  more
    material the children are not British or citizens of  the  UK  nor  are
    they settled in the United Kingdom. The children do not appear to  have
    any leave under the Immigration Rules or  the  law.  The  children  are
    nationals of Pakistan.

14. Further Counsel  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant  took  issue  with  the
    reference in paragraph  3  of  the  Decision  of  Judge  Bruce  to  the
    Appellant having made to previous applications as a " dependent" of his
    wife as a Tier 4 Migrant. It  was  being  suggested  that  that  was  a
    finding by Judge Bruce which infected the whole of the Decision.

15. If one looks carefully at paragraphs 2 and 3 of  the  Decision,  it  is
    clear that the judge is merely summarising the  respective  cases,  for
    the Appellant in paragraph 2 and for the  Respondent  in  paragraph  3.
    Thereafter the judge has properly concentrated upon the issue that  was
    before her of whether or not the Appellant  had  proved  dependency  in
    terms of that Regulation 8 on the EEA national applying  the  cases  of
    Moneke (EEA OFM) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00341 (IAC) and Dauhoo [2012] UKUT
    79.

16.  In assessing whether or not an individual is entitled to rights  under
    the EEA Treaties and Regulations, specifically Regulations 8 and 12, in
    the first instance it has to be shown that an individual is an extended
    family member in that he or she  was  a  member  of  the  household  or
    financially dependent upon of the EEA national prior to coming  to  the
    UK and that he or she is a family member or  financially  dependent  on
    the EEA national in the UK.

17. Once it has been shown that he or she is  an  extended  family  member,
    there is a discretion to exercise under Regulations 8 and 12 (2) as  to
    whether the individual should be granted a residence card. Article 8 of
    the ECHR and factors associated with it may be relevant in  considering
    whether or not the discretion should be exercised.

18. The EEA Regulations and Treaties in order to be able to rely  upon  EEA
    rights require that an individual was a member of the  house  owned  or
    financially dependent prior to coming to the UK. Judge Bruce found that
    the Appellant  was  not  a  member  of  the  household  or  financially
    dependent of the EEA national prior to coming to  the  UK.  Accordingly
    there were no Article 8 rights arising prior to the Appellant coming to
    the UK.  Any Article 8 rights have to have arisen after  the  Appellant
    came to the UK.

19. It having been decided that the Appellant  was  not  a  member  of  the
    household or financially  dependent  prior  to  coming  to  the  United
    Kingdom, the Appellant cannot succeed under the  EEA  regulations.  The
    Appellant is not entitled to a Residence Card.

20. One cannot substitute the assessment of present rights  in  the  United
    Kingdom under Article 8 for the requirements under the  regulations  of
    prior membership of the household  or  dependency  in  the  country  of
    origin. Whilst the Article  8  assessment  may  assist  in  determining
    whether an individual is a family member or dependent,  it  can  wholly
    replace the requirements of the regulations.

21.  Counsel  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  sought  to  argue  that   the
    consequences of failing to consider the Appellant's  Article  8  rights
    would render the Appellant as unlawfully  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
    liable to criminal consequences. The Appellant is in no worse  position
    than he was before he made the application. He had no  leave  prior  to
    the EEA application and still has  no  leave.  It  is  the  Appellant's
    failure to leave after his leave expired or his failure to make a valid
    application under the Rules or the Law that has resulted in  his  being
    unlawfully in the UK not the present decision.

22. It may be that issues under Article 8 may assist in looking at  whether
    the discretion under Regulations 8 and 12(2)  should  be  exercised  in
    favour of an Appellant, once it has been established that  they  are  a
    family member. However in the first instance it has to  be  established
    that an individual is an extended family member.  Where  on  the  facts
    there is the finding that an  individual  is  not  an  extended  family
    member no right to an EEA Residence Card arises and  Article  8  cannot
    alter that decision.

23. It is for the Appellant to make a valid application under the Rules and
    his and his family's Article 8 Rights can be considered at that  stage.
    Whether that gives an in-country right of appeal will depend  upon  the
    application and decision, but it is  for  the  Appellant  to  make  the
    application. It cannot be a breach of a person's Article 8 rights  that
    they make a lawful application for leave to remain.

24. Further it has to be noted that there is  no  decision  to  remove  the
    Appellant. The decision refusing to issue a residence card specifically
    states that the Appellant is required to make arrangements to leave the
    United Kingdom failing which a separate decision may be made to enforce
    removal at a later date. Until such time as  there  is  a  decision  to
    remove, there will be no interference in Article 8 rights.

25. Accordingly whilst  Article  8  may  assist  in  assessing  whether  an
    individual is a family member, where a judge has found and justified  a
    conclusion that an applicant is  or  was  not  a  family  member  at  a
    material time, that is whilst in Pakistan, and  was  not  dependent  at
    that time, that is sufficient to deal with the rights  under  EEA  law.
    That was the application made by the Appellant. If  the  Appellant  was
    his Article 8 rights further considered, he should make an  application
    for leave.

26. For the reasons set out any  Article  8  assessment  cannot  alter  the
    decision that the Appellant  is  not  entitled  to  a  residence  card.
    Accordingly I find that there is no  arguable  material  error  of  law
    within the determination. I uphold the decision to dismiss this appeal.

Notice of Decision

27. There is no material error of law in the original determination  and  I
    uphold the decision to dismiss this appeal.

28. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date 16th February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure

