
IAC-AH-DN-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/35717/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 8 December 2014                              |On 16 December 2014        |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           BEATRICE BAFFOUR GYIMAH
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy of the Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    Ms E Aryee of Immigration Practitioners Service LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Respondent

 1. The Respondent to whom I shall refer as "the applicant" is a citizen of
    Ghana, born on 16 February 1984.  In August 2009 she arrived with entry
    clearance as spouse.  She was the victim of domestic violence and on 14
    March 2012 the marriage was dissolved by a certificate  issued  in  the
    Ghanaian courts.  Her partner, Napoleon Darkwah  became  a  naturalised
    British citizen in 2010.  His marriage to Georgina was dissolved  by  a
    certificate issued on 3 March 2011 in the Ghanaian courts.  He has  two
    children by that marriage born in 2006  and  2007.   They  are  British
    citizens and they live with him and the applicant.  The  applicant  and
    her partner have a child born in 2011.   They  met  subsequent  to  the
    applicant's divorce.  In addition, their family household includes  two
    children born 1998 and 2002 to Mr Darkwah's brother who  is  a  soldier
    serving abroad in the British Army.

 2. On 6 July 2012 the applicant applied for leave to remain on  the  basis
    of her relationship with her partner and their  child.   On  13  August
    2013 the Appellant (the SSHD) refused the application  and  decided  to
    make directions  under  Section  47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006 for the removal of the applicant to Ghana.

 3. The SSHD referred to Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules and found the
    applicant did not meet the requirements of the Rules  and  Appendix  FM
    and in particular paragraph EX1 which it was accepted was  relevant  to
    the applicant.  Additionally, the SSHD refused  the  application  under
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules because the  applicant  could
    not satisfy the requirements as to length  of  residence  and  had  not
    shown she had lost all ties to her home country.

 4. On 29 August 2013 the applicant lodged notice of appeal  under  Section
    82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended  (the
    2002  Act).   The  grounds  are  general,  referring  to  the   British
    nationality of her partner and their child; that she  and  her  partner
    had been together in a durable relationship for over  two  years;  that
    she is responsible not only for her child but also  her  partner's  two
    children by his previous marriage and his two nephews.

The First-tier Tribunal's Determination

 5. By a determination promulgated on 4 September 2014 Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Buckwell allowed the appeal of  the  applicant  on  human
    rights grounds.  He noted Mr  Darkwah's  brother  was  serving  in  the
    British Army and that the applicant looked after his  two  children  as
    well as her partner's two children by his previous marriage.

 6. The Judge noted the application had the  benefit  of  the  Transitional
    Provisions affecting the coming into force of Appendix FM  referred  to
    in paragraphs A277 and following. He also referred to Section 55 of the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act  2009  and  the  judgment  in
    Edgehill and Bhoyroo v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 402 as well as  other  case
    law relating to Article 8 of the European Convention.

 7. He found both the applicant and her partner "to be very straightforward
    witnesses"; that they enjoyed "a devoted and loving  relationship"  and
    that they both  played  a  positive  role  in  the  upbringing  of  her
    partner's three children as well as her partner's two nephews.

 8. The appeal before the Judge turned entirely on  the  applicant's  claim
    under Article 8 of the European Convention outside  the  Rules  and  he
    found in her favour.

 9. The SSHD sought permission to appeal on the ground that the  Judge  had
    misconstrued jurisprudence in Edgehill and that  he  also  misconstrued
    the  application  of  Sections  117A-D  of  the  2002   Act   affecting
    determinations determined on or after 28 July 2014.

10. On 22 October 2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal P J G White granted
    the SSHD permission to appeal he found the Judge had arguably erred  in
    law because he had "allowed the appeal on Article 8 grounds";  that  he
    had not had regard to the fact of the changes to the Immigration  Rules
    which came into effect on 9 July 2012 and that  he  should  have  taken
    account of Sections 117A-D of the 2002 Act because although the  appeal
    was heard on 9 July the determination was signed off  on  28  July  and
    promulgated on 4 September 2014.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

11. The applicant  and  her  partner  attended.   For  the  SSHD  Mr  Duffy
    submitted the Judge had not engaged with the Immigration Rules.  In his
    assessment of the claim under Article 8 outside the  Rules,  the  Judge
    should have referred to Appendix FM  as  reflecting  the  SSHD's  views
    about Article 8 and had given insufficient weight to those views.   His
    determination had been promulgated after Sections 117A-D had come  into
    effect and therefore they should have been referred to in  the  Judge's
    proportionality assessment.

12. Ms Aryee relied on the applicant's response filed under Procedure  Rule
    24.   This  asserts  the  Judge  correctly  applied  the   Transitional
    Provisions of paragraph A277 and following of the Rules and  was  right
    to use the older version of the Rules in his assessment  of  the  claim
    under Article 8 of the European Convention outside the Rules which also
    correctly reflected what the Court of Appeal had said in Edgehill.

13. In any event, there were insurmountable obstacles  to  the  applicant's
    return to Ghana because she and her partner were responsible  for  five
    children, all of whom were British citizens and in school in the United
    Kingdom.  It would be unreasonable to expect her to return to Ghana  to
    seek entry clearance.

14. The appeal was heard on 9 July 2014 which was before Sections 117A-D of
    the 2002 Act had come into effect.  Even if they  had  been  in  force,
    they would have had little, if any, adverse effect on  the  applicant's
    case because she positively satisfied  a  number  of  the  requirements
    imposed by Section 117B of the 2002 Act. Throughout  her  time  in  the
    United Kingdom she had  had  leave  and  had  not  been  in  breach  of
    immigration control.  Her private and family life had been  established
    at a time when her status was not precarious. She speaks English and is
    financially independent as she has worked throughout her  stay  in  the
    United  Kingdom.   The  First-tier  Tribunal's  determination  did  not
    contain an error of law and should be upheld.

15. At the  hearing  she  went  on  to  refer  again  to  the  Transitional
    Provisions  in  paragraph  A277  and  following  and  the  judgment  in
    Edgehill.  If  Appendix  FM  was  applicable,  the  applicant  met  the
    requirements of paragraph EX1.  She was responsible for five  children,
    all of whom were British citizens.  The Judge had been right  to  allow
    the appeal.  Mr Duffy had no further submissions to make.

Consideration

16. At paragraphs 22-33 of its judgment in Edgehill  the  Court  of  Appeal
    rejected an argument bearing considerable similarity to  that  advanced
    for the SSHD in this appeal, namely that even if the new Rules were not
    applicable for a consideration of  a  claim  under  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention under the Rules because they were not in  force  at
    the date of the decision under appeal, the new Rules should inform  the
    assessment of the proportionality of any claim under Article 8  outside
    the Rules.

17. While the argument that the First-tier Tribunal's determination is  not
    settled until promulgated  which  was  an  issue  referred  to  in  the
    consideration whether the Tribunal could accept  post-hearing  evidence
    discussed in E and R v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ 49 at paragraph  27,  I  do
    not find the cut-off point for the consideration of late evidence to be
    applicable by analogy to the last  moment  for  consideration  of  what
    might be the relevant law in the event of new  law  coming  into  force
    between the date of the hearing and  the  date  of  promulgation  of  a
    determination. The practical consequences of having  to  consider  each
    appeal heard  before  a  change  of  the  law  and  whose  decision  is
    promulgated after the change is impracticable, if  not  impossible  and
    the system of being able to appeal such decisions  which  is  in  place
    offers some remedy.  Additionally as a matter of public  policy,  there
    must be a sufficient degree of certainty and finality in litigation.  I
    am not persuaded by the  SSHD's  argument  that  Sections  117A-D  were
    properly applicable in this appeal.

18. On this basis, the SSHD's grounds for appeal do not disclose  an  error
    of law.  Turning to the grounds upon which  permission  to  appeal  was
    granted, I do not understand how it can be an arguable error of law for
    a judge to have allowed an appeal on Article 8 grounds: not all appeals
    which are allowed on Article 8 grounds outside the Rules by that virtue
    of that reason alone arguably contain an error of law.  The Judge dealt
    expressly with the  matter  of  the  Transitional  Provisions  for  the
    introduction of Appendix FM at paragraph 30 in which he  also  referred
    to the judgment in Edgehill.  The Judge signed his determination on  28
    July 2014 and it is reasonable to assume that he had in fact  drawn  it
    up some time before it was typed and signed.   In  any  event  for  the
    reasons given I do not find that it was an error of law for  the  Judge
    not to have addressed Sections 117A-D of the 2002 Act in respect of  an
    appeal heard on 9 July 2014.

19. For these reasons the SSHD has not shown that there is a material error
    of law in the Judge's determination which therefore shall stand.

Anonymity

20. The Judge did not make an anonymity direction and there was no  request
    for an anonymity order or direction by the Upper  Tribunal  and  having
    considered the appeal I find that none is warranted.

DECISION

    The determination of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error
    of law and shall stand.

    The effect is that the applicant's appeal is allowed and the appeal  of
    the SSHD is dismissed.

    No anonymity order or direction.



Signed/Official Crest      Date 15. xii. 2014

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

