
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/35000/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7 May 2014                                 |On 22 May 2014               |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                             MS EUNICE BLANKSON

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No legal representative
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, HOPO


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant appeals with leave against the  determination  of  First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hands  dismissing   her   appeal   against   the
    respondent's refusal to grant her leave to remain in the United Kingdom
    outside of the Immigration Rules.
2.   The appellant entered the UK on 26 December 2011 with  entry  clearance
    which conferred leave to enter as a visitor with leave  until  15  June
    2012.  Her conditions of entry were that she had no right to  work  and
    no recourse to public funds.  She returned to Ghana  briefly  in  April
    2012.  On 3 May 2012 she made an application to remain  in  the  UK  to
    enable her to support her daughter and grandchildren when her  daughter
    goes to work at night as her daughter is finding it difficult  to  find
    someone to look after the  children  at  night.   The  application  was
    refused by the respondent on 5 July 2013.

3.   The respondent was not satisfied that the  family  life  the  appellant
    claimed to have with relatives in the UK constituted a family  life  as
    set out in Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   Her  claim  was
    considered under  Article  8  which,  from  9  July  2012,  fell  under
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.  The appellant has not lived
    continuously in the UK for at least twenty years.  At the time  of  the
    decision she was 55 years of age and had spent 54 years  in  Ghana  and
    had not lost ties with her home country in the time she had been in the
    UK.  The respondent took  the  view  that  there  were  no  exceptional
    circumstances which would  justify  the  grant  of  leave  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.

4.   In her  grounds  of  appeal  against  the  respondent's  decision,  the
    appellant  claimed  that  the  respondent  had  not  given   sufficient
    consideration  to  her   application   in   respect   of   the   caring
    responsibilities she has as a grandmother.  Her  daughter's  hours  are
    sometimes during the night and without  the  appellant's  support,  the
    children would need childcare from outside the home.  Her daughter  has
    started a midwifery  course  and  the  combination  of  her  busy  work
    schedule and college work will be very stressful  and  demanding  hence
    she cannot care and support her children alone without the support of t
    he appellant.  They live in a two bedroom house and are provided for by
    the appellant's daughter and there will be no need for the appellant to
    depend on public funds.

5.   The appellant's appeal was considered on the papers  by  the  judge  as
    requested by her and to  which  the  respondent  raised  no  objection.
    There was a letter of support from the appellant's daughter  confirming
    her circumstances. The letter was considered by the judge.

6.   The judge also considered a letter at Appendix F  of  the  respondent's
    bundle which was a letter written by the  appellant's  the  son-in-law,
    Emmanuel Kondonu to the UKBA.  It was dated 15 August 2012.   It talked
    of the eldest child as his son.  He referred to the  appellant's  visit
    to Ghana in April 2012 when she found out about  her  husband's  health
    problems and his inability to care for himself.  The son-in-law said he
    had received calls from members of the wider family asking to send  the
    appellant home and that the appellant's daughter  Agatha  was  ignoring
    the family conflict that may arise if the appellant did not return home
    immediately.

7.   The judge said this letter could only  be  given  the  same  evidential
    weight as that from the appellant's daughter and taken at face value it
    told her three things.  Firstly, the appellant has family in Ghana  and
    ties to that country that have not been severed.  Secondly,  there  are
    alternative arrangements for the care of the children that can  be  put
    in place during the appellant's daughter's night shift commitments  and
    that day care for the  children  is  already  in  place.   Finally  the
    appellant's daughter may not work the number of hours  she  claims  and
    can be at home to care for the children.

8.   The judge found  that  the  appellant  had  provided  evidence  of  her
    daughter's work  and  study  which  she  accepted  were  genuine.   The
    evidence did not  tell  her  the  hours  the  appellant's  daughter  is
    expected to work and the two pay slips  presented  were  for  the  same
    period in respect of two different jobs.  The rosters did not give  any
    indication of who the roster was for.  A letter from Redbridge  College
    states the student's attendance at college would exceed 21 hours due to
    extracurricular activities, study sessions and enrichment.  It did  not
    say that these were mandatory or that they could not be done  at  home.
    In any event, the course referred Access to  Higher  Education  Diploma
    and not a  midwifery  course  as  claimed  by  the  appellant  and  her
    daughter.

9.   The judge found that the appellant has not  discharged  the  burden  of
    proof on her to demonstrate that her circumstances were such  that  she
    ought to be afforded preferential treatment to enable her to remain  in
    this country to look after her grandchildren.

10.  The judge found that there was  insufficient  evidence  before  her  to
    establish that she cares for her  grandchildren  on  a  regular  basis.
    Such care may be classed as work and the appellant,  by  terms  of  her
    current leave to remain in  this  country,  is  prohibited  from  work.
    While she may not receive payment for caring for the children,  she  is
    remunerated by being provided with accommodation  free  of  charge  and
    being maintained by her daughter  free  of  charge.   The  letter  from
    Emmanuel Kondonu indicated that he is available to provide care for the
    children in her absence and that childcare is available to  the  eldest
    child, at least, during the day.  The  appellant  has  family  ties  to
    Ghana where her husband and other family members reside.   She  arrived
    in this country on 26 December 2011 and therefore has not been in  this
    country for any substantial length of time.  She has spent 54 years  in
    Ghana prior to this.  The two children were born prior to  her  arrival
    and there is no indication her daughter  was  unable  to  manage  these
    children prior to her mother's arrival.

11.  The judge  considered  the  appellant's  appeal  under  Article  8  and
    dismissed it on the basis that an  appellant  does  not  by  virtue  of
    Article 8 get  to  choose  where  they  live.   The  appellant  has  no
    legitimate expectation to remain in this country.  Whilst  her  removal
    would interfere with a family life she currently  enjoys,  her  removal
    would be in accordance with the law  and  proportionate  when  balanced
    against the implementation of a proper system of immigration control.

12.  The appellant attended the hearing without legal  representation.   She
    spoke through a Twi interpreter.

13.  She claimed she was not aware of  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  I find that she had indeed  requested  that  her  appeal  be
    considered on the papers, which is what the First-tier Judge did.

14.  I got the interpreter to read the letter her  son-in-law  had  sent  to
    the UKBA to her and also paragraphs 9 and 10 of the determination where
    the judge had considered the letter.  This was  because  the  grant  of
    permission said that the appellant was not aware of the  correspondence
    considered by the judge.  Permission was granted in the  light  of  the
    factors referred to and the issues arising from the correspondence from
    Mr Kondonu.

15.  Mr Avery said that the appellant should have been aware of  the  letter
    from her son-in-law as it was included in the respondent's bundle.  The
    respondent's bundle would have been served on the appellant as she  did
    not have a legal representative.

16.  In a letter written by the appellant to the First-tier  Tribunal  dated
    11 March 2014 she denied the  allegations  made  by  Mr  Kondonu.   She
    maintained that she would like to remain in the UK to care for her  two
    grandchildren.

17.  I find that on the evidence before the  judge,  she  did  not  make  an
    error of law.  The letter from Mr Kondonu was written to the  Secretary
    of State and formed part of the Secretary of State's bundle at Annex F.
     The judge would not have known that the appellant  was  not  aware  of
    this letter. As the  appellant  was  without  legal  representation,  I
    accept Mr. Avery's submission that the respondent's bundle  would  have
    been served on her.  The appellant had  asked  for  the  appeal  to  be
    determined on the papers.  In the circumstances I find that  the  judge
    was entitled to consider all the evidence that was before her from both
    the appellant and the respondent.  I find that the judge did not err in
    law in considering the letter from Emmanuel Kondonu.  In any event, the
    judge was right to say that the letter could only  be  given  the  same
    evidential weight as the letter from the appellant's daughter.  I  find
    that the judge reached  conclusions  that  were  open  to  her  on  the
    evidence.

18.  I find that the judge's  decision  dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal
    does not disclose an error of law.  The judge's decision  shall  stand.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

