
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/35288/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 17th October 2014                 |On 11th November 2014                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER Tribunal JUDGE KELLY


                                   Between

                            KARVNASREE GILLIPALLI
                           (anonymity not directed)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is a citizen of India who was born on the 31st  July  1975.
   She appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Pears  who,
   on the 2nd July  2014,  dismissed  the  appeal  against  refusal  of  her
   application for limited discretionary leave to remain for the purpose  of
   receiving medical treatment in the United Kingdom. The  appellant  brings
   her appeal on the ground that the First-tier Tribunal acted  unfairly  by
   refusing her application for an adjournment, made on the 26th June  2013,
   when her appeal was listed for hearing.

2. The relevant history of the proceedings,  together  with  the  Tribunal's
   reasons for refusing to accede to the  adjournment  applicaiton,  can  be
   found at paragraphs 6 to 10 of the determination -

      6. On 25th June 2014 there  were  two  faxes  from  Linga  &  Co,  one
         apparently sent at 2.46pm saying the Appellant wishes to  represent
         herself and that she will  not  be  represented  by  counsel  or  a
         representative from Linga & Co. Subsequently at  5.57pm  there  was
         sent an unsigned copy of a witness statement  purportedly  being  a
         statement from the Appellant  raising  issues  of  a  fundamentally
         different nature to those raised before and which I set out below.

      7. However before I come to that, on the morning of the hearing of the
         appeal hearing, at 9.08 there was a fax from Linga & Co saying  "we
         understand that our client  has  been  calling  us  outside  office
         hours, to inform us that she is felling unwell and that she will be
         attending the Accidents and Emergency department". They say they do
         not know the diagnosis or the condition or  whether  she  has  been
         admitted as in patient but she advised them that she  will  not  be
         able to attend the hearing and they sought an  adjournment  in  the
         interests of justice until such time  as  the  client  was  fit  to
         attend. They do not propose a length for the adjournment.

      8. The appeal was not reached until 14.45 and by that time  there  was
         no medical evidence faxed or any further message from Linga and  Co
         and no indication of what the Appellant was suffering from or  even
         which hospital she attended.

      9. The Respondent's representative opposed the application.

     10. I considered the application in accordance with  paragraph  19  and
         paragraph 21 of the Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)
         Rules 2005. IN relation to the request for an adjournment the party
         applying for an adjournment must produce  evidence  of  any  factor
         matter relied upon  in  support  of  the  application  -  paragraph
         21(1)(c). The Appellant has failed to produce any evidence  of  why
         she could not attend or from what  she  was  suffering.  Further  a
         tribunal must not adjourn a hearing of an appeal  unless  satisfied
         that the appeal cannot otherwise be justly determined  -  paragraph
         21(2). The Appellant has submitted her statement and I am far  from
         satisfied that he appeal cannot be justly  determined.  Turning  to
         paragraph 19 I may hear  an  appeal  in  the  absence  of  a  party
         provided the party has been given notice  of  the  date,  time  and
         place of hearing and there is no good reason for  such  absence.  I
         find she was given notice and there is no good  reason  and  in  my
         discretion it was appropriate to proceed.

3. The judge then considered the appeal substantively. He noted that  whilst
   the  appellant  had  submitted  medical  appointment  letters,  she   had
   nevertheless failed to provide any medical evidence "about  the  results,
   her condition or  any  prognosis"  [paragraph  14].  He  also  noted  the
   contents of  an  unsigned  witness  statement.  This  asserted  that  the
   appellant had been widowed in 2002  and  that  her  family  believed  her
   subsequent conduct was incompatible with her  widowed  status  [paragraph
   15]. She feared that if she returned to India she would be  pressured  by
   her parents into  re-marrying  against  her  wishes  [paragraph  19].  In
   explaining the reasons for  his  decision,  the  judge  again  noted  the
   absence of any "independent  or  corroborative  or  medical  evidence  to
   support any of her  claims  [paragraph  22].  Even  if  her  claims  were
   accepted, however, they did  not  amount  to  grounds  for  international
   protection  [paragraph  23].  The  judge  therefore  concluded  that  the
   respondent had applied the Immigration  Rules  correctly,  and  that  the
   appellant had failed to show that there  were  any  arguably  exceptional
   circumstances that merited consideration of her application  outside  the
   Rules.

4. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal may be summarised as  follows
   -

      i) The appellant was suffering from severe pains which had (a) come on
         suddenly, (b)  resulted  in  her  admission  to  hospital  and  (c)
         prevented her from providing evidence to the Tribunal in support of
         her adjournment request.

     ii) The judge failed "to assess in its proper substantive form  whether
         it would be reasonable for the  Applicant  to  relocate  to  India"
         [paragraph 6].

    iii)  "In any  event,  discretion  could  have  been  exercised  in  the
         Applicant's favour  given  her  long  residence  in  this  country"
         [paragraph 8].

5. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted in  the  following
   brief terms -

    In light of the Appellant's admission to hospital and the circumstances
    appertaining to that an arguable error of law has arisen in relation to
    the refusal of an adjournment.

   I take  the  above  to  signify  that  the  appellant  has  been  granted
   permission to argue only the first of the grounds that  I  summarised  in
   the previous paragraph.

6. Before turning to consider the merits  of  this  ground,  it  is  perhaps
   pertinent to note that  appellant  also  applied,  by  way  of  a  letter
   received on the previous day, to adjourn the hearing of her appeal in the
   Upper Tribunal. Upper Tribunal Judge P Lane refused that  application  in
   the following terms -

    You have not supplied any medical note or other  reliable  evidence  to
    show that your client will be unfit to attend tomorrow. Even if she  is
    not present, there is no reason why the Tribunal should not proceed  to
    hear submissions from you and the Home Office on whether  there  is  an
    error of law in the determination, such that the  determination  should
    be set aside.

7. A decision will only be set aside on the basis of procedural  impropriety
   where an application to adjourn has been refused unfairly, or  where  the
   Tribunal has failed to take account of  material  matters  or  has  taken
   account of immaterial matters [see Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014]
   UKUT 00418 (IAC)]. The appellant has now  submitted  medical  notes  that
   were not before the First-tier Tribunal when it made  its  decision.  The
   Tribunal cannot therefore be said to have erred by failing to  take  them
   into account. The notes are in any event  not  particularly  informative.
   They merely indicate that the appellant  was  admitted  to  the  Princess
   Royal hospital on the day of the hearing, was diagnosed as suffering from
   PF (?) Pain, and was prescribed  Paracetamol  and  Ibuprofen.  Tellingly,
   they do not confirm the appellant's claim that she was  unfit  to  attend
   the hearing. Accordingly, the  Tribunal  did  not  err  by  refusing  the
   appellant's request for an adjournment.

8. The appellant has in any event failed to show that  the  outcome  of  her
   appeal would have been any different if the Tribunal had acceded  to  her
   application to adjourn the hearing. Even now, she has  failed  to  adduce
   any further evidence in support of her claims. As the First-tier Tribunal
   judge  correctly  observed,  the  extremely  limited  evidence  that  the
   appellant is suffering from a medical condition for which  she  has  been
   receiving treatment in the United Kingdom does  not  begin  to  establish
   that her removal would  result  in  the  potential  operation  of  either
   Article 3 or Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention for the Protection
   of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms. Equally, her  claimed  fear  of
   returning to India - taken at its highest  -  falls  very  far  short  of
   establishing that she has a well founded fear of suffering harm on return
   to India so  as  require  the  United  Kingdom  to  grant  her  surrogate
   protection. In arriving at the latter conclusion, I have taken account of
   the arguments that the appellant put forward in her grounds of appeal  to
   the Upper Tribunal in respect of which she was not granted permission  to
   appeal. As a result of doing so, I am satisfied that the refusal  of  the
   application to adjourn did not deprive the appellant of a fair hearing of
   her appeal.

Notice of Decision

9. The appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity not directed.



Signed                                  Date

David Kelly
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal           10th November 2014


