
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/35317/2014
                                                               IA/35405/2014
                                                               IA/35319/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4th December 2015                 |On 8th January 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                          Mrs Esther Olubukola Dada
                      Miss Rebecca Olufoyinsayemi Dada
                      Miss Mary Oluyoyinsolaayomi Dada
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr O Jibowu, Counsel instructed by M.J. Solomon &
Partners
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  by  the  Appellant,  with
    permission, against a Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lucas  that
    was promulgated on 25th March 2015.  The first Appellant is  a  citizen
    of Nigeria born on 6th July 1978 who came to the UK  as  a  visitor  in
    November 2005.  She very shortly thereafter gave  birth  to  her  first
    child on 10th December 2005 and had a second child on 13th  June  2009,
    so she now has two dependent children, the second and third Appellants.
     They are also citizens of Nigeria.

 2. She twice, unsuccessfully, sought residence  cards  to  remain  as  the
    spouse of an EEA national, in 2010 and November  2011.   She  has  made
    four applications for leave to remain outside the Rules on human rights
    grounds.   She  applied  in  2012,  twice  in  2013  and  the   present
    application, the subject of this appeal.

 3. Permission to appeal the Decision was granted on the basis that it  was
    arguable that the judge did not consider ZH (Tanzania) [2011]  UKSC  in
    the determination and the judge granting permission also noted that the
    judge failed to consider the impact of the  2014  Immigration  Act,  by
    which she must mean Section 117, which was in force at the time.

 4. The Appellant relied on a report from  a  clinical  psychologist.   The
    representative before me argued that inadequate  attention  and  weight
    were attached to  that  report.   At  paragraph  15  the  judge  quoted
    paragraph 71 of the report where the expert went as  far  as  to  state
    that in her opinion the best interests of the children were best served
    in the UK where they would have access to  a  good  education,  a  good
    social network and family friends to whom they are close with whom they
    have regular contact.  Moving to  Nigeria,  the  expert  opined,  would
    disrupt the already  developed  system  and  this  could  significantly
    impact on their psychological wellbeing.

 5. The judge's findings start at paragraph  26  of  the  judgment  and  at
    paragraph 30 the judge says that close attention has been paid  to  the
    expert report but given little  weight,  noting  that  it  was  totally
    dependent  upon  what  was  said  by  the  Appellant  of  her  asserted
    experiences in Nigeria; that it was hardly a dispassionate report since
    it was entirely based upon the words of the Appellant and the potential
    impact of return for the Appellant  and  her  children  was  simply  an
    attempt to influence and supplant the  factual  determination  of  this
    appeal by the Tribunal.  The Judge noted that it is for the Tribunal to
    decide the facts of the case and not the expert.  The  public  interest
    in the removal of individuals who enter the UK illegally and have since
    remained is not discussed in any meaningful sense at all in the report.

 6. The judge goes on at paragraph 31 to say that little weight  is  placed
    on the Appellant's "traumatic"  experiences  in  Nigeria  because  that
    claim had only emerged in the latest claim by  the  Appellant,  despite
    her having been in the UK since 2005 and, as I  have  indicated  above,
    making numerous previous applications to remain. The judge  found  that
    that was similarly an attempt to bolster her claim by adding additional
    factors as to why she should not return to Nigeria.

 7. At paragraph 32 the judge notes that the Appellant is aged 37 but  only
    left Nigeria aged 28 and thus spent most of her life there.  So far  as
    the ZH (Tanzania) point and the best  interests  of  the  children  are
    concerned, the judge at paragraph 33 makes clear that he  accepted  and
    noted that children cannot be blamed for the actions of their  parents.
    However, the best interests of  the  children  must  be  examined  both
    within and without the relevant Immigration Rules.

 8. The judge goes on to note that the eldest child is now over the age  of
    9 and would potentially qualify  under  paragraph  276ADE.   The  judge
    recorded that the school reports indicated that the children were doing
    very well and there was no doubt that removal of  this  and  the  other
    child would be disruptive socially and in  terms  of  their  education.
    Again in this regard the judge gave  little  weight  to  the  submitted
    expert report because what the report stated could have been written in
    relation to any child born in the UK who faced the prospect of  removal
    and he found the report far from objective or helpful.

 9. He then goes on to say that  the  simple  fact  is  that  both  of  the
    children could readjust to life in Nigeria.   There  is  a  functioning
    education system there.  English is widely spoken.  The fact  that  the
    education system and standard of living may not be the same as  in  the
    UK is not a decisive factor.  Both of the children are healthy and will
    have the continuing support of their mother.

10. At paragraph 37 the judge indicates that notwithstanding Section 55 the
    public interest in removing individuals with no status or permission to
    be  in  the  UK  outweighs  the  best  interests  of   those   children
    particularly when the children can re-adapt to life in  Nigeria.  I  am
    reinforced in the view that the judge has not erred by  the  two  cases
    relied upon by the  Presenting  Officer  before  me,  EV  (Philippines)
    [2014] EWCA Civ 874 in which at paragraph 60 the Court of Appeal said:

         "In our case none of the family is a British citizen.  None has the
         right to remain in this country.  If the  mother  is  removed,  the
         father has no independent right to  remain.   If  the  parents  are
         removed, then it is entirely reasonable to expect the  children  to
         go with them.  As the Immigration Judge found it  is  obviously  in
         their best interests to remain with their parents.  Although it  is
         of course a question of fact for the Tribunal I cannot see that the
         desirability of being educated at public  expense  in  the  UK  can
         outweigh the benefit  to  the  children  of  remaining  with  their
         parents.  Just as we  cannot  provide  medical  treatment  for  the
         world, so we cannot educate the world."

11. The other case relied upon in that regard by the Presenting Officer  is
    AM (S.117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC) and at paragraph 39  of  that
    judgment the Upper Tribunal stated that:

         "There was  no  reason  to  infer  that  any  interruption  to  the
         education of the elder child upon return to  Malawi  would  be  any
         more significant than that faced by any child forced to  move  from
         one country to another by virtue of the careers of  their  parents.
         Nor should the difficulties of a move from one  school  to  another
         become unduly exaggerated.  It would be highly unusual for a  child
         in the UK to complete the entirety of their  education  within  one
         school.  The trauma, or excitement, of a new school, new classmates
         and new teachers is an integral part of growing up.   In  too  many
         appeals the  Tribunal  is  presented  with  arguments  whose  basic
         premise is that to change a school is to submit a child to a  cruel
         and unduly harsh experience.   Indeed,  as  if  to  illustrate  the
         point, we note that the  eldest  child  of  this  family  has  been
         required to move schools, and move from one end of the  UK  to  the
         other, as a result of the Decisions of her parents.   The  evidence
         does not suggest she suffered any hardship or ill  effect  from  so
         doing."

12. The children in this case are healthy.  There are  no  medical  issues.
    They are neither of them in a critical stage in their education and, as
    the judge found, the  education  system  is  conducted  in  English  in
    Nigeria.  It is the country of their parents' nationality.   They  will
    be returning there with their mother and the judge was entitled to find
    that that was not unreasonable and  also  entitled  to  find  that  the
    public interest in removing individuals without  leave  outweighed  any
    other interests in this case.

13. The other matter referred to by the judge who  granted  permission  was
    that the First-tier had not considered Section 117.   However,  looking
    at Section 117B it could not have made any difference to the outcome of
    the hearing because the Appellant could not satisfy the requirements of
    the exception to that Rule for the same reasons.  Section  117B  states
    that the maintenance of effective immigration control is in the  public
    interest, secondly that it is in the public interest, and in particular
    in the interests of the economic wellbeing of the United Kingdom,  that
    persons who seek to enter or remain are able to speak English and  also
    thirdly that they are financially independent so that they  are  not  a
    burden on taxpayers and better able to integrate into society.

14. This Appellant is  not  financially  independent.   She  is  apparently
    dependent upon the  charity  of  others  and  her  children  are  being
    educated and presumably receive medical treatment at the expense of  UK
    taxpayers.  It also indicates that little weight should be given  to  a
    private life established when the person is in the UK unlawfully.  That
    is the case so far as the mother is concerned.

15. The exception in Section 117B(6) indicates:

         "The public interest does not require the person's removal where -

         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
             with a qualifying child, and

         (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
             United Kingdom."

16. The judge has covered that in the reasoning and finding that  it  would
    be reasonable  for  the  children  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  and
    therefore a failure to refer in terms  to  Section  117B  has  made  no
    difference to  the  outcome  and  is  an  error  of  form  rather  than
    substance.

17. For all of those reasons I find that the determination  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal is not tainted by material error of law and I uphold  it.
    The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 7th January 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

