
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA350292015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2nd May 2017                               |On 23rd May 2017              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                              mr Muhammad Umar


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Nasim, (Counsel) instructed by Legal rights
Partnership
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 8th September 1991.

2.   He arrived in the United Kingdom in December 2010  as  a  student  with
    leave until 31st May 2014.  In September 2013 he  made  an  application
    for a derivative residence card under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations
    2006 as the primary carer of  his  paternal  grandmother,  [AB].   That
    application was  refused  in  February  2014.   On  23rd  May  2014  he
    submitted a fresh application, this also was  refused  on  18th  August
    2014.  Following a judicial review challenge,  reconsideration  of  the
    decision was made, which resulted in the decision of 3rd December  2015
    under challenge refusing to grant the application.

3.   Regulation 15A(4A) of the 2006 Regulations requires three things to  be
    established, namely:-

    (a)  that the appellant is the primary carer of a British citizen;


    (b)  that the relevant  British  citizen  is  residing  in  the  United
         Kingdom; and


    (c)  the relevant British citizen would be  unable  to  reside  in  the
         United Kingdom or in  another  EEA  state  if  the  appellant  were
         required to leave.

4.   In the decision  it  was  not  accepted  by  the  respondent  that  the
    appellant was related to [AB] as claimed nor was it accepted  that  she
    was wholly dependent upon him for her care.  Further it was  considered
    that, as a British citizen, she would be entitled through  the  NHS  or
    social services to care should it be needed  and  that  preference  and
    convenience were not sufficient reasons for the application to succeed.
     The appellant was held to have failed to demonstrate that  [AB]  would
    be unable to reside in the UK or  in  another  EEA  state  if  he  were
    required to leave.

5.   An appeal was lodged against that decision, which  appeal  came  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Lloyd on 14th September 2016.  In essence the
    Judge accepted that the appellant was indeed related to his grandmother
    and that she required a degree of personal care because of her  medical
    condition.  The Judge was not satisfied, however, that in  the  absence
    of the appellant, further care could not be available to  her.  Further
    that there was no indication that his absence would involve her leaving
    the United Kingdom to return to Pakistan to be with him.

6.   Challenge is made to the decision, it being said  that  the  Judge  had
    failed to make proper findings as to the  nature  of  the  disabilities
    experienced by [AB] and of her dependence upon the appellant.   It  was
    said that the Judge had failed to give adequate  consideration  to  the
    evidence of  the  appellant  and  particularly  the  evidence  of  [AB]
    herself.

7.   There is a statement from the appellant in  the  hearing  bundle  dated
    31st August 2016 and also statements from his uncle  Mr  [S]  and  from
    [AB] herself.

8.   The family situation would seem to be of considerable  complexity.   In
    particular the wider family consists of three paternal uncles and their
    families seemingly not in good relationships  one  with  the  other  on
    account of land disputes between them in Pakistan.

9.   [AB] lived with her husband in the United  Kingdom  until  he  died  in
    2007.  Thereafter Uncle [M] took responsibility for looking after  [AB]
    with his family in the United Kingdom.  This was for the period 2008 to
    2012 when he left the United Kingdom and returned overseas.

10.  The responsibility for looking after [AB] then fell  upon  Mr  [S]  and
    [AB] has since 2012 resided with him and his family in his  house.   An
    added complication to the situation would seem to be that Mr [S] is  in
    full-time employment and therefore cannot afford the  time,  except  in
    the evenings to be with his mother.  Mr [S]'s wife  and  children  want
    little to do with his mother on account of  the  interfamily  feud  and
    thus it was that the appellant was asked to come  and  look  after  his
    grandmother, living with her in one room in the house of his uncle.

11.  In his statement the appellant sets out the  many  problems  which  his
    grandmother has in  terms  of  her  health.   Such  include  depressive
    symptoms since the death of her  husband;  some  cognitive  impairment;
    limited mobility, poor eyesight. He indicates that she  needs  constant
    support.  Although she can wash and bathe herself she needs  assistance
    to get to the toilet and to the bathroom. She is  often  very  confused
    and lost and needs a lot of care and support.  He helps  her  with  her
    medication and takes her to appointments with her general  practitioner
    and to hospital.  He prepares her meals and generally looks  after  her
    clothing and her general health.   Significantly  she  does  not  speak
    English.  She is very fussy about  her  habits  and  argumentative,  on
    occasions becoming very angry as to her circumstances.

12.  In terms of her going into a nursing home, she does not want that.   It
    is the view of the appellant and of [AB] herself that  her  quality  of
    life would disappear very quickly particularly as she would have little
    human contact or conversation.

13.  Mr [S] in his statement  reaffirms  the  position  that  his  wife  and
    children continue to shun his mother and will not engage with her to do
    anything at all.  It is deeply upsetting for him, she depending  almost
    entirely upon the good offices of the  appellant  for  everything.   He
    speaks of her suffering hypertension,  angina,  pulmonary  disease  and
    depression and other ailments.  It is important she has  somebody  that
    she can talk to otherwise she would be  very  isolated  and  given  her
    mental health would  rapidly  deteriorate.   Often  she  is  dazed  and
    confused and often visits the memory clinics.

14.  At paragraph 14 he gives an indication that he is willing and  able  to
    buy or rent a property for his mother  where  she  can  live  with  the
    appellant, but he cannot do this until the situation with him  and  her
    has been resolved.  He does not  consider  that  any  other  assistance
    would be adequate for her needs.

15.  Finally there is a statement from [AB] herself.  She  is  83  years  of
    age and speaks of the appellant having been her carer for approximately
    three and a half years.  She speaks to the fact of  her  illnesses  and
    frailty and health issues.  She feels very keenly that she is a  burden
    on people and that causes her to be depressed and anxious and  worried.
    She expresses the view in paragraph 9 of her statement that she  cannot
    go to Pakistan but in the absence of  support  from  her  grandson  she
    fears that she will have no quality of life at all.  She does not  want
    to go to a nursing home because she  cannot  speak  any  English.   She
    fears the isolation that that would bring upon her.

16.  In terms of medical  evidence  there  is  a  report  from  the  general
    practitioner dated 31st August 2016 setting  out  the  various  medical
    conditions that [AB] suffers from, citing particularly  breathlessness,
    poor mobility and low mood.  She is unable to  walk  more  than  a  few
    yards because of back pain and spends much time in  a  wheelchair.   In
    terms of a nursing home the comment made in the report is "I understand
    she is not keen on moving to a nursing home because she is  being  well
    cared for by  Umar,  both  of  whom  are  living  in  her  son's  home.
    Culturally, many of my patients  are  very  happy  to  care  for  their
    elderly relatives at home".

17.  There is a further report by Dr Bindra, the  GP,  of  28th  April  2014
    speaking of the fact that the appellant is her main carer  and  without
    his help she will need social services' help to  maintain  her  medical
    health.

18.  The first challenge that is made to the Judge's decision is in  essence
    that he has not made  a  proper  and  balanced  assessment  as  to  the
    dependency of [AB] upon the appellant or attempted to make findings  as
    to the exact level of care which she requires to manage her conditions.
     There is some merit in that criticism because it is apparent that  the
    Judge  failed  to  realise  from  the  evidence,  particularly  of  the
    appellant and his uncle, that the appellant had ceased to study in  the
    United Kingdom but had devoted himself full-time to her care  for  some
    four years.    The fundamental difficulty, however, in  this  case,  as
    was highlighted by the Judge in the determination, is to determine what
    level of care would be available to [AB] were the appellant not  to  be
    looking after her.  For four years her elder son had been looking after
    her and for four years the appellant.

19.  Mr [S] was working and one issue would clearly be the extent  to  which
    he was able to finance any care that she might  require.   An  apparent
    contradiction was noted in paragraph 16 of the determination,  when  Mr
    [S] said that he could not afford to pay for any care, whereas  in  his
    statement and at the hearing he referred to being  willing  to  buy  or
    rent another house for [AB] and the appellant in  which  to  live.   He
    sought to clarify the contradiction by saying that he has incurred much
    expense in pursuing the status of the appellant. That begs the question
    of the availability of further financial support.

20.  Mr [S] was asked about  what  alternative  care  or  support  had  been
    investigated.    There was little mention of anybody having  approached
    social services for an assessment of her needs or for  assistance.   Mr
    [S] talked about an approach made by social services  with  a  visit  a
    year ago to carry out an assessment but there was  nothing  in  writing
    from social services to confirm that and the  Judge  did  not  find  it
    credible that such an event would not have some documentation  attached
    to it.  As a further complication to care, Mr  [S]  indicated  that  he
    would not permit carers to come and assist in his house.  Clearly  that
    did not help clarify what care could be provided if requested.

21.  Further criticism was made of the Judge that  he  had  failed  to  take
    into account the concerns of [AB] to going into a care  home.   It  was
    contended that it was not simply that she had  expressed  a  preference
    not to be moved into a care home but that she had given  clear  reasons
    why to  do  so  would  be  utterly  detrimental  to  her  health.   The
    difficulty again with that submission is that  no  investigations  have
    been made as to possible care homes and to the care that they could  or
    could not provide.  It is understandable that,  if  [AB]  went  into  a
    nursing home or care home and was not  able to communicate with anybody
    , such would be a very isolating event.  It has  not  been  established
    that there are not places that would have people speaking her  language
    and being able to communicate with her as she requires. There has  been
    little assessment professionally as to her needs and whether those  can
    be met otherwise than by the appellant.  The burden is and remains upon
    the appellant to establish that which is contended.  It seems to me ,as
    a matter of commonsense ,that if it is  contended  that  no  proper  or
    adequate alternative care can be provided that  there  is  some  proper
    substance for that in a report  by  social  services  or  at  least  by
    diligent enquiry.

22.  The focus of the appeal, and indeed the focus of challenge, is  on  the
    basis that without the appellant the health of [AB]  will  continue  to
    deteriorate and in effect her personal identity and integrity  will  be
    damaged and compromised.  Clearly these are  important  matters  to  be
    borne in mind, particularly to determine whether there  are  compelling
    circumstances which should be exercised in her favour by permitting the
    appellant to remain.  However, the  requirement  that  requires  to  be
    satisfied under the Regulations, as identified by the Judge, is whether
    in the absence of the appellant [AB] will be forced to leave the United
    Kingdom and return to Pakistan.  On that matter there  is  very  little
    evidence.  She herself in her statement says that she cannot return  to
    Pakistan and that no case has been advanced in terms that she would  of
    necessity require to be returned.  There was  some  suggestion  at  one
    point by Mr Nasim that the purchase of the property spoken about by the
    uncle was in terms of property in Pakistan.  From my point  of  view  I
    can find no indication that that is so, rather the  context  being  put
    that once the appellant's status in the United  Kingdom  was  clarified
    then such a purchase might be made.  There is a paucity of any evidence
    seeking to link the departure of the appellant with the necessity  that
    [AB] also would have to leave the United Kingdom.

23.  As the Judge indicated, [AB] as a British citizen would be entitled  to
    social support.  The evidence is far from conclusive that such  support
    would not be unavailable or ineffective.

24.  It seems to me and I so find, therefore,  that  although  there  are  a
    number of shortcomings in the overall analysis of the evidence  by  the
    Judge, such makes no material  difference  to  the  resolution  of  the
    fundamental question as to what if any support would  be  available  to
    [AB] were the appellant to be removed.  It also begs the question as to
    whether [AB] would in any event be forced to leave the  United  Kingdom
    as a consequence of the appellant's removal.

25.  Overall therefore I find that the decision  of  the  Immigration  Judge
    was one that could properly be made, notwithstanding the findings  that
    were made in favour of the appellant.

26.  In those situations the  appeal  of  the  appellant  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal is dismissed such that the original decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal stands, namely that the appellant's appeal is dismissed so far
    as the operation of the EEA Regulations 2006 are concerned.


No anonymity direction is made.








Signed            [pic]                      Date 19 May 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Mr P D King TD

