
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/35226/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Stoke-on-Trent                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 10 April 2015                         |On 9 June 2015                      |
|Prepared 28 April 2015                   |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  Mr S M D
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss U Sood, Counsel, of Trent Chambers


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In this decision the Appellant is  referred  to  as  the  Secretary  of
    State and the Respondent is referred as the Claimant.

2.   The Claimant, a national of Ivory  Coast,  date  of  birth  8  February
    1973, appealed against the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  dated  21
    August 2014  to  make  removal  directions  under  Section  10  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

3.   His appeal came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Mather  (the  judge)
    who, on 25 November 2014, allowed the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds.
      Permission to appeal was given to the Secretary of State.  A Rule  24
    response was lodged by the Claimant essentially  asserting  in  brief:-
    first, that the judge had  failed  in  granting  permission  to  follow
    guidance given by the Upper Tribunal in MR  [2015]  UKUT  29  and  that
    there had been a proper consideration  in  the  balancing  exercise  on
    proportionality  by  the  judge  to  Sections  117A  and  117B  of  the
    Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  as  amended  by  the
    Immigration Act 2014.

4.   The Secretary of State's grounds are long and take a number  of  points
    but in a nutshell the complaint is that the judge  failed  to  properly
    set out and reason the justification for concluding that Article 8  was
    not only engaged but also the decision of the Secretary  of  State  was
    disproportionate.   The  submissions  to  me  have  essentially   taken
    differing sides on that issue.

5.   The judge in what may be a significant element  of  formatted  decision
    [D] cited extensively legal issues and guidance [D 4-13] but ultimately
    it was the analysis of the proportionality issue raised  by  the  fifth
    question in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 where the  problems  arise.   It  was
    plain that the judge did not set out any  balancing  of  the  interests
    that  form  part  of  the  proper  consideration  of   proportionality.
    Proportionality is of course a matter of judgment.  It  does  not  fall
    upon  one  party  to  prove  or   disprove   the   proportionality   or
    disproportionality of the Secretary of State's decision.

6.   In this  case  the  judge  whilst  taking  account  of  the  Claimant's
    immigration  history  gave  considerable  weight  to  the   unfortunate
    circumstances of the Claimant's partner suffering from complex PTSD and
    having mental health problems associated with earlier  mistreatment  in
    the Ivory Coast, which was her country of origin.

7.   The judge, whilst noting earlier  in  the  decision  that  neither  the
    Claimant nor his partner nor their child have UK nationality  and  have
    no permanent rights to remain, simply embarked upon the exercise of the
    asserted risks associated to the Claimant's partner were she to have to
    return.  Whilst it might be said the judge must have been  taking  into
    account the best interests of their child,  the  judge  never  descends
    into the issues of their immigration status and needs to be in the  UK.



8.    Ultimately  the  public  interest,  including  those  interests  which
    support proper border controls and enable those  who should be  in  the
    United Kingdom to remain, gets  lost  and  the  exercise  unfortunately
    descended to the issue of proportionality without an assessment of  the
    public interests and those of the Claimant, his partner and his  child.



9.   In the circumstances I was satisfied that the  Original  Tribunal  made
    an error of law in the assessment  of  proportionality.   The  Original
    Tribunal's decision cannot stand and will have to be remade.

10.  It was accepted by the parties the appeal can be remade  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

11.  It has also been accepted that written representations can be made  and
    the appeal determined on the basis that the findings  of  fact,  rather
    than  the  conclusions  driven  from  them,  should  stand.   In  those
    circumstances I proposed to remake the case.  I gave  both  parties  14
    days to make written  representations  which  should  be  sent  for  my
    attention at Field House, not at Stoke, Bennett House and on that basis
    I would then remake the decision.

12.  I received representations from the Home Office by  Mr  McVeety,  which
    had been copied to Trent Chambers, the Appellant's representatives,  on
    20  April  2014   under  reference  [             ]to  the  Appellant's
    representatives, Trent Chambers.

13.  The Secretary of State's position was to  remind  me  that  as  I  also
    noted, the Claimant  could not meet the requirements of the Immigration
    Rules in respect of Appendix FM  or paragraph  276ADE  and  accordingly
    there  was  no  substantive  challenge  to  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decisions in relation to those adverse findings made by the Judge.

14.  Looking at this matter outside of the Rules, I have  applied  the  case
    law particularly of MM (Lebanon)  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  985,  AJ  (Angola)
    [2014] EWCA Civ 1636, Razgar [2004] UKHL 27, Huang [2007] UKHL 11,  and
    Singh [2015] EWCA Civ 74.  The position and standing of the Immigration
    Rules in relation to individual  ECHR  Convention  rights  was  clearly
    presented in SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387.

15.   I  therefore,  whilst  not  applying  a  threshold   or   gateway   of
    exceptionality, nevertheless consider whether there are particular, for
    example special or  compelling  circumstances  which  demonstrated  the
    Secretary of State's decision was  disproportionate,  and  support  the
    claim to remain.

16.  I have considered the  additional  representations  made  by  the  Home
    Office to which I have not received any response within  14  days  from
    the Appellant's representatives.

17.  The effect of Sections 117A, 117 B of the Nationality, Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 as amended, show the need to identify  public  interest
    remains as clear as ever and the weight  to  be  given  to  the  public
    interest is a matter of considerable importance.

18.  On the face of it there is no evidence that  the  Claimant  and  family
    are not entirely dependent upon public funds: They are not  financially
    independent and are a burden  on  tax  payers.   There  is  as  yet  no
    evidence to show the ability of the Claimant  to obtain  employment  in
    the United Kingdom.

19.  It is also correct to say under Section 117B(4) of the  2002  Act  that
    it is relevant in the assessment of private life issues as  to  whether
    or not the Claimant can have been involved with his partner as  a  time
    when his status was illegal and precarious.  It seems to me that in the
    light of examples such as SS (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA  Civ  550,  assuming
    Article 8 private/family life rights are engaged and that the effect of
    interference is significant, those  are  the  principal  issues  to  be
    weighed with the public interest.  It is plain that  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision is lawful and made for the purposes  of  Article  8(2)
    ECHR reasons.

20.  I note the judge's findings concerning  the  Claimant's  mental  health
    and the real risk of its deterioration.  The judge had the  opportunity
    to hear evidence on these matters; see [D 24, 27, 32 and 34].

21.  The Claimant's partner and her child would  best  be  served  by  being
    together with the Claimant but in this case it seems  to  me  that  the
    judgment that has to be made is really  the  potential  impact  of  the
    Claimant's removal. I fully take  into  account  in  my  assessment  of
    proportionality the position in relation  to  child's  interests  under
    Section 55 of the BCIA 2009.

22.  Accordingly I do not find the age of the Claimant's partner  and  their
    child, or the home circumstances in the UK or the  inevitable  presence
    of friends, contacts in the UK, and the extent to which the  Claimant's
    partner has integrated into life in the  UK  of  themselves  inevitably
    leads to the conclusion that removal is disproportionate.  I take  into
    account the Claimant's precarious and unlawful status within the United
    Kingdom since 2001.

23.  The Claimant left the Ivory Coast when about 27 years of age.   He  has
    not lost linguistic or cultural ties. The standard  of  living  may  be
    different there but that does not establish a  right  to  remain.   The
    Claimant is fit and able to  work.  The  Claimant  has  never  had  any
    legitimate expectation of  being able to reside in the UK save that  he
    may have temporarily have  had  status   (19/2/10)  which  was  removed
    (11/11/10).

24.  The son of the Claimant's partner, Miss O, dob 11/6/2007, is not  a  UK
    national.  Miss O has discretionary leave to remain.  Miss O has mental
    health problems arisen from ill-treatment and rape in  Ivory  Coast  in
    about 2006.  I note the medical evidence of Professor  Katona  in  2010
    concerning the effect of interference in counselling of Miss O would be
    much more precarious.  I do not have evidence to rebut the Secretary of
    State's references (RFRL p7/10)  to  the  restrictive  availability  of
    mental health.  I consider her return as being with  the  Claimant  and
    her child as a family enjoying family life together.  I see the child's
    best interests being with the family unit in Ivory Coast.   I  bear  in
    mind the judge's remarks about Dr Pant's evidence of May 2013  [D  para
    22].

25.  However on the evidence before me I do not find there  is  currently  a
    real risk the return  as  a  family  gives  rise  to  a  real  risk  of
    significant deterioration in Miss O's mental health.

26.  In these circumstances I am satisfied therefore that the  Secretary  of
    State's decision was proportionate.   The  Original  Tribunal  decision
    cannot stand.  It follows from my matters above the following  decision
    is substituted.

27.  The appeal by the Claimant under the Immigration Rules is dismissed.

28.  The appeal by the Claimant under Article 8 ECHR grounds is dismissed.

29.  Given the age of the Claimant's child, I find that an  anonymity  order
    is appropriate.

DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court  directs  otherwise,  the  Claimant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Claimant and to the  Secretary  of  State.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                  Date 27 May 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey



To The Claimant
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 27 May 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey









