
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/35496/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Decision and Reasons Promulgated :   |
|On 16 November 2015                  |On 16 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L MURRAY


                                   Between

                                  AZIZ IMAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Lay, instructed by Alexander Shaw Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a Pakistani national born  on  9  February  1979.  The
    Appellant applied for further leave to remain on 22 January 2014 on the
    basis that his removal would be a breach of  his  human  rights.    The
    Respondent refused his application in a letter dated 26 August 2014  on
    the basis that his removal would not breach his right  to  respect  for
    family and private life under Article 8 of the European  Convention  on
    Human Rights (ECHR) both under the Immigration Rules  and  outside  the
    Rules on the basis of exceptional circumstances. The Respondent made  a
    decision the remove him as an illegal entrant under section 10  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

 2. The Appellant appealed against that decision.  His appeal was heard and
    dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox in a decision promulgated on
    12 June 2015. Permission to appeal against that decision was granted by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Fisher  on  16  September  2015.  He  granted
    permission on the basis that the Judge arguably erred  in  law  in  his
    assessment of Section EX.1 of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules when
    he concluded that citizenship was not material  in  his  assessment  of
    proportionality. He also considered it arguable  that  this  error  had
    infected his conclusions on Article 8 under the ECHR  and  those  under
    section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.  He
    found that all grounds were arguable as they were closely linked.

The Grounds

 3. Ground 1  argues  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  concluded  that  the
    Appellant's children's status as British Citizens  did  not  materially
    affect the assessment of whether it was reasonable to  expect  them  to
    return to Pakistan with their parents and that this  was  an  error  of
    law. It is asserted that the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  ascribe
    appropriate weight to the issue of their  British  citizenship.  It  is
    submitted that British Citizenship is a  relevant,  weighty  and  often
    determinative consideration.

 4. Ground 2 argues that the failure to  consider  the  children's  British
    citizenship  as  having  any  weight   at   all   also   rendered   the
    proportionality assessment flawed. The Respondent who was unrepresented
    at the appeal never submitted that  it  would  be  reasonable  for  the
    children to return if they were British. Whilst the refusal letter said
    it would be reasonable this  was  on  the  basis  that  they  were  not
    British. The First-tier Tribunal therefore should  have  grappled  with
    the issue of whether, if the children could not reasonably be  expected
    to  leave,  the  separation  from  the   Appellant   was   nevertheless
    proportionate.   It is submitted  that  this  further  meant  that  the
    children's best interests, in the eventuality of separation, were  also
    not considered in a lawful way.

 5. Ground 3 contends that the First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  apply  the
    mandatory public interest considerations under section 117 of the  2002
    Act. There was no indication that the determination had regard to those
    considerations.  If  the  First-tier  Tribunal  deemed  it  unnecessary
    because he had already found (in the context of EX.1) that it would  be
    reasonable to expect the children to leave the UK, then  that  position
    was tainted for the reasons given.

The Rule 24 Response

 6. The Respondent argues  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  directed
    himself appropriately, that he was aware that the children were British
    Citizens and that both were nationals of Pakistan,  the  mother  having
    obtained indefinite leave to remain. The Judge listed and  applied  the
    relevant case law. The Judge had assessed the  best  interests  of  the
    children and asked himself whether it would be reasonable to expect the
    children to return to Pakistan with their parents. The Judge  had  made
    clear findings on the age of the  children  and  that  having  acquired
    British status did not prevent them living abroad. The Judge found that
    they were of an age where their focus would be on  their  parents,  the
    eldest being 7 years old.  The Judge had accepted that the family would
    be inconvenienced when they repatriated.

The Hearing

 7. Mr Lay submitted that the critical issue was giving no  weight  to  the
    fact that the children were British citizens. It was a  material  issue
    which had to go into the mix. It was not only a  clear  error  but  one
    that was material. If I were to find that it was a  material  error  it
    would be necessary to remit so that a First-tier Judge could  hear  the
    evidence as updated. British citizenship was not a trump  card  but  it
    was something of importance. This was not a  criminal  case  and  could
    succeed notwithstanding findings of deception. The refusal  letter  was
    written  before  the  children  were  British  citizens  and  now   the
    Appellant's wife was also a British citizen. Her passport was  dated  1
    July 2015.

 8. Another reading of the First-tier Tribunal's decision was that  he  did
    not conduct an Article 8 assessment. It was like the reasoning of an E-
    A (Article 8 - best interests of child) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00315 case.
    This  was  never  that  kind  of  case.  Remittal  was  important.  The
    successful career prospects were relevant as were the  public  interest
    considerations.

 9. Mr Melvin submitted that he stood by the fact that the Judge  had  made
    findings that the children would be able to go  to  Pakistan.   British
    citizen children could accompany their non-citizen children back. There
    was no material error of law. If there were a material error of law  it
    would be best to remit it to the First-tier Tribunal.

10. I indicated that I considered that there was a material error of law in
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and that the matter  should  be
    remitted for a de  novo  hearing  before  a  different  judge  with  no
    findings preserved.

Discussion and Findings

11. The Appellant's appeal fell to be considered under section EX.1 (a)  of
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    does not  explicitly  state  which  Rules  he  is  considering  in  his
    assessment  from  paragraphs  23  to  38  of  the  decision.  In  those
    paragraphs the Judge considers  the  reasonableness  of  expecting  the
    children to leave  the  UK  and  acknowledges  that  they  are  British
    citizens.

12. It is clear that section EX.1 (a) applied  in  this  case  because  the
    Appellant had  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  British
    Citizen children.  I also conclude from the language  of  the  decision
    that the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  considering  the  requirements  of
    section EX.1 (a) in respect of the children and EX.1 (b) in respect  of
    the Appellant's wife at paragraphs 32 to 38. He concluded that it would
    not be unreasonable for the children to leave the  UK  and  that  there
    were  no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life  with  his   wife
    continuing in Pakistan. He did not consider Article 8 outside the rules
    because he found  at  paragraph  40  that  there  were  no  exceptional
    circumstances which would permit the Appellant to succeed  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.

13. The First-tier Tribunal Judge directs himself at paragraph  25  in  the
    following terms:

14. I confined myself to the assessment of  whether  it  is  reasonable  to
    expect the children to  return  to  Pakistan  with  their  parents  and
    whether insurmountable obstacles exist for the  appellant's  wife.  The
    children's status as British citizens does not materially  effect  this
    assessment.

15. The Appellant's children are both British Citizens. It is unclear  from
    the papers  exactly  when  they  were  granted  citizenship  but  their
    passports are dated 15 December 2014. In ZH (Tanzania) (FC) (Appellant)
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department (Respondent) [2011] UKSC 4
    Lady Hale said at paragraph [30] that:

         "Although nationality is not a "trump card"  it  is  of  particular
         importance in assessing the best interests of any child".

    She  also  concluded  the  view  that  the  intrinsic   importance   of
    citizenship should not be played down and continued at paragraph [32]:

         "As citizens these children have rights which they will not be able
         to exercise if they move to another country.  They  will  lose  the
         advantages of growing up and being educated in their  own  country,
         their own culture and their own language. They will have  lost  all
         this when they come back as adults".

16. Lord Kerr said at paragraph [47] that:

         "The significance of a child's nationality must  be  considered  in
         two aspects. The first of these is in its role as a contributor  to
         the debate as to where the child's best interests lie. It seems  to
         me self-evident that to diminish a child's right to assert  his  or
         her nationality will not normally be in his or her best  interests.
         That consideration must therefore feature in the  determination  of
         where  the  best  interests  lie.  It  was  also  accepted  by  the
         respondent, however, (and I think rightly so) that if a child is  a
         British citizen, this has an independent value, freestanding of the
         debate in relation to best interests, and this must  weigh  in  the
         balance in any decision that may affect where a child will live. As
         Lady Hale has said, this is not an inevitably decisive  factor  but
         the benefits that British citizenship brings, as so aptly described
         by Lord Hope and Lady Hale, must not readily be discounted".

17. The First-tier Tribunal Judge properly directed himself in relation  to
    the relevant case law at paragraphs 8 to 11 of the  decision.  However,
    in the light of these passages from the judgement of the Supreme  Court
    I consider that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  misdirected  himself  in
    holding  that  the  children's  status  as  British  citizens  did  not
    materially affect the assessment of whether it was reasonable for  them
    to  return  to  Pakistan.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   did   not
    demonstrate in his reasoning that  he  give  weight  to  the  intrinsic
    importance of British citizenship or consider the loss of benefits that
    British citizenship brings and did not weigh this in the balance.  This
    was a material error of law  as  it  affected  the  assessment  of  the
    reasonableness of expecting the children to leave the UK.

18. I consider that the extent of judicial fact finding is such  that  this
    matter should be remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  complete
    rehearing.

19. In MK (section 55 - Tribunal options) Sierra Leone  [2015]  UKUT  00223
    the Upper Tribunal held that where the Tribunal finds  that  there  has
    been a breach of either of the section 55 duties, one  of  the  options
    available is remittal to the Secretary of State for reconsideration and
    fresh decision. The grounds of appeal did not argue that the Respondent
    had not properly considered her duties imposed by s55 of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and I have made no  such  finding.
    Therefore remittal to the Secretary of State is not an option  open  to
    me. However, it may be that in the light of the  fact  that  since  the
    Respondent drafted her Refusal Letter both children have become British
    citizens the Respondent may wish to make a fresh decision.

Notice of Decision

In those circumstances I conclude that there was a material error of law  in
the determination. The extent of judicial fact finding  is  such  that  this
matter  should  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal   for   complete
rehearing.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction. None is  sought
and no need for such a direction arises on the facts of this of case.


Signed      Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray

