
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/35906/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 October 2015                   |On 23 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER


                                   Between

                             TALAT MEHMOOD MALIK
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Schwenk of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mrs Petterson a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

      1. The respondent notified the appellant of her decision to refuse  to
         vary his leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules on 27 August
         2014. His appeal against that decision was dismissed by  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Grimshaw ("the Judge")  following  a  hearing  on  2
         March 2015. This is an appeal against that decision.

      2. First-tier Tribunal Judge  Reid  refused  to  grant  permission  to
         appeal  on  19  May  2015.  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Smith   granted
         permission to appeal on 16 July 2015 in  the  following  terms  (my
         underlining);

             "...  the  Judge  may  have  adopted  the  wrong   test   when
             considering whether Article 8 needed to be considered  outside
             the Rules by importing the test from the  respondent's  carers
             policy as to whether there existed particularly compelling and
             compassionate circumstances. It is arguable that, if the Judge
             had directed herself only in relation to the issue of  whether
             there were exceptional circumstances and taking  into  account
             in particular the implications for Mr  I  of  the  appellant's
             removal, she might  at  the  very  least  have  considered  it
             necessary to consider the proportionality of the  respondent's
             decision to remove the  appellant.  Permission  to  appeal  is
             accordingly granted on the issue raised at paragraphs 6-11  of
             the grounds."

The grounds

      3. Paragraphs 6-11 of the grounds state as follows (my underlining);

             "6.)      At paragraph 45 (sic) Immigration Judge acknowledges
             that "a strong bond exists"  between  the  Appellant  and  his
             uncle, Mr I, since the "Appellant has been the main  carer  of
             his uncle since December 2012 which is a significant period of
             time and has allowed trust and dependency  on  both  sides  to
             develop.  Mr I has now become reliant upon  the  Appellant  to
             manage all his personal care needs including attending to  his
             personal hygiene, assisting  with  household  chores  and  the
             preparation of food" (paragraph 35).

             7.) That said, it is  submitted  that  whist  the  Immigration
             Judge comments on the Appellant's family life, the Immigration
             Judge has totally overlooked the family life of Mr I which  he
             enjoys with his carer, nephew, and  if  not  the  only  family
             member actively involved in his care, support and assistance -
             the Appellant.

             8.) The Immigration Judge has also overlooked the family  life
             the Appellant enjoys with his uncle and  briefly  comments  on
             this, by suggesting the Appellant's family life  is  with  his
             wife and daughter in the USA. The Immigration Judge has  erred
             by failing to give adequate reasons for this conclusion  which
             seems more of an opinion on its natural reading than a finding
             of fact supported by evidence.

             9.) The Immigration Judge ought to have considered the Article
             8 rights of Mr I and has erred in failing to do so.  Reference
             is made to the House of  Lords  judgements  in  the  cases  of
             Chikwamba (FC) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
             [2008] UKHL 40 & Beoku-Betts v Secretary of State for the Home
             Department [2008] UKHL 39 in which the House of  Lords  stated
             to the nearest meaning that the effect on other family members
             with a right to respect for their family and private life with
             the appellant must also be taken into account.

             10.)      Whilst it is noted  that  family  life  exists  here
             between adult relatives, it is submitted that the normal  test
             of enjoying a relationship  "beyond  emotional  ties"  between
             adults should not apply in this instance, since  here  one  of
             the  parties  is  a  heavily  dependent  adult   with   severe
             disabilities.

             11.)      In assessing (sic), the  Article  8  rights  of  the
             Appellant and the individual rights of Mr I,  the  Immigration
             Judge ought to have had regard  to  the  factors  set  out  in
             Razgar. Failure to do so amounts to an error of law."

Respondent's position

      4. The respondent asserted (13 August 2015) that  the  Judge  directed
         herself appropriately.  The  Judge  correctly  asked  herself  [27]
         whether there  were  circumstances  which  merit  consideration  of
         Article 8 outside the Rules. The reference to the carer's policy in
         [26]  simply  summarises  the  respondent's  position.  The   Judge
         considered the factors in favour of the appellant  and  respondent,
         considered Mr I's situation, and made findings on the level of care
         required and the sources available  for  those  needs  to  be  met.
         Having weighed the evidence in the balance,  it  was  open  to  the
         Judge to conclude [47] that neither  the  appellant's  nor  Mr  I's
         circumstances were exceptional or compelling.

      5. Mrs Petterson submitted that the Judge took all  the  circumstances
         into account, outlined the  positive  factors  in  the  appellant's
         favour, identified that professional services can be provided,  and
         looked at all the family relationships including the rights of Mr I
         and the impact on him of the  appellant's  removal.  The  balancing
         exercise was undertaken.

Appellant's submissions

      6. Mr Schwenk submitted that the wrong test was applied. It should not
         be compelling or  compassionate  circumstances  under  the  carer's
         concession but should be compelling circumstances of an exceptional
         nature. Exceptional is not the same  as  compelling.  I  cannot  be
         confident that if she had applied the correct test the result would
         have been the same. There is no real balance  in  the  family  life
         assessment as the Judge has not considered the family life with  Mr
         I. The appellant can have  family  life  with  both  his  wife  and
         daughter, and Mr I. There has been no finding as to  whether  "they
         have a strong bond" or whether "trust and  dependency"  amounts  to
         family life between adults. There is prima facie evidence that more
         than emotional ties exist.

      7. The Judge has  not  considered  proportionality  regarding  Mr  I's
         family life. Mentioning proportionality does not sit with a finding
         that Article 8 was not engaged. There has been no Razgar  analysis.
         The appellant does not know why he lost.

      8. Mr Schwenk accepted there are some mentions of the correct test and
         that proportionality is mentioned at least twice  but  he  asserted
         that it was not really a proportionality assessment.

The Judges findings

      9. The Judge made the following findings. I have set them out in full.
         I have underlined  the  parts  where  the  legal  tests  have  been
         identified,  the  relevant  findings,   and   where   the   matters
         appertaining to the grant of permission have been considered.

         26. "If there are any exceptional  circumstances  consistent  with
             the right to respect for private and family life contained  in
             Article 8, consideration by the Respondent of a grant of leave
             to remain in the United Kingdom outside  the  requirements  of
             the Immigration  Rules  may  be  warranted.  The  Respondent's
             decision is that no compelling or compassionate  circumstances
             are engaged in  the  present  case  and  thus  the  concession
             granted to carers does not apply.

         27. Where a  claimant  does  not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
             Immigration Rules it is necessary to examine all the  evidence
             in order strike a balance between the competing  interests  of
             the Appellant and the public interest in  maintaining  a  fair
             immigration system.  There must be an overall consideration of
             the facts of the case in order to  establish  whether  or  not
             there are exceptional or compelling circumstances  which  mean
             refusal of the application would result in unjustifiable harsh
             consequences for the individual (or their  family)  such  that
             refusal would not be proportionate under Article 8.

         28. I note that the Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom  as  a
             visitor in July 2012. It is the Appellant's evidence  that  he
             has a wife and a daughter. They have remained  in  the  United
             States  where  the  Appellant  and  his  wife   have   secured
             employment. According  to  the  Appellant's  statement  of  10
             October 2012, his wife and  daughter  are  currently  residing
             with his mother and father-in-law.

         29. The Appellant states that the purpose  of  his  visit  to  the
             United Kingdom in 2012 was to spend time with his uncle, Mr I,
             and his grandmother (his uncle's mother).  At  that  time  the
             Appellant's grandmother had been granted leave  to  remain  in
             the United Kingdom as the main carer of Mr I. She had provided
             him with support and assistance with his care needs  for  many
             years until her own health deteriorated. Sadly the Appellant's
             grandmother died on 4 December 2012. The Appellant took on the
             caring role and has been Mr I's main carer since that time.

         30. I accept that following  an  accident  many  years  ago  Mr  I
             developed paraplegia and is a wheelchair user. I have seen the
             letter dated 1 October 2012 from the GP, Dr  Javali.   The  GP
             states that Mr I has  pain  in  his  back  and  shoulders  and
             "because of his paraplegia he needs a  significant  amount  of
             care input to manage his bowels and his day-to-day activities.
             He is also prone to incontinence and bowel accidents almost on
             a daily basis..." There is a second letter from the GP dated 1
             November 2013 which contains similar information.

         31. Although the evidence from the witnesses is that Mr I  suffers
             from low mood  there  is  no  mention  of  any  mental  health
             problems in either letter from the GP. I have not overlooked a
             letter from Mr Raza the Consultant in Spinal Injuries dated 27
             October 2014 which does refer to Mr  I  "struggling  mentally"
             since the death of his mother. However, Mr I does  not  appear
             to have been referred for counselling or other specialist help
             either  at  the  time  he  was   bereaved   or   subsequently.
             Accordingly, I am led to the conclusion  that  Mr  I  has  the
             resources  to  cope  with  his  mental  health  problems.   My
             conclusion is reinforced by  the  report  in  the  Appellant's
             bundle completed by a private care agency, Assisted Lives,  in
             which the Appellant claims to receive "good support  from  his
             family and friends". Thus, I find Mr I does have opportunities
             for social interaction with his family and presumably they can
             offer him companionship and comfort  since  the  loss  of  his
             mother. I am satisfied that despite his  disabilities  Mr  I's
             ability to maintain contact with his family  and  friends  and
             with the outside world has not been significantly compromised.

         32. I note and accept the information provided by Mr  Raza  namely
             that Mr I has a number of risk  factors  "due  to  ageing  and
             duration of his paralysis". He is followed up  at  the  Spinal
             Injuries Centre on an annual basis. Mr Raza states that  Mr  I
             is "struggling to cope with  day-to-day  activities  of  daily
             living especially bladder and bowel care".

         33. The evidence from the witnesses indicates that due to a number
             of factors, including family reasons and the pressure of work,
             none of the family members of Mr I  who  are  present  in  the
             United Kingdom are in a  position  to  commit  their  time  to
             offering him practical assistance. Furthermore,  as  Mr  I  is
             doubly incontinent and requires assistance if he soils or wets
             his clothes or bedding his relatives do not  feel  comfortable
             about providing him with this aspect of his personal care.

         34.  As  to  whether  there  are   compassionate   or   compelling
             circumstances to the application I find the factors that weigh
             in favour of the Appellant are as follows.

         35. The Appellant has been the  main  carer  of  his  uncle  since
             December 2012 which is a significant period of  time  and  has
             allowed trust and dependency on both sides to develop.   Mr  I
             has now become reliant upon the Appellant to  manage  all  his
             personal  care  needs  including  attending  to  his  personal
             hygiene, assisting with household chores and  the  preparation
             of food.

         36. Furthermore, the Appellant and Mr I submit  that  neither  the
             statutory services nor an informal  carer  can  replicate  the
             level of care and support provided by the Appellant  on  a  24
             hours basis every  day.  It  would  be  harsh  and  culturally
             inappropriate to expect Mr I to live in a care home. It  would
             also be costly. Mr I has consistently asserted that it is  his
             wish to remain at home. His  right  to  dignity  and  personal
             autonomy would be adversely  affected  if  the  Appellant  was
             required to leave the United Kingdom.

         37. I find the factors that weigh in favour of the Respondent  are
             as follows.

         38. The diagnosis and treatment plan that applies to Mr I  is  not
             in dispute. However there is nothing in the  medical  evidence
             to substantiate the claim  made  by  the  Appellant,  and  the
             additional witnesses, that Mr I requires care and  supervision
             for 24 hours a day, every  day.   The  essential  question  is
             whether  the  help  that  is  provided  by  the  Appellant  is
             reasonably required. It  is  evident  that  the  Appellant  is
             currently provided with suitable aids and adaptions  at  home.
             The letter from the  District  Nurse  dated  22  October  2014
             confirms that Mr I has been given pressure relieving equipment
             and that he is monitored every 12 weeks.

         39. The Wakefield Council's report is  based  on  a  questionnaire
             completed by Mr I. The questionnaire invites him to  tick  the
             statements in the document  that  he  believes  best  fit  his
             situation.  The  questionnaire  makes  it   clear   that   the
             information provided is  the  starting  point  for  the  local
             authority to determine if the applicant  is  eligible  for  an
             individual budget and the amount of funding available. It also
             states "if you are eligible for assistance from other  funding
             sources information about these  will  be  provided  following
             completion  of  this  form.  If  this  form  identifies  needs
             assessed as being health-related needs you  will  be  referred
             for a continuing healthcare assessment".

         40. As to Mr I's specific circumstances the  information  supplied
             by Wakefield Council makes it clear that the  local  authority
             is prepared to facilitate access to the appropriate health and
             services to ensure that Mr I is able to remain  at  home.  The
             social worker's assessment (page 27 of the  report)  concludes
             as follows "even though Mr Malik wishes to carry on caring for
             his uncle, if for any reason he could not provide the  support
             he is currently providing, services will be offered to meet Mr
             I's needs".  From the point of view of the Respondent Mr I  is
             in receipt of disability benefits and presumably could  afford
             to purchase top-up care privately or from an informal carer if
             he believes the help provided by  the  statutory  services  is
             insufficient to assist  him  to  manage  activities  of  daily
             living and remain at home.

         41. In addition, the report  from  Assisted  Lives  found  in  the
             Appellant's bundle is also based on a  self-assessment  rather
             than any objective evaluation of Mr  I's  care  needs.  It  is
             headed Service User Needs Assessment. Although it  contains  a
             detailed account of the care needs  identified  by  Mr  I  the
             estimate of his care costs reached by Assisted Lives is  based
             entirely on the views of Mr I and the  Appellant  without  any
             contribution being made to  the  assessment  by  a  health  or
             social care professional.

         42. In short, the Respondent submits that Mr I is already known to
             the health and social care professionals. If he is  struggling
             with the activities of daily living he is entitled to services
             to meet his needs from the statutory  sector.  Some  of  those
             services are free, such as continuing healthcare;  others  are
             likely to be means tested or will incur a cost.  There  is  no
             evidence to justify a finding that Mr  I  will  be  forced  to
             leave his home in the event of the removal of the Appellant.

         43. Taking an overall view of the evidence before  me,  I  do  not
             doubt that the Appellant's return will inevitably disrupt  his
             relationship with his uncle  and  cause  inconvenience  whilst
             alternative arrangements are made. It is not in  dispute  that
             Mr I cannot cope alone. However,  I  bear  in  mind  that  the
             Appellant has not provided a detailed and objective assessment
             of  the  extent  of  his  uncle's  care  needs.  Rather,   the
             information provided is based on Mr I and the Appellant's  own
             views.  Crucially,  the  application  and  appeal   has   been
             predicated on the basis that Mr I requires  24-hour  care  and
             the Appellant's priority is to providing it. That maybe  their
             view and sincerely held but  it  is  not  necessary  based  on
             clinical need or what is reasonably required.

         44. I am satisfied there are services available from the  NHS  and
             the local authority to meet Mr I's need  for  assistance  with
             the activities of daily living. I add here that much has  been
             made  of  Mr  I's  need  for  assistance   in   managing   his
             incontinence and the reluctance of family  members  to  become
             involved in the intimate aspects of his personal care. I  find
             it significant that in the questionnaire completed  in  behalf
             of Assisted Lives it is reported that the Appellant "has  been
             able to provide some physical  care  but  cannot  provide  the
             intimate personal care that is needed". Thus it  seems  to  me
             that the difficulties with incontinence, referred  to  by  the
             Appellant and his uncle, is an issue that ought to be referred
             to the GP, community nurse or a  continence  advisor  who  can
             better advise Mr I on the  management  of  his  condition  and
             arrange for outside specialist help  if necessary.

         45. I recognise that there  is  mutual  affection  and  dependency
             between the Appellant and his uncle and that they  consider  a
             strong bond exists between them. The Appellant and Mr  I  have
             lived together for nearly three years and each  has  benefited
             from that arrangement. However, the Appellant's family life is
             clearly in the United States,  where  his  wife  and  daughter
             continue to reside and where he has  held  employment  in  the
             past. The care and support put in place for Mr I in the future
             will not necessarily mirror the  care  that  he  has  received
             hitherto and, of course, it will not be delivered  exclusively
             by the Appellant.  However, that does not mean that Mr I  will
             be forced  into  residential  or  nursing  care  or  that  his
             essential needs will not be met.

         46. I cannot accept that  the  Respondent's  decision  is  not  in
             accordance with the law, as Mr Schwenk submits, because  I  do
             not agree that there has been a misapprehension of the  facts.
             The Respondent may  well  have  taken  into  account  that  it
             appeared that the Appellant aspired to full-time employment, a
             matter which he denies. However, in my  view,  the  Respondent
             properly considered all aspects to the  application  including
             the existence of alternative care and support to Mr I,  before
             reaching a decision. The Carers Policy makes it clear that the
             Home Office's position on carers is  not  designed  to  enable
             people to stay in the United Kingdom who would  otherwise  not
             have leave to do so. Rather, leave is granted only where it is
             warranted  by  particularly   compelling   and   compassionate
             circumstances and then only on the basis  that  the  applicant
             understands it is an  interim  arrangement.  The  Home  Office
             expects permanent  arrangements  for  the  future  care  of  a
             relative by an individual not subject to  immigration  control
             to be put in place during that period of leave.

         47. When I stand back and look at  the  factors  specific  to  the
             present case I do not accept that the  end  result  makes  the
             position of the Appellant or the uncle he leaves behind either
             exceptional  or  compelling.  The  Appellant  is  subject   to
             immigration control. As I have already stated his family  life
             is with his wife and daughter  in  the  United  States.  I  am
             satisfied that the health and social care professionals are in
             a position  to  arrange  and  deliver  suitable  care  to  the
             Appellant's uncle.

         48. Unfortunately for the Appellant, for the reasons  given  above
             and having conducted the proportionality weighing  process,  I
             cannot find that there are  any  compassionate  or  compelling
             features of his application  requiring  leave  to  be  granted
             outside the rules. I am satisfied  that  the  removal  of  the
             Appellant pursuant to the decision to refuse to  grant  leave,
             would not engage the operation of Article 8. In any  event,  I
             conclude that such  removal  would  be  proportionate  to  the
             legitimate public end, namely the  operation  of  a  fair  and
             effective system of immigration control."

Discussion

Ground 1 - wrong test

     10. The Judge made reference to "compelling circumstances" in  [27  and
         47],  "compelling  or  compassionate  circumstances  [34  and  48],
         "compelling   and   compassionate    circumstances"    [46],    and
         "exceptional" circumstances [26, 27, and 47].

     11. Secretary of State for the Home Department v SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA
         Civ 387 states that [33];

             "... compelling circumstances would need to be  identified  to
             support a claim for grant of LTR  outside  the  new  Rules  in
             Appendix FM. This is not as strict as a test of exceptionality
             or a requirement of "very compelling reasons" (as referred  to
             in MF (Nigeria) in the context  of  the  Rules  applicable  to
             foreign  criminals),  but  gives  appropriate  weight  to  the
             focused consideration of  public  interest  factors  as  finds
             expression in the SSHD's  formulation  of  the  new  Rules  in
             Appendix FM."

     12.  There  is  therefore  a  difference  between   "exceptional"   and
         "compelling". It is plainly right that  foreign  criminals  have  a
         more demanding test to meet than who have not offended while  here.
         However the Judge considered the facts as  established  using  both
         criteria as is evident from  the  heart  of  the  appeal  which  is
         summarised at [47] that;

             "I do not accept that the end result makes the position of the
             Appellant or the uncle he leaves behind either exceptional  or
             compelling."

     13. On the facts she was entitled to find that the case  did  not  meet
         either  test.  She  gave  multiple  reasons  for  that  as  already
         identified. It may have been more  helpful  if  she  had  used  the
         phrase "compelling" throughout, but her failure to do so  does  not
         mean that she made a material error of law. If  the  appellant  did
         not meet the "compelling" test, he could not meet the  "exceptional
         test". In any event he met neither.

     14. In my judgement there was therefore no material error of law in the
         decision in the application of the relevant test.

Ground 2 - failed to make adequate findings on Mr I's family life  with  the
Appellant

     15. Having failed to establish that  compelling  circumstances  existed
         outside the rules such as to mean that Article 8 was engaged  [48],
         which on the facts the Judge was entitled to  find,  there  was  no
         obligation on the Judge to consider Mr I's right to respect for his
         family life. However she did, albeit briefly.

     16. I note that it was wrongly asserted in the grounds that the Judge;

             "... acknowledges that "a  strong  bond  exists"  between  the
             Appellant and his uncle".

     17. The Judge recorded [45] (my underlining);

             "... that they consider a strong bond exists between them".

     18. The Judge was plainly aware of the  strength  of  the  relationship
         having found that [45];

             "... there is mutual  affection  and  dependency  between  the
             Appellant and his uncle and that they ... have lived  together
             for nearly three  years  and  each  has  benefited  from  that
             arrangement."

     19. The Judge also  considered  his  other  family  relationships  when
         finding that;

             "Mr I does have opportunities for social interaction with  his
             family and presumably they can  offer  him  companionship  and
             comfort since the loss of his  mother.  I  am  satisfied  that
             despite his disabilities Mr I's ability  to  maintain  contact
             with his family and friends and with the outside world has not
             been significantly compromised."

     20. Mt I was, at the date of hearing, almost 50 years old and had other
         family members here. The appellant had been in the  United  Kingdom
         for less than 3 years. In those circumstances it was  open  to  the
         Judge to find that the appellant's primary family life was with his
         wife and daughter and not Mr I. Accordingly little  further  needed
         to be said about Mr I's family life  with  the  appellant,  it  not
         being a core consideration,  as  the  main  consideration  was  the
         private  life  entitlement  he  had  to  personal  care  where  the
         shortfall in personal care required, as opposed to  desired,  could
         be taken up by professional agencies.

     21. In my judgement, for both of the reasons set out above [15 and 20],
         there was therefore no  material  error  of  law  in  the  decision
         regarding Mr I's family life.

Ground 2 - proportionality assessment

     22. The Judge, having found that compelling circumstances did not exist
         such as to consider the matter outside the Rules, still went on  to
         consider proportionality as confirmed in [48] even though  she  did
         not need to. One only has to read [34] to  [45]  to  see  that  the
         balancing exercise required within a proportionality  exercise  was
         undertaken. She was entitled to find that the balance fell  against
         the appellant. The Judge does not have to slavishly  recite  Razgar
         or repeat the facts as found when she considers each  question  she
         was asked to determine.

     23. In my judgement there was therefore no material error of law in the
         decision regarding the proportionality assessment.

Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

    I do not set aside the decision.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
21 October 2015
