
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/35633/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 January 2016                    |On 27 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MS KONLAPAT BURAPAKDI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Khyati Joshi, Legal Representative of A Bajwa &
Co   Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Monaghan who sitting at Hatton  Cross  on  25
    June 2015 and in a determination promulgated on 23  July  2015  allowed
    the appeal of the  Respondent  (hereinafter  called  the  Claimant),  a
    citizen of Thailand, born on 1 August 1983 against the decision of  the
    Secretary of State dated 8 September  2014  to  cancel  the  Claimant's
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom under paragraph  321A(2)  on  the
    basis that the  Claimant  had  used  a  fraudulently  obtained  English
    language certificate to obtain her leave as a Tier 4 Student.

 2. The Secretary of State successfully sought permission  to  appeal  that
    decision the grounds of which in summary contended that the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge failed to give adequate reasons  for  finding  that  the
    Secretary of State was  required  to  produce  a  Document  Examination
    Report (DER) or a Document Verification Report (DVR) when the Secretary
    of State's allegation was that the Claimant had  fraudulently  obtained
    the relevant documents not that the document itself was false.  In that
    regard it was said that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  failed  to  give
    adequate reasons for the finding at paragraph 34:

         "Unless there is an admission from the (Claimant) that (she) used a
         false document then the Secretary of State must complete  either  a
         Document Examination Report (DER) or a Document Verification Report
         (DVR).  Neither of these documents have been produced and for  that
         reason and to that limited extent only I allow the appeal and remit
         the matter to the (Secretary of State) for a further decision to be
         made."

3.   In her grounds, the Secretary of State points out that  the  Judge  was
    provided with a bundle of documents in support  of  the  allegation  in
    respect  of  paragraph  321A  that  included  witness   statements   in
    particular from Mr Peter  Millington  and  Ms  Rebecca  Collings,  that
    clearly provided that tests were categorised as 'invalid' where ETS was
    certain that there was evidence of proxy test-taking  or  impersonation
    and inter alia, where a match had been identified, their  approach  was
    to invalidate the test result  in  that  there  was  evidence  of  such
    invalidity in those cases.

4.   It was clear that in order  to  be  categorised  as  'invalid'  on  the
    spreadsheet provided to the Home Office, the case had  gone  through  a
    computer programme analysing  speech  and  then  to  independent  voice
    analysts.  If all three were in agreement that a proxy had  been  used,
    then the test was categorised as 'invalid'.

5.   In that  regard  a  print-out  of  the  relevant  section  of  the  ETS
    spreadsheet was attached  to  Annex  D  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
    Explanatory Statement before the Judge, that identified the Claimant by
    name and recorded that the test taken on 21 August  2012  was  invalid.
    It was clear from the evidence that where ETS invalidated a test result
    as in the present case, it was because there was evidence of proxy test-
    taking or impersonation.

6.    Notably,  while  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  accepted   the
    Secretary of State's evidence above, he was unable  to  accept  on  the
    balance of probabilities, that the Claimant had sat the TOEIC  test  on
    21 August 2012.  It is thus  contended  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge materially erred in law by failing to give adequate  reasons  for
    holding that a DER or DVR needed to be produced.   The  allegation  was
    one of a fraudulently obtained document,  not  a  false  one.   It  was
    therefore unclear as to what relevance the production of  such  reports
    would have.

7.   Thus the appeal came before me on 4 January 2016, when  my  first  task
    was to determine whether the determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge disclosed an error or errors on a point of law such as  may  have
    materially affected the outcome of the appeal.

8.   Mr Tufan in his submissions, relied on the  grounds  of  challenge  and
    pointed out that in the very last sentence of the Judge's determination
    and having previously made comprehensive  and  clear  adverse  findings
    open to him on the evidence, the Judge  proceeded  to  mistakenly  rely
    upon a misconceived matter  and  therefore  and  as  described  in  the
    grounds, materially erred in law.   Mr  Tufan  emphasised  the  Judge's
    adverse findings and invited me in such  circumstances,  to  allow  the
    Secretary of State's appeal.

9.   Ms Joshi accepted that regrettably, there had been  a  failure  on  the
    part of the Claimant, to lodge any cross-appeal challenging the Judge's
    adverse factual findings. Instead, she relied on the  premise  that  in
    this case it had "not been proved that the  document  was  fraudulently
    obtained but that it was a false representation".  She  further  relied
    on the decision in R (on the application of) Gazi v Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department (ETS - judicial review) [2015] UKUT 327 and  in
    particular where at paragraph 27 the Tribunal had inter  alia  this  to
    say:

         "The evidence must always prove to a  high  degree  of  probability
         deception had been used to gain  the  leave.   Whether  or  not  an
         admission of deception is  made  the  onus  -  as  always  in  such
         situations - is on the officer making the assertion  to  prove  his
         case."

10.  In that regard Ms Joshi  also  relied  upon  the  Home  Office  general
    grounds for refusal, Section 205 "Considering Entry Clearance" in which
    it was stated inter alia as follows:

         "When you refuse an application under paragraph 320(7A) or  320(7B)
         you must fill in either a Document Examination Report  (DER)  or  a
         Document Verification Report (DVR).  This is because you must  make
         sure there is a clear audit trail which shows how you have  reached
         your decision ..."

11.  It is however, apparent to me, that this was  not  a  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State based on either paragraphs 320(7A)  or  320(7B)  but
    upon paragraph 321A(2) of the Immigration Rules that indeed  the  Judge
    made clear reference to in his determination  and  which  states  inter
    alia, that under  paragraph  321A(2)  the  following  grounds  for  the
    cancellation of a person's leave to enter or remain which is  in  force
    on his arrival in or whilst he is outside United Kingdom apply:

         "2.  False  representations  were  made  or  false  documents  were
             submitted (whether or not  material  to  the  application  and
             whether or not to the holder's knowledge)  or  material  facts
             were not disclosed in relation to the application  for  leave;
             or in order to obtain documents from the Secretary of State or
             a third party required in support of the application."

12.  It follows therefore that the premise of Ms Joshi's  argument  in  that
    regard founders, because the guidance upon which she  relied  does  not
    apply in the circumstances of the present case.



Assessment

13.  There being no Rule 24 response served by the Claimant,  I  have  taken
    account of  the  skeleton  argument  that  was  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge as requested by Ms Joshi before me in  her  submissions,
    in which reference is indeed made to the Secretary of State's  guidance
    that I have dealt with above.  Further, the Claimant's grounds refer to
    the decision in Gazi that further emphasises that each case  is  to  be
    decided on its own facts.  It was further submitted that Gazi  held  at
    paragraph 10, that the Secretary of State ought to have provided a  DER
    but as I have earlier indicated (see paragraphs 11 and 12  above)  that
    does not apply in the particular circumstances of this appeal.

14.  Notably in his determination, the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  made  a
    series of comprehensive, clear and unequivocal adverse findings  as  to
    the Claimant's credibility over paragraphs 29 to 33 of his decision and
    it would be as well for the sake of completeness were I  to  set  those
    findings out below:

         "29. On the day following her last IELTS test, it is said that  the
             Appellant took her TOEIC test, her overall score for which was
             885.  This would be the  equivalent  to  C1  on  the  CEF  and
             therefore represents a very  significant  improvement  on  the
             test taken the day before.  In particular, having  scored  5.0
             on the speaking component  on  20/08/2012  where  the  highest
             possible score is 9.0, the following day the Appellant  scored
             200 marks out of a possible 200, thereby achieving 100%.

         30.  I find it unlikely on the balance of  probabilities  that  the
             Appellant would improve her performance to that extent on  the
             speaking test in one  day,  particularly  given  that  in  her
             previous run of three IELTS tests she had scored much the same
             mark each time.

         31.  I also found the Appellant less than credible when she said in
             her evidence that the interviewing  officer  only  photocopied
             one of her IELTS test results when she produced all of them to
             her.

         32.  Accordingly I find that on the balance of probabilities  I  am
             unable to accept the Appellant's evidence  that  she  sat  the
             TOEIC test on 21/08/2012.

         33.  Although the  Appellant  casts  doubt  upon  the  Respondent's
             evidence in relying on what they say is  an  invalid  test,  I
             find that on balance, having considered the  detailed  witness
             statements supplied by the Respondent as to the methodology of
             the testing which was then subject  to  human  verification  I
             prefer to accept  this  evidence  than  the  evidence  of  the
             Appellant for the reasons I have stated."

15.  Notwithstanding these  unequivocal  findings  such  that  it  would  be
    confidently expected that the Judge in consequence, would  dismiss  the
    appeal, he instead concluded at paragraph 34, that the appeal should be
    allowed to the limited extent that the matter be remitted back  to  the
    Secretary of State for  a  further  decision  to  be  made.   This  was
    explained as follows:

         "34. However the  Appellant's  representative  has  also  drawn  my
             attention to the Respondent's own  guidance  when  considering
             the general grounds for refusal.  Unless there is an admission
             from the Appellant that they used a false  document  then  the
             Respondent could complete either a document examination report
             (DER) or a document verification  report  (DVR).   Neither  of
             these documents have been produced and for that reason and  to
             that limited extent only I allow  the  appeal  and  remit  the
             matter to the Respondent for a further decision to be made."

16.  Regrettably the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  has  I  find,  misdirected
    herself in a very significant way.  She has criticised the Secretary of
    State for not following policies that are relevant in  the  case  of  a
    false document, for example a document that was forged,  but  there  is
    nothing said to  be  wrong  with  the  documents  in  this  case.   The
    Secretary of State's contention was that the document had been obtained
    fraudulently and a careful reading of the determination, shows that the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge was satisfied that this was indeed  the  case
    and she should thus have dismissed the  appeal.   However  she  allowed
    herself to be distracted by what I consider to have been an  irrelevant
    point.

17.  In the circumstances  I  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  and  in  accordance  with  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    sustainable findings of fact, I  substitute  a  decision  allowing  the
    Secretary of  State's  appeal  and  dismissing  the  Claimant's  appeal
    against the Secretary of State's decision.

Decision

18.  The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law and where it has been ordered that it  shall  not  stand
    and has been set aside.

19.  I re-make the decision in this  appeal  by  dismissing  the  Claimant's
    appeal against the Secretary of State's decision.

20.  No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 23 January 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein
