
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/35428/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 8 April 2015                      |On 21 April 2015                     |
|Prepared on 8 April 2015             |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                       KALUGALA CHARITH SHEHAN PEIRIS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Rogers, Solicitor, Immigration Advice Centre
Limited
For the Respondent:    Ms Rackstraw, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka who applied on 3 April 2014
         for a variation of his leave to remain in the UK on  the  basis  of
         his marriage to a British citizen, and the relationships formed  as
         a result with her, and her children.

      2. The application was refused on 21 August 2014 and in consequence  a
         decision to remove the Appellant to Sri Lanka was made by reference
         to s47 of the 2006 Act. The Appellant duly lodged an appeal against
         those immigration  decisions,  and  his  appeal  was  heard  on  18
         November 2014, and allowed under both the Immigration Rules, and on
         Article 8 grounds, in a decision promulgated on 4 December 2014  by
         First Tier Tribunal Judge Hillis.

      3. By a decision of First Tier Tribunal Judge Ransley dated 28 January
         2015 the First Tier Tribunal granted the Respondent  permission  to
         appeal on the basis it was arguable the  Judge  had  erred  in  his
         approach to the Article 8 appeal, and to paragraph EX.1.

      4. The Appellant filed a Rule 24 response to the grant  of  permission
         on 15 January 2015 in which she argued that there was  no  material
         error of law. Although the decision was not free  from  errors,  it
         could, and should be read as a whole, and showed that the Judge had
         been  satisfied  that  the  requirements  of  paragraph  EX.1  were
         satisfied. That being the case, the errors in his approach  to  the
         Article 8 appeal outside the Immigration Rules were immaterial.

      5. Neither party sought permission to introduce further evidence. Thus
         the matter comes before me.

    Paragraph EX.1

      6. The Respondent did not take issue with the validity of the marriage
         between the Appellant and the sponsor in either the refusal of  his
         application, or at the hearing of the appeal.

      7. The sponsor has three children, aged at the date of hearing 21, 18,
         and 6. The decision refers  to  only  the  youngest,  although  the
         application referred to both the 18 year old and  the  6  year  old
         because they were then both in full time education  and  living  as
         members of the household of the Appellant and the  sponsor.  Whilst
         the position of only the 6 year  old  would  be  relevant  under  a
         consideration of paragraph EX.1, the position of the elder children
         would be relevant to any consideration  of  the  Article  8  appeal
         outside the Immigration Rules.

      8. Before me the Respondent accepts that the decision should  be  read
         as including a  finding  that  the  Appellant  had  a  genuine  and
         subsisting parental relationship with the youngest child, a British
         citizen aged under 18. There is no explicit finding in those terms,
         but read as a whole that must be what the Judge's  conclusion  was.
         Moreover there was evidence that would allow him to  make  it,  and
         there is no assertion in the grounds  that  any  such  finding  was
         perverse or irrational. Boiled down, the Respondent's challenge  to
         this finding is no more than a disagreement with it.

      9. Equally the Respondent accepts that the decision must be read as to
         include a finding that it would not be reasonable  to  expect  this
         child to leave the UK at the date of the hearing, even  though  the
         Judge did not express himself in those terms. The Judge noted  that
         the child was the subject  of  disputed  Family  Court  proceedings
         between her parents, and that the sponsor was  currently  prevented
         from removing her from the UK. That situation  would  endure  until
         the Family Court proceedings were concluded. In the  circumstances,
         it is difficult to see how she  could  reasonably  be  expected  to
         leave the UK at the date of the hearing.  Ms  Rackstraw's  argument
         that she might be able to do so in the future was not  material  to
         the requirements of paragraph EX.1.

    Article 8

     10. In the circumstances the criticisms of  the  manner  in  which  the
         Judge addressed either the issues arising pursuant to s55, or,  the
         Article 8 appeals, simply fall away as immaterial.

    DECISION

         The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was  promulgated
         on 4 December 2014 did not involve the making of an error of law in
         the decision to allow the appeal under the Immigration  Rules  that
         requires that decision  to  be  set  aside  and  remade,  and  that
         decision is accordingly confirmed.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes
Dated 8 April 2015
