
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/35185/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 26 March 2015                              |On 31 March 2015              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF

                                   Between

                               NARAK MARDANYAN
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Cole of Counsel instructed by Sterling & Law
Associates LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding of the Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS


The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Armenia born on 12  April  1991.   On  13
    August 2012 he entered with leave as a student, expiring on 5  November
    2014.  On 23 January 2014 he married Saida Zukova, a  Latvian  national
    born on 20 September 1986  and  exercising  Treaty  rights  here  as  a
    worker.  She has two children by a previous marriage aged about  9  and
    4.

 2. On 12 March 2014 the Appellant lodged an application  for  a  Residence
    Card as the  husband  of  an  EEA  national  exercising  treaty  rights
    pursuant to Regulation 7 of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations  2006  as
    amended (the 2006 Regs).

The Decision and Appeal

 3. On 22 August 2014 the Respondent refused to issue a Residence  Card  to
    the Appellant for reasons given in a  letter  of  the  same  date  (the
    reasons letter).  The Respondent noted the Appellant's wife had stopped
    working in about July 2014 and was no longer  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    The Appellant had been unable to produce evidence that she had arranged
    to return to the United Kingdom and concluded she had not shown she was
    a qualified person within the  meaning  of  Reg.6  of  the  2006  Regs,
    exercising Treaty rights as a worker and refused the application.

 4. On 5 September 2014 the Appellant lodged notice of appeal under  Reg.26
    of the 2006 Regs and Section 82 of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 as amended (the  2002  Act).   The  grounds  of  appeal
    assert the Appellant's wife was  temporarily  absent  from  the  United
    Kingdom and continues to be resident in the United  Kingdom  exercising
    Treaty rights.  A claim was also asserted based on  Article  8  of  the
    European  Convention  that  the   decision   was   a   disproportionate
    interference with the Appellant's private and family life.

The First-tier Tribunal's Decision

 5. By a decision promulgated on 4 December 2014 Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal I F Taylor dismissed the appeal under the  2006  Regs  and  on
    human rights grounds.  He found the Appellant's wife had  not  produced
    sufficient evidence to discharge the burden of proof to show  that  she
    was exercising Treaty rights in the United Kingdom  as  a  worker.   He
    went  on  to  consider  the  claim  under  Article  8  and  found   the
    Respondent's decision did not interfere  with  the  Appellant's  rights
    protected under Article 8 because there was no apparent  impediment  to
    his wife returning to the United Kingdom with or without her  children.



 6. On  12  December  2014  the  Appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal,
    asserting that his wife had  returned  to  the  United  Kingdom  on  14
    September 2014 and resumed her employment and so continued to  exercise
    Treaty rights as a worker.  Additionally, the  Appellant  asserted  the
    Judge had erred in concluding his wife had not shown she was exercising
    Treaty rights because such a  finding  was  contrary  to  the  evidence
    before him. He had erred  in  expecting  to  see  visa  stamps  in  her
    passport evidencing her departure from and return to the United Kingdom
    and had erred in his  treatment  of  the  claim  under  Article  8,  in
    particular in relation to the  consideration  of  the  public  interest
    factors referred to in Sections 117A-117D of the 2002 Act.  The grounds
    also asserted that the decision was "Wednesbury" unreasonable.



The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 7. The Appellant attended with  his  wife.   After  I  had  explained  the
    purpose of the hearing and the procedure to be  adopted  in  connection
    with the part of the  hearing  relating  to  the  finding  whether  the
    Judge's decision contained a material error of law, Mr Cole handed up a
    skeleton argument which I considered.  I  adjourned  the  hearing  into
    Chambers to discuss certain procedural issues.

 8. On resuming the hearing, Mr Cole submitted that there was an  error  of
    law because the Judge's findings were against the  weight  of  evidence
    and that the Appellant's wife had been and was exercising Treaty rights
    in the United Kingdom at all material times.  He had a copy of her zero
    hours employment contract dated 18 November 2010  with  her  employer's
    letter confirming  her  continuing  employment,   as  well  as  a  bank
    statement  showing  a  salary  payment  on  30  September  2014.    The
    Appellant's bundle also included evidence from various friends  of  her
    return to London.  The Judge should have approached his  assessment  of
    the evidence on the basis of  the  wife's  continued  presence  in  the
    United Kingdom.

 9. The Judge was in error to have expected to have seen the exit or  entry
    stamps in the passport  of  the  Appellant's  wife.   She  was  an  EEA
    national and it was not usual for stamps to be put in an EEA national's
    passport whether on arrival or departure.  There was nothing to suggest
    the Appellant's wife had not been present in the United Kingdom at  the
    date of the Judge's decision and the finding she was not in the  United
    Kingdom was irrational.  The Judge had failed to look in the  round  at
    the evidence before him.

10. Turning to the Judge's treatment of the claim under Article 8, Mr  Cole
    submitted the Judge had erred in considering Sections 117A-117D of  the
    2002 Act because the decision under appeal was under the 2006 Regs  and
    consequently his findings in this regard were unsafe.

11. Further, the Judge had erred in  finding  the  Appellant's  residential
    status in the  United  Kingdom  was  precarious  at  the  date  of  his
    marriage.  He was able at the hearing before me to produce a  biometric
    card issued on 16 October 2003 which confirmed the Appellant had  leave
    at the date of his marriage and indeed subsequently.  The finding  that
    the Appellant's position in the United Kingdom was  precarious  at  the
    date of his marriage was against the evidence.  Mr Cole  submitted  the
    Upper Tribunal had a discretion where there was a residual  error  made
    by the First-tier Tribunal to correct that  error  and  the  weight  of
    evidence before the Judge was that the Appellant's wife had returned to
    the United  Kingdom  and  the  Judge's  finding  to  the  contrary  was
    irrational.

12. For  the  Respondent,  Mr  Wilding  submitted  the  Appellant  had  not
    established there was a material error of law in the Judge's  decision.
    Whether the Appellant's wife was present in the United Kingdom  at  the
    date of the consideration of the appeal or not was not the core  issue.
    The core issue was whether she had shown she was  a  qualifying  person
    within the meaning of Reg.6  of  the  2006  Regs.   The  Appellant  had
    asserted the Judge's decision was irrational which amounted to a charge
    of perversity.  For this to succeed the Appellant had to show  that  no
    other Judge would have come to a similar conclusion.

13. At paragraph 13 of the Judge's decision he had referred to the evidence
    and was entitled on the evidence before him to come to  the  conclusion
    that the Appellant had not shown his wife was exercising Treaty  rights
    in the United Kingdom as a worker.  There was nothing in this paragraph
    which pointed to an irrational or perverse conclusion.

14. The evidence of various friends referred to  in  paragraph  13  of  the
    decision  did  not  greatly  assist  the  Appellant.   There   was   no
    explanation in the letters to show on what basis the writers  knew  the
    Appellant's wife was in the United Kingdom and  exercising  her  Treaty
    rights as a worker.

15. Even if the point about the absence of stamps in the  passport  of  the
    Appellant's wife was not well taken by the Judge it was  not  material.
    The issue before him which he correctly identified was whether she  was
    exercising Treaty rights as a worker.

16. In the light of the report before the Judge from an Immigration Officer
    on a visit to the Appellant's home on 20  August  2014  the  Judge  had
    reasons to reject the Appellant's claim that his wife had only left the
    country for a month.  On the  information  before  him  the  Judge  was
    entitled to reach that conclusion and he had been entitled to take into
    account the matters referred to in the last sentence of paragraph 40 of
    his decision.

17. The conclusions the Judge reached at paragraph 15 of his decision  were
    adequately supported by evidence and sufficiently reasoned. They  could
    not in the remotest sense be considered to be irrational or perverse.

18. Turning to the Judge's treatment of the Appellant's claim under Article
    8 of the European  Convention,  Mr  Wilding  submitted  the  Judge  had
    considered the Article 8 claim on the  basis  that  the  Appellant  had
    failed to show he was entitled to a Residence Card by way of  reference
    to Reg.7 of the 2006 Regs.  Consequently there was no error  made  when
    the Judge referred to Sections 117A-117D of the 2002  Act.   There  had
    been no challenge by the Appellant to the Judge's findings of  fact  at
    paragraph 17 of his decision and the matter of Sections  117A-117D  was
    addressed at paragraph 18 of the decision.   However  the  findings  in
    paragraph 17 had not been challenged which  in  the  event  meant  that
    paragraph 18 mentioning the Appellant had not shown  that  he  had  had
    status in the United Kingdom when he married had little relevance.

19. The Respondent had not required the Appellant to make a statement under
    Section 120 of the 2002 Act and had not made or  proposed  any  removal
    directions  in  the  notice  of  decision  under  appeal.    In   those
    circumstances it was arguable there  was  no  need  for  the  Judge  to
    consider the claim under Article 8.  The skeleton argument submitted to
    the First-tier Tribunal gave little substantive details of  the  nature
    of the Appellant's private and family life in the United Kingdom.   The
    interference to his private and family  life  caused  by  the  decision
    which was to refuse to  issue  a  Residence  Card  was  not  sufficient
    interference to engage the United Kingdom's obligations under Article 8
    of the European  Convention.   He  repeated  that  the  Respondent  had
    neither made nor  proposed  any  directions  for  the  removal  of  the
    Appellant.  In such circumstances  the  Appellant's  challenge  to  the
    Judge's treatment of Sections 117A-117D of the 2002 Act was  of  little
    weight.  On the other hand, if the Appellant fell outside the scope  of
    the 2006 Regs then Sections 117A-117D would be relevant.

20. The Judge had gone on to conduct an assessment of  the  proportionality
    of the Respondent's decision at paragraph 19 of his decision and on the
    basis of his findings was fully entitled to find that if there  was  an
    interference  which  engaged  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  such
    interference  would  be  proportionate  to  a  legitimate  public   end
    identified in Article  8(2)  of  the  European  Convention.   This  was
    particularly so, as appeared to be  the  case,  because  the  Appellant
    without  leaving  the  United  Kingdom  could  easily  make  a  further
    application under the 2006 Regs on the same basis  as  leading  to  the
    decision presently under appeal.  In short, there was no material error
    of law in the Judge's decision which should stand.

Findings and Consideration

21. The Appellant requested his appeal be determined without a  hearing  on
    the papers in the Tribunal file.  He was therefore reliant on  all  the
    relevant information being in adequate documentary form and before  the
    Judge.

22. At paragraph 11 of his decision the Judge identified the issue  he  had
    to decide, whether the Appellant's wife was exercising Treaty rights as
    a worker.  In paragraph 12 and in the first half  of  paragraph  13  he
    reviewed the evidence and was entitled to come  to  his  conclusion  at
    paragraph 15 that she had not shown she was exercising Treaty rights.

23. The Judge erred in expecting the passport of the  Appellant's  wife  to
    show stamps evidencing her departure and return. Nevertheless  on  rest
    of the evidence before him to which he referred in the second  half  of
    paragraph 13 and paragraph 14 was entitled to come  to  the  conclusion
    that it had not been shown that she was in the  United  Kingdom.   That
    she was in the United Kingdom is immaterial to the finding that it  had
    not been shown she was exercising Treaty rights for  reasons  given  in
    paragraph 12 and the first half of paragraph 13.  Even if  she  was  in
    the United Kingdom it had still not been shown that she was  exercising
    Treaty rights.

24. Mr Cole suggested the Judge's findings in paragraph 15 were  irrational
    but I do not consider that on the evidence before the Judge he came  to
    a conclusion which no other reasonable Judge would  have  reached:  see
    for instance MN (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ.1601.  The Appellant
    has  therefore  not  made  out   the   complaint   of   perversity   or
    irrationality.

25. At paragraphs 17 and 18 the Judge considered the claim under Article  8
    of the European Convention.  As already mentioned even if  it  was  not
    the fact that the Appellant's wife was out of the United Kingdom at the
    time it had still not been shown that she was exercising Treaty  rights
    and accordingly that she had any right under the Citizens Directive  to
    be in the United Kingdom other than as a visitor.  With this  in  mind,
    the claim under Article 8 had to fail because  there  was  no  evidence
    before the Judge to show the decision under appeal would result  in  an
    interference to the private and family life of the  Appellant  and  his
    family which would be  of  sufficient  gravity  to  engage  the  United
    Kingdom's obligations to respect the private and  family  life  of  the
    Appellant and his family.  Consequently there was no need for the Judge
    to consider, although he did, the factors identified in Sections  117A-
    117D of the 2002 Act.  That part of  his  decision  was  therefore  not
    germane to the issues before him and so an error of law,  if  there  is
    one, would not be relevant or material.

26. I conclude the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  does  not  contain  any
    material error of law such that it should be set aside and re-made.

Anonymity

27.  There was no request for an anonymity direction and  having  heard  the
appeal consider none is required.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The First-tier Tribunal's decision did not contain an error of law  and
    shall stand.

    No anonymity direction is made.


Signed/Official  Crest                                            Date   31.
iii. 2015




Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal







