


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
IA/36650/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|on 14 October 2015                     |On 18 November 2015            |
|                                       |                               |
|                                       |                               |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA

                                   Between

                         MR SAMIR HUSSAIN CHOWDHURY
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY Of STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr A Chowdhury of Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr A Holmes, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS



1. The appellant, who is a national of  Bangladesh  4  March  1971  appealed
   against the decision of the respondent dated 11 August 2014 to remove him
   from the United Kingdom. The appellant appealed, in  country,  under  the
   Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 annual issue  was  raised  in
   respect of his right to appeal in country.


2. First-tier Tribunal Judge RBL prior dismissed the appellant's appeal  "on
   human rights grounds".


3. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Landes  on
   7 August 2015 stating that it was arguable that the Judge made a material
   error of law for his failure to  give  adequate  reasoning  and  to  make
   critical findings of fact.


   The First-Tier Tribunal Judges findings


4. The Judge made the following findings which I summarise. The  appellant's
   case was found in the grounds of appeal and generic terms, the  appellant
   statement dated 20 April 2015 and four letters of support by relatives or
   friends stating that the appellant to their knowledge  had  been  in  the
   United Kingdom since 2002 or 2003. It was the appellant's  case  that  he
   had learned to speak English and became accustomed  to  the  culture  and
   life in the United Kingdom. He claims that he cannot return to Bangladesh
   where he has very little connections because his parents  have  died.  He
   has no family left in Bangladesh. He would find it very difficult to just
   to life in Bangladesh having lived in the United Kingdom for 13 years. He
   would find it difficult to find  a  job  and  maintain  himself  in  that
   country. The appellant submitted that there had been no challenge  raised
   by the appellant's claim to have entered the United Kingdom on  15  March
   2002 and by residing in the United Kingdom for 13  years,  the  appellant
   had come close to meeting the  previous  residence  requirements  of  the
   immigration rules which set the bar at 14  years.  The  appellant  claims
   that he has strong connections with the United Kingdom and there was  the
   exceptional circumstance of his length of residence in  the  country  and
   connection with his brother's  family  in  the  United  Kingdom.  It  was
   accepted by the appellant that there is a lack of documentary evidence as
   to the appellant's private life in the United Kingdom but this was to  be
   explained by his lack of immigration status in the country.


5. The respondent's case  was  set  out  in  the  refusal  letter  dated  12
   November 2007. Paragraph 13 of the reasons for refusal letter referred to
   paragraph 395C  of  the  immigration  rules  and  the  factors  that  the
   paragraph required he considered  when  arriving  at  a  decision  as  to
   whether to remove an offender under section 10  of  the  immigration  and
   Asylum act 1999. The refusal letter states that the appellant is aged  36
   and claims to have lived in the United Kingdom for five years  but  there
   is no evidence of this, as an  illegal  entrant,  none  of  it  has  been
   accrued with leave to  enter.  It  is  not  considered  that  either  the
   appellant's age or length of residence provide grounds for  not  removing
   the appellant from the United Kingdom. It is not considered  that  either
   his ties to the United Kingdom or domestic circumstances are sufficiently
   compelling to justify allowing him to  remain  here.  The  appellant  has
   given no indication that he has a family in the  United  Kingdom  or  any
   other particular domestic circumstances which makes his case exceptional.
   The extent of his claim to have ties with  the  United  Kingdom  is  that
   there is a large Bangladeshi community here and that he has been employed
   in various Indian restaurants since his  arrival.  However  as  mentioned
   above the appellant has never been granted any leave omitting him to take
   on employment in the United Kingdom.  The  existence  of  an  established
   Bangladesh community in the United Kingdom is not a compelling reason for
   the appellant to be awarded a grant of discretionary leave not  least  as
   he has not provided any evidence that he has ties to this community.  The
   appellant has not met the requirements of the  length  of  residence  for
   private life set out in paragraph 276 ADE of the immigration rules. Under
   section 117 (B) of the 2000 and to act, little weight should be  attached
   to the appellant's private life in the United Kingdom since he  had  been
   in this country illegally. The appellant has worked as an electrician  in
   Bangladesh, speaks the language of that country and has relatives there.


6.  The  Judge  stated  at  paragraph  12  "the  appellant's  evidence   was
   ambivalent, if not contradictory, as to whether or not  he  had  received
   the refusal letter of 12 November 2007 or was at  least  aware  that  his
   human rights application had been refused. While the appellant  testified
   that he had contacted his solicitors in 2011 and 2012  to  learn  of  the
   outcome of this application-and was informed by them that they would  let
   him know as soon as they heard in response to the  application-there  was
   no evidence that  the  appellant  had  made  any  attempt  to  chase  the
   respondent for a decision. I observed that it was part of the appellant's
   incoherent and unsatisfactory testimony that he was informed by a  friend
   who had read a letter-the appellant not  reading  English-from  the  Home
   Office that the Home Office  had  prohibited  him  from  leaving  London.
   Despite that prohibition it was the appellant's  testimony  that  he  had
   moved  from  London,  variously  to  Gloucester  and  the  Lake  District
   believing that those parts of the country were within London.


7. The appellant entered the United Kingdom, on his own  evidence  13  years
   ago when he was aged 31 and thus he has spent the majority of his life in
   Bangladesh where he referred to the presence of individuals described  by
   him as relatives of his  recently  deceased  sister.  The  appellant  has
   worked as a casual electrician in  Bangladesh.  If  the  appellant  truly
   believe that had been no decision on his application of 12 June 2007 then
   I find that he condoned or colluded with the perceived delay indecision.


8. While the appellant claimed to speak English  in  his  adopted  statement
   nonetheless, he just to have a Bengali interpreter at the hearing.  There
   is very limited evidence before me as to the depth  and  quality  of  the
   appellant's private life in the country. The private life conducted  when
   the appellant had  no  status  in  the  country.  Having  regard  to  the
   statutory considerations set out in section 117 (B) of the  2000  and  to
   act, I have no hesitation in concluding that the removal of the appellant
   from the United Kingdom would not be a disproportionate interference with
   his  private  life.  There  are  no  exceptional  circumstances  in   the
   appellant's case any falls outside the ambit of  the  immigration  rules,
   governing private life considerations.


   Appellant's grounds of appeal

9. The appellants' grounds of appeal which are written  by  hand  state  the
   following, which I summarise. The decision of the judge is flawed in that
   he has failed to make critical findings of fact which were  necessary  to
   reach a proper and sound judgement on the  strength  of  the  appellant's
   private life in the United Kingdom. This was that he has been  living  in
   the United Kingdom since 2002, a fact which has been unchallenged by  the
   Home Office. The judge was invited to make a finding in this  respect  by
   the appellant's representative but chose not to do so. It  is  imperative
   for the judge to have made clear findings of fact as to the length of the
   appellant's residence in the United Kingdom  before  pronouncing  on  the
   issue of private life and proportionality.


10. The decision of the  judge  is  insufficiently  reasoned  and  feels  to
   explain how the judge applied article 8 principles as stated in paragraph
   3 to the facts of the case. The judge erred in making adverse  inferences
   against the appellant at paragraph  15  for  choosing  to  give  evidence
   through an interpreter. The appellant is able to speak English however he
   felt that his command of the language may not be up to the  standards  of
   the court and thus choose to give evidence through an  interpreter.  This
   was not taken into account.


11. MM and others [2014] EWCA Civ 985 and MF Nigeria [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1192
   and  stated  at  paragraph  16   of   his   determination   that   recent
   clarifications given by the Court of Appeal including the High Court show
   that it can properly be said that  the  Immigration  Rules  constitute  a
   complete code which deals with a person's Convention rights and  it  will
   take something exceptional or very compelling to outweigh  the  terms  of
   the Immigration Rules. He posed the  question  that  if  the  Immigration
   Rules do constitute such a complete code than the principles set  out  in
   Razgar and Huang must never be considered. Exceptionality is not  a  test
   which must be applied in individual circumstances.



Submissions of the Parties at the Hearing

12. Mr Chowdhury on behalf of the appellant made the  following  submissions
   which I summarise. The Judge give insufficient reasons and failed to make
   findings of fact. The appellant has been in this country since  2002  and
   has long residence. He has a connection with  his  brother's  family  and
   therefore family life. Although paragraph 7 alludes to this but fails  to
   make findings of fact. At paragraph 3 the judge is not clear how  he  has
   determined these issues.


13. Mr Holmes on behalf of the respondent submitted the following. There  is
   no error of law which is material in the determination.  The  appellant's
   brother and his wife did not attend the  hearing.  The  judge  said  that
   there was limited evidence of private life which is  appropriate  because
   there was limited evidence. The appellant could not meet the  immigration
   rules and there was no adequate evidence of any compelling circumstances.
   The judge was entitled to find that the appellant by using an interpreter
   at the hearing did not speak English. There is no other judge which would
   make a different decision in this case.


   Findings on Error of Law


14. I have considered the determination with all due care to  see  if  there
   is a material error of law in the determination. I cannot find any. There
   is no criticism on the Judge's finding that the appellant  did  not  meet
   the requirements of the Immigration Rules. Therefore, it will only be  in
   exceptional circumstances that the appellant  will  succeed  pursuant  to
   Article 8 when he cannot meet the requirements of the Immigration  Rules.
   The Judge set out both the appellant's and the respondent's case in  some
   detail in his determination. He was fully apprised of all the  facts  and
   there is no accusation that he has misunderstood the evidence.


15. The Judge stated in his determination  that  there  are  no  exceptional
   circumstances in the appellant's case which he was entitled to find.  The
   Judge at paragraph 13 stated that  the  appellant  on  his  own  evidence
   entered the United Kingdom 13 years ago when he was aged  31.  The  Judge
   said that that means that the appellant has spent  the  majority  of  his
   private life in Bangladesh and he referred to the presence of individuals
   described by the appellant as relatives of  was  very  recently  deceased
   sister. This demonstrated to the Judge that the appellant  has  relatives
   in Bangladesh. The Judge found that the  appellant  worked  as  a  casual
   electrician in Bangladesh found  that  the  appellant  will  be  able  to
   replicate his private life in Bangladesh  by  working  in  that  country.
   There is no perversity in these findings.


16. The grounds of appeal did not state what circumstances of the  appellant
   that the Judge did not take into account and thereby fell  into  material
   error. The Judge stated at paragraph 16 that the appellant's evidence  as
   to his private life in this country was  limited  as  to  its  depth  and
   quality. There is still no evidence of what the appellant's private  life
   consists of other than his work in this country and his brother  and  his
   children. The appellant's brother did not  attend  the  hearing  to  give
   evidence in support of the appellant.


17. The Judge is only  required  make  a  decision  based  on  the  evidence
   provided by the appellant as the burden of proof is upon the appellant on
   a balance of probabilities. The Judge made a  decision  on  the  evidence
   before him.


18. The Judge clearly stated at paragraph 16 that there are  no  exceptional
   circumstances in the appellant's case and he falls outside the  ambit  of
   the Immigration Rules  governing  private  life  considerations.  On  the
   evidence before the judge this was a sustainable finding.


19. The Judge was entitled to find that the appellant having given his  oral
   evidence through an interpreter, does not speak English. He obviously did
   not accept the appellant's evidence that although he knows English he  is
   more comfortable speaking in his own language. Nevertheless, he  provided
   no credible evidence to the Judge that he speaks English to the  required
   standard. There is no error of law  in  the  Judge's  findings  that  the
   appellant does not speak English.


20. The Judge took into account s117B of the 2002 Act and  correctly  stated
   that little weight should be attached to the appellant's private life  in
   the United Kingdom as he had been in this country  illegally.  The  Judge
   specifically stated that the "appellant had not sought to rely  upon  any
   family life in the United Kingdom, for example his relationship with  his
   brother's children".


21. The point made by the respondent was that the brother and his  wife  did
   not attend the hearing to give evidence. As such, there was  no  evidence
   before the Judge as to the appellant's private life with his brother  all
   his brother's children. Even if there was evidence that the appellant has
   some private life with his brother's children, this does  not  trump  the
   respondent's interest in the orderly immigration control.


22. The appellant claims that he has come very close to meeting the 14  year
   rule of the previous Immigration Rules. The appellant's  application  was
   before 28 July 2014 when section 19 of the Immigration Act  2014  brought
   into force and therefore the old rules apply to him. Therefore the  Judge
   was entitled to find that the appellant has not met the  requirements  of
   the Immigration Rules and that cannot be an error of law.


23. Article 8 is not meant to take into account  the  near  miss  principle.
   The appellant meets the requirements of the Immigration Rules or he  does
   not. The fact that he nearly met the old Immigration Rules  does  not  in
   any way assist the appellant in respect of his Article 8 claim. The Judge
   was mindful that the appellant has been in this  country  for  nearly  13
   years and took that into account in his proportionality exercise.


24. I find that there is no material error of law in the  determination  and
   I uphold it.


Decision

Appeal dismissed


Signed


Mrs S Chana
Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge                                          15th
    day of November 2015










