
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/36242/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 8th August  2014                             |On 08th Aug 2014           |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN

                                   Between

                             ms fazilet karamese
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Blundell (instructed by Kilic & Kilic
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    Appellant with regard to a determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Cary) promulgated on 23rd May 2014.

 2. The Appellant, a Turkish national, had applied for leave to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom as the wife of Mr Veyis Poyraz, a British citizen of
    Turkish origin.

 3. Being unable to meet the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules,  the
    appeal was on the basis of Article 8 only  and  was  dismissed  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it was arguable that
    the First-tier Tribunal had given insufficient reasons  for  coming  to
    the conclusion it did in relation to Article 8; in particular making no
    findings as to whether the Appellant's husband would return  to  Turkey
    with her or the likely effect on the Appellant if  she  had  to  return
    given her past medical history. My first task is to decide whether  the
    First-tier Tribunal made an error of law and if so whether and to  what
    extent its determination should be set aside.

 5. The grounds upon which permission to appeal was sought run across seven
    pages and 13 paragraphs although before me Mr Blundell relied upon only
    one ground and that was at paragraph 10 of the grounds. It is  asserted
    that the judge erred about information not being available in  relation
    to the Children Act proceedings regarding the  Sponsor's  son  Eren.  A
    letter which the Judge  referred  to  as  being  missing  was  in  fact
    included at page 34 of the bundle. It was argued by  Mr  Blundell  that
    had that error not been made  a  different  conclusion  may  have  been
    reached.

 6. I disagree. Mr Blundell accepted that the error arose through no  fault
    of the Judge as in fact the  representative  confirmed  [36]  that  the
    letter was not available and the Judge proceeded  on  that  basis.  The
    letter in fact was available and contained in the  Appellant's  bundle.
    However, while it was clearly a mistake of fact and thus an  error  for
    the Judge to say evidence was not available when  it  was,  so  far  as
    materiality is concerned it is necessary to refer to the evidence as  a
    whole and the content of the letter in particular.

 7. The Sponsor's case as set out at paragraph 52 was that he had  a  child
    from his previous relationship who is now aged four in respect of  whom
    he was trying to gain a contact order through the courts. He  had  said
    that a letter from his solicitors  was  enclosed  which  provided  more
    detail.

 8. The Sponsor's oral evidence is set out at paragraph 27 and he told  the
    Judge that he had applied for contact with his son.  He  was  currently
    waiting for a contact date  to  be  arranged.  He  would  be  initially
    allowed to see his child for a  few  hours  and  then  the  time  would
    increase in stages. The first visits were likely to  be  at  a  contact
    centre. He said that a contact order was made about four months  before
    the hearing and that he had still not been given a date for  his  first
    contact visit. He was also waiting for a final  hearing.  He  told  the
    Judge that a court welfare officer (who I take to be a Cafcass officer)
    had intervened and a report had  been  prepared.  His  former  wife  no
    longer opposed contact although  she  wanted  the  arrangements  to  be
    official and secure. He  confirmed  that  he  was  represented  in  the
    contact proceedings by the same solicitors who  represent  him  in  the
    immigration proceedings.

 9. It is also apparent from paragraph 20 of  the  determination  that  the
    Sponsor had last seen the child concerned when he was aged four  months
    and he was, by the date of the hearing, four years old.

10. If the judge had had sight of the letter to which  I  was  referred  he
    would have seen that it said:-

         "We write to confirm we are instructed by the above named client in
         relation to his child contact matter.

         We hereby confirm that our client applied to the  Family  Court  in
         Brighton in 2012 for a contact order, these proceedings are ongoing
         and no final hearing has yet been listed. We  anticipate  that  the
         matter will conclude in 6 to 12 months.

         We further confirm that since June  2013  the  court  has  made  an
         indirect contact order granting our client permission to  send  his
         son monthly letter/card and small gifts. We confirm that our client
         has committed to this and has been sending monthly letter.

         We are currently  waiting  for  the  court  to  list  our  client's
         application for further hearing  at  which  point  the  court  will
         decide whether further contact should be ordered, including  direct
         contact with his son."

11. That letter in fact contradicts the evidence given by the  Sponsor.  It
    does not assist his case. It certainly does not  confirm  his  evidence
    that he is about to have direct contact; that  seemingly  is  dependent
    upon a further hearing not yet listed. It also makes clear that despite
    proceedings having commenced in  2012,  by  May  of  2014  he  had  not
    progressed beyond indirect contact.

12. The Judge made reference at paragraphs 53 and 54 to a lack of  evidence
    regarding  the  contact  proceedings  and  the  discrepancies  in  what
    evidence there was. The solicitor's letter indeed does not support  the
    Sponsor's evidence indicating that he still has not achieved contact on
    a face-to-face basis despite lengthy proceedings. It  would  have  been
    open to the representatives to seek the court's consent to disclose any
    Cafcass report that had been  obtained,  if  indeed  it  supported  the
    Sponsor's case.

13. On the basis of  the  evidence  before  him  therefore  the  Judge  was
    entitled to find, as he did at paragraph 51, that there is no  evidence
    indicating that the child's best  interests  required  the  Sponsor  to
    remain in the UK. The Judge was also entitled to find,  as  he  did  at
    paragraph 53, that as a British citizen the Sponsor would  be  entitled
    to return to the United Kingdom to  pursue  any  court  proceedings  or
    indeed to exercise contact if he chose to relocate to Turkey  with  the
    Appellant.

14. This claim was always doomed to failure on Article 8 grounds and indeed
    I am surprised that permission to appeal was granted. The background to
    the case is that the Appellant arrived in the UK only in  January  2013
    with leave to enter as a visitor valid until July  2013.  She  and  the
    Sponsor married the day after her leave expired  and  she  then  sought
    leave to remain as a spouse.

15. She could never meet the requirements of the Rules for leave to  remain
    as a spouse as the Rules do not permit such  leave  when  an  applicant
    entered as a visitor. This therefore is  not  a  case  where  Chikwamba
    [2008] UKHL40 could be argued.  There  was  no  evidence  that  it  was
    unreasonable for her husband who is of Turkish origin to accompany  her
    to Turkey. Despite the fact that he had previously been granted  asylum
    as being at risk of persecution in Turkey, he had  travelled  there  on
    several occasions without difficulty and therefore there was  no  issue
    as to his returning there with her  either  on  a  permanent  basis  or
    temporarily while she pursues an application for leave to enter the  UK
    as a spouse.

16. The Judge in the First-tier Tribunal  gave  detailed  reasons  for  his
    conclusions from paragraph 47 to 55 of the  determination  and  I  find
    that there is no error of law that could have made  any  difference  to
    the outcome. There is no prospect of another Judge reaching a different
    conclusion on this matter notwithstanding the error as to the existence
    of the solicitor's letter.

17. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 8th August 2014







Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
