
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Ia/36557/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Oral determination given following   |On 23 September 2015                 |
|hearing on 20 August 2015            |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                             IMMIGRATION OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                FORHAD MINAR
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr I Hossain, Solicitor, of Liberty Legal Solicitors



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Immigration  Officer  against  a  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Bird who allowed Mr  Minar's  appeal  against
    his decision not to grant him leave to enter  the  United  Kingdom  and
    cancelling his leave.  For ease of reference I  shall  throughout  this
    determination refer to the Immigration Officer  who  was  the  original
    respondent as "the Immigration Officer" and to Mr  Minar  who  was  the
    original appellant, as "the claimant".

 2. The claimant is a national of Bangladesh who  had  been  granted  entry
    clearance as a student pursuant to  which  he  first  arrived  in  this
    country in 2011.  Subsequently he was granted further leave  to  remain
    and part of the evidence which he had had  to  submit  was  an  English
    language test certificate (ETS) for which he claimed to have undertaken
    a test at an ETS testing centre in Portsmouth.   Following  a  Panorama
    programme in which fraud was detected by many people  undertaking  this
    test the Home Office conducted tests on ETS service centres in  general
    and following these tests a  number  amounting  to  many  thousands  of
    people were alleged to have taken the test by using a  proxy.  That  is
    that it is said that they did not take the test  themselves  but  other
    people pretending to be them took the test on their behalf. As  I  have
    said, there are many thousands of cases where this is what is  asserted
    by the Home Office or  in  this  case  for  reasons  I  have  given  an
    Immigration Officer.

 3. In all of these  cases  generic  evidence  has  been  given  which  has
    consisted of witness statements given by  two  witnesses  of  the  Home
    Office, Mr Millington and Miss Rebecca Collins, which set out  how  the
    forensic tests were conducted and the basis upon which the Home  Office
    is able to say that in the particular cases in question it is much more
    likely than not that the tests relied on were among the ones which were
    fraudulent.

 4. In a general case where an application for leave has  been  refused  in
    this country an appellant will have an out of country right  of  appeal
    and there are many decisions affirming that the Home Office's  position
    in refusing such an appellant an in country right of appeal is  lawful.
    What Parliament has decreed in these cases is that an  out  of  country
    right of appeal is an adequate remedy and the challenge to the decision
    will not give rise to an in-country right of  appeal.   In  this  case,
    however, the decision was taken to refuse the claimant leave  to  enter
    and to cancel his leave when he tried to come back to the  country  and
    that decision does carry an in country right of appeal which is why the
    claimant in this case was able to appeal this  decision  without  first
    leaving the country.

 5. He appealed the decision and his appeal  was  heard  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Bird sitting at Taylor House on 31 March 2015 and  in  a
    decision promulgated on 24 April 2015 Judge Bird allowed his appeal.

 6. The law with regard to the way in which the evidence of the Home Office
    (or for technical reasons in this case the Immigration Officer)  should
    be viewed by Tribunals has been clarified  by  the  President  of  this
    Tribunal Mr Justice McCloskey in the judicial review case of R (on  the
    application of Gazi) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  (ETS
    - judicial review) IJR  [2015]  UKUT  00327  and  the  finding  can  be
    summarised very briefly.

 7. Effectively so far as this Tribunal is concerned Mr  Justice  McCloskey
    found that the evidence produced on behalf of the Home Office in  these
    cases is capable of establishing to the requisite degree of proof  that
    a test was taken fraudulently but this test is not infallible and it is
    open to a Tribunal in any case considering the specific facts  of  that
    case to decide that that  particular  case  was  an  exception  to  the
    general rule that such findings should  be  upheld.   In  other  words,
    although the generic evidence  produced  was  sufficient  to  establish
    without contrary evidence that the  English  language  certificate  had
    been fraudulently obtained, it was open to a Tribunal in any individual
    case on the basis of findings on specific evidence adduced to say  that
    that particular case was an exception to the general rule.

 8. In this case Judge Bird allowed the claimant's appeal but did so not on
    the basis that she was persuaded by the evidence adduced on  behalf  of
    the claimant that this was  an  exception  to  the  general  rule,  but
    because she considered that the generic evidence adduced on  behalf  of
    the Immigration Officer (rather than the Home  Office  which  it  would
    have been had this been a refusal of leave to remain) was  insufficient
    to satisfy the burden of proof which the Immigration Officer had.

 9. The basis of the Immigration Officer's appeal is that  that  is  not  a
    basis upon which in light of the decision  of  the  President  of  this
    Tribunal in Gazi, it was properly open to the judge so to find.

10. In my judgement this submission is clearly correct.  It would certainly
    have been open to the judge had she chosen to explain her  decision  in
    this way, to have found  that  she  was  persuaded  by  the  claimant's
    evidence (and it appears the claimant gave his evidence in English  and
    there were no problems with translation) that his was an  exception  to
    the general rule, but she did not do so.

11. Accordingly to the extent that she failed to do so she  has  failed  to
    give sustainable reasons to justify the decision she made.

12. In these circumstances this decision must be set aside as containing  a
    material error of law and I shall do so.

13. Both Mr Hossain on behalf of the claimant and Mr Wilding on  behalf  of
    the Immigration Officer submitted that the appropriate course I  should
    follow would be to remit this case back to the First-tier  Tribunal  in
    order for the claimant's case to  be  determined  in  a  fresh  hearing
    before a judge other than Judge Bird.  The basis on which it is said  I
    should do so is that the judge's failure to give proper reasons for her
    decision was such that it cannot be said that this claimant has  had  a
    fair hearing.  I agree with these submissions and will so order.

Notice of Decision

I set aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  as  containing  a
material error of law.

I order that this appeal be remitted for rehearing at Taylor  House  by  any
judge other than Judge Bird.


Signed:

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig      Date: 18 September 2015
