
IAC-PE-SW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/36840/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5th May 2015                      |On 18th May 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAIRD


                                   Between

                                  HAU ZHANG
                       (anonymity directiON NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Islam
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against  the  determination
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Dickinson  issued  on  28th  January  2015
    allowing under the Immigration Rules the  Appellant's  appeal   against
    the decision of the Respondent made on 10th September  2014  to  cancel
    the Appellant's leave under the Immigration Act 1971 and paragraph 321A
    of the Immigration Rules.  Refusal was on the basis that the Respondent
    believed that the Appellant had fraudulently obtained his  ETS  English
    language certificate submitted as part of his previous application  for
    leave to enter/remain in the United  Kingdom  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student.

 2. It is submitted in the grounds seeking permission that:

      i) Judge Dickinson failed entirely to give adequate  reasons  for  his
         material finding that the Appellant had not committed  any  act  of
         deception and that he had on 1st and 3rd May 2013  sat  and  passed
         the TOEIC English language examinations administered by ETS.

     ii) In reaching this conclusion he had  relied  on  findings  that  are
         materially flawed and unsustainable, i.e.:

          a) At paragraph 14 that the Appellant had been consistent in  his
             account and is thus credible.  The evidence of  the  Appellant
             was entirely uncorroborated so only very limited weight  could
             be attached to it.  He had taken into account his view that if
             the Appellant had not participated  in  the  exam  process  he
             would not have been able to account for the details  which  he
             recalled to the authorities.

          b) His finding that there was no evidence before him to  discount
             the version of the examination process  as  described  by  the
             Appellant  was  clearly  factually   incorrect   because   the
             Secretary of State had provided  documentation  purporting  to
             demonstrate that the Appellant  did  not  attend  the  English
             language test as claimed.

          c) At paragraph 17 the Judge found that the evidence  in  support
             of  the  deception  allegation  is  generic  and  provides  no
             evidence relating to the Appellant's  personal  circumstances.
             It is submitted that  this  is  incorrect.   As  well  as  the
             witness statements produced the Secretary of State provided an
             ETS Lookup Tool Document which gave details of this  Appellant
             and  showed  that  his  English   language   test   had   been
             invalidated.

          d) At paragraph 18 the Judge said that it was unclear to  him  as
             to the  precise  reason  as  to  why  the  Appellant  had  his
             certificate invalidated by ETS as there is no  elaboration  on
             this issue.   This  finding  is  factually  incorrect  as  the
             witness statements of Peter  Millington  and  Rebecca  Collins
             detail the  process  and  procedures  which  resulted  in  the
             English language test scores being invalidated.

          e) At paragraph 20 the Judge had found himself  to  be  satisfied
             that there remains a possibility that  invalidation  had  been
             due to an irregularity at the particular testing  centre  used
             rather than any  specific  evidence  of  dishonesty  but  this
             failed  to  take  account  of  Peter  Millington's  subsequent
             statement that in these cases the individual would usually  be
             invited to take a free re-test and there is nothing to suggest
             that the Appellant was offered any such test.   He  failed  to
             take  this  into  account  including  the  fact   that   Peter
             Millington  had  also  said  that  these  cases  are   clearly
             distinguished by ETS in its spreadsheets provided to the  Home
             Office.

          f) The finding at paragraph 51 that  the  Appellant  successfully
             completed a diploma in business law and  social  sciences  and
             that that in itself demonstrates a sound grounding in  English
             has little bearing on  the  Appellant's  ability  to  sit  and
             English test in May 2013 and whether a proxy was used for  the
             sitting.

          g) At paragraph 22 the finding that the Appellant's current level
             of English language is inconsistent  with  the  allegation  of
             deception is irrelevant to a test done in May 2013.

My findings on error of law

 3. I have given careful consideration to the  above  Grounds  and  to  the
    submissions of the representatives. I note that the Tribunal has  dealt
    with many of these cases in which the same general and generic evidence
    is provided by the Respondent.

 4. Judge Dickinson gave ten reasons for finding  that  the  Appellant  had
    validly sat the ETS test.  The main reason for his  decision  was  that
    there was no evidence  before  him  to  discount  the  version  of  the
    examination process as described by the Appellant which  satisfied  him
    that the Appellant had been involved in the process as claimed.  He was
    satisfied that the  Appellant  had  given  truthful  evidence.   It  is
    undisputable that the two statements  provided  by  the  Respondent  as
    evidence in these cases are generic.   There  is  nothing  in  them  to
    establish  specifically  that  the  Appellant  was  involved   in   the
    deception.  In the circumstances I can find no material error of law in
    the determination of Judge Dickinson and I uphold his decision.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  a  material  error
of law and is upheld.

The Appeal of the Respondent is dismissed.



Signed   Date: 11th May 2015

N A Baird
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

