

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number IA/36089/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 23rd April 2015                   |On 13th May 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                           JOSEPHINE AKOMA-ANSONG
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Balroop (Counsel, instructed by Shan & Co)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. In this determination the term the Appellant refers to Ms Akoma-Ansong,
    the Appellant before the First-tier Tribunal, the term  the  Respondent
    refers to the Secretary of State who  was  the  Respondent  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant's immigration  history  is  set  out  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision of Judge Parker, promulgated on the 11th of  November
    2014. The Appellant came to the UK on a visit visa to see  her  husband
    at a time when she was pregnant, she did not return to Ghana but stayed
    in the UK and gave birth to her daughter who is a British citizen.  The
    Appellant's application to vary her leave was refused and she appealed.

 3. The substantive appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Parker at
    Taylor House on the 16th of October 2014 and allowed  for  the  reasons
    given in the decision promulgated on the 11th  of  November  2014.  The
    primary findings are set out at paragraphs 16 to  22  of  the  decision
    followed by consideration of the position  of  the  Appellant  and  her
    daughter under article 8 and section 117B of the 2002 Act.

 4. The Judge found that the Appellant and her husband were not  impressive
    witnesses. Having married in December  2011  and  becoming  pregnant  a
    month later pursued an appeal in a visit visa  application.  I  do  not
    have the visit visa application but it appears  that  the  appeal  must
    have been pursued at a time when the Appellant knew  she  was  pregnant
    and she chose to travel when heavily pregnant. There was no explanation
    why a settlement application had not been made. The Judge rejected  the
    claimed reasons for her failure  to  return,  there  being  no  medical
    evidence to show that she could not have flown. The Judge rejected  the
    claim that it had been their intention that the Appellant was  to  have
    returned to Ghana at the end of her visit to have the  baby  there  and
    apply for settlement. That is a clear finding  that  they  intended  to
    circumvent the Immigration Rules in that regard.

 5. The appeal was dismissed under  the  Immigration  Rules  for  the  non-
    payment of an NHS bill. The  Judge  went  on  to  consider  article  8,
    section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act and the cases of Chikwamba [2008]  UKHL
    40 and Sanade and others (British children - Zambrano - Dereci)  [2012]
    UKUT 48(IAC). In paragraph 35 there is  reference  to  the  Appellant's
    inability to meet the Immigration Rules if required to  make  an  entry
    clearance  application  but  found,  in   paragraph   35,   there   was
    insufficient evidence to second guess the ECO's decision.

 6. In summary it was found that there was potentially a lengthy separation
    if the Appellant and her daughter were to return to Ghana and apply for
    entry clearance and in those circumstances it  was  not  reasonable  to
    expect the Appellant's daughter to leave the UK.

 7. I am satisfied that the decision contains a number of errors which  are
    material to the appeal. The Judge had found that the Appellant had  not
    sought entry as a genuine visitor and that it was not her intention  to
    leave at the expiry of her visa.  It  had  also  been  found  that  the
    Appellant did not meet the Immigration Rules on  the  application  made
    and it appeared that the Appellant might not meet the Immigration Rules
    on a settlement application made properly from abroad, paragraph 35.

 8. The Judge had referred to the speed with  which  previous  applications
    had been considered and so the finding of delays in respect of an entry
    clearance application would have been on the basis that  the  Appellant
    would not meet the Immigration Rules. There is no reference to the case
    of Ekinci [2003] EWCA Civ 765 (17 June 2003) in which Simon  Brown  LJ,
    in paragraph 17, observed "It would be  a  bizarre  and  unsatisfactory
    result if,  the  less  able  the  applicant  is  to  satisfy  the  full
    requirements for entry clearance, the more readily he should be excused
    the need to apply."

 9. There is an error in respect of the approach to  be  taken  to  section
    117B of the 2002 Act. Whether the Appellant leaves the  UK  voluntarily
    or under compulsion her daughter can remain in the UK with her  father.
    There is no question of the child, or any children, being "expected" to
    leave the UK. In any event it was the Appellant's stated  intention  to
    return to Ghana with her child and live there. It would be difficult to
    see how it would be unreasonable for the Appellant  to  carry  out  her
    previously stated intentions.

10. The errors are such that I am satisfied that the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal cannot stand. The Appellant's  immigration  history,  the
    finding that she was not a genuine  visitor  carried  implications  for
    proportionality decision. Added to that were findings that the evidence
    did not show that medically she  could  not  have  travelled  to  Ghana
    whilst still pregnant, pregnancy is not itself a bar to air travel  and
    the finding that she might not meet the requirements of the Immigration
    Rules. In those circumstances the finding that  her  removal  would  be
    disproportionate cannot, on the reasons given, be  maintained  and  the
    decision is set aside.

11. At the hearing submissions were made with regard to the remaking of the
    decision and I  have  considered  these  along  with  the  unchallenged
    findings made in the First-tier Tribunal decision. I bear in mind  that
    article 8 is not to be regarded as a by-pass to the  Immigration  Rules
    and by the terms of paragraph 400 of the Immigration Rules the  article
    8 assessment is to be carried out against the rubric of Appendix FM and
    paragraph 276ADE. I am also obliged to treat  the  Appellant's  child's
    best interests as a primary consideration and this forms  part  of  the
    assessment under article 8.

12. The fact that the Appellant entered  with  the  intention  of  avoiding
    immigration  control  and  may  not  meet  the  requirements   of   the
    Immigration Rules on an application properly made  are  strong  reasons
    for finding that she should return to Ghana. She came knowing that  she
    was pregnant, apparently aiming to have  the  child  here.  Her  stated
    intention that she wanted to return to Ghana with her daughter,  whilst
    apparently false, has not been to shown to be not possible. There is no
    expectation that her daughter should leave  the  UK  if  the  Appellant
    goes.

13. Of course it is in the interests  of  her  daughter  that  her  parents
    remain together and provide a stable upbringing.  It  is  also  in  her
    daughter's interests that her parents go about their  affairs  lawfully
    and without seeking to obtain advantages to which they are not entitled
    and not placing themselves in predicaments such as  this.  I  emphasise
    that this situation has been brought about entirely by the  actions  of
    the Appellant and her husband. They are not in any way  the  victim  of
    circumstances over which they had no control.

14. The Appellant's daughter is not to be punished for the behaviour of her
    parents. However, the Appellant is not to be  rewarded  with  leave  to
    remain when she cannot meet the Immigration Rules  simply  because  she
    has contrived to have a child here and then remain. There is a  danger,
    recognised in the ECHR case of Jeunesse that some may use children as a
    means of circumventing immigration control and that states are entitled
    to expect that individuals will comply with the  rules  that  apply  to
    them.

15. It is difficult to see what is unreasonable about expecting someone  to
    abide by the rules that apply and which they are  fully  aware  of.  In
    this case the Appellant can live in Ghana, as she said she intended  to
    do. Given that the Appellant does not meet the  Immigration  Rules  and
    her behaviour in getting to the  UK  and  since  I  am  satisfied  that
    requiring her to return to Ghana to  apply  in  the  proper  manner  is
    entirely proportionate and does not place  the  UK  in  breach  of  its
    obligations.

16. This is not a case where Chikwamba could be said to  be  analogous.  In
    that case the Appellant was in a situation largely not of  her  making,
    there were considerable obstacles to the making of an application to re-
    enter the UK and there would be delays in circumstances where she would
    be bound to succeed in the application which would be a  formality.  In
    this case none of those observations apply.

17. Whilst the Appellant has established a family life in the UK  this  has
    been achieved by her deliberately seeking to evade immigration control,
    where she can live  in  Ghana  and  apply  safely  from  there  but  in
    circumstances where she might not meet the Immigration Rules. Her being
    in the UK is not a  justification  for  circumventing  the  rules  that
    apply. Her daughter can travel with her to Ghana but is not expected to
    do and if  the  family  wish  to  remain  together  her  husband,  also
    originally from Ghana, can return with them. It has not been shown that
    he could not do so or that that is an unreasonable alternative.

18. In summary I find that the First-tier Tribunal erred and  the  decision
    is set  aside.  I  find  that  the  Appellant's  removal  to  Ghana  is
    proportionate given her immigration history and the other findings made
    against her. Article 8 and section 55 considerations do not require her
    to remain in  the  UK  and  the  fact  that  she  might  not  meet  the
    Immigration Rules severely undermines her position and  aggravates  the
    attempt to evade immigration control.

CONCLUSIONS

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

    I do not set aside the decision.

    I re-make the decision in the appeal dismissing the appeal of Josephine
    Akoma-Ansong.

Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure)  Rules  2005  and  I
    make no order.

Fee Award

    In dismissing the appeal I make no fee award.



Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 8th May 2015
