
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number IA/36846/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 September 2015                 |On 14 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              mR ROSHAN PRADHAN
                        (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Savage, a Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A B AL Arayan, Farani, Javid, Taylor Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. In this appeal, the Secretary of State for the Home Department  appeals
    against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of Mr
    Pradhan ('the claimant') who appealed against a decision taken  on  5th
    September 2014 to refuse his application for leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom as a  Tier  4  (General)  Student  Migrant  pursuant  to
    Paragraph 245ZX of the Immigration  Rules  HC  395  (as  amended).  The
    appeal of Mrs Pradhan (which was heard  together  with  the  claimant's
    appeal) is not subject to an appeal to this Tribunal.

Background Facts

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Nepal born on 12th February 1984.  As  set
    out above he applied for leave to remain as a Tier 4 (general)  student
    Migrant.

The Appeal

 3. The claimant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In  a  determination
    promulgated on 19 January 2015, Judge Sweet remitted the application to
    the Home Office for a fresh decision to be made in light of the finding
    that the claimant ought to  have  been  granted  60  days  to  find  an
    alternative college in light of the suspension of the licence of  Blake
    Hall College (the first college that the claimant  had  applied  to  in
    respect of the application in issue).

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 4. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  On 20 April 2015 First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Colyer  granted
    permission to appeal.  Thus, the appeal came before me.

Preliminary Issue

 5. Ms Savage raised as a preliminary issue a concession on behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department. With regard to ground 1  of
    the Secretary of State's grounds of appeal it  was  conceded  that,  in
    light of the case of QI (Pakistan) [2011] EWCA Civ 614,  the  Secretary
    of State for the Home  Department  had  incorrectly  applied  Paragraph
    245ZX(l) of the Immigration Rules HC395 (as amended).

 6. In light of that concession and effective withdrawal of that ground  of
    appeal Mr Arayn accepted that the First-tier Tribunal judge's  decision
    that the claimant was entitled to 60 days leave to find an  alternative
    college was in error.

Material Error of Law

 7. The First-tier Tribunal decision contains a material error of law.  The
    application was remitted to the Home Office by the First-tier  Tribunal
    for a fresh decision to be made on the basis  that,  in  light  of  the
    suspension of the licence of Blake Hall College, the  appellant  should
    have been granted 60 days  to  find  an  alternative  college.  It  was
    submitted in the grounds of appeal that as the appellant did not have a
    CAS for Blake Hall college when its licence was suspended he could  not
    benefit from the matters of fairness falling within the  remit  of  the
    case of Patel (India) 2011 UKUT 2011  Mr Arayn  did  not  resist  those
    grounds. The claimant was not entitled to be granted a 60 days to  find
    an alternative college, therefore the First-tier Tribunal erred in  law
    in making that finding.

 8. The First-tier Tribunal decision is set aside

Re- making of the Decision

 9. I re-make the  decision.  In  light  of  the  concession  made  by  the
    Secretary of State the appeal by the claimant against the  decision  of
    the Secretary of State is allowed to the extent  that  it  was  not  in
    accordance with the Immigration Rules. Paragraph  245ZX  (l)  does  not
    apply on the facts of this case. This was the sole reason  for  refusal
    of the claimant's application.

10. The First-tier Tribunal remitted the matter to the Home  Office  for  a
    fresh decision and I was invited to do the same.

11. In the case of  Greenwood  (Automatic  Deportation:  Order  of  Events)
    [2014] UKUT 00342 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal considered the power of  the
    First-tier Tribunal to 'remit' a matter to the respondent. At paragraph
    16 the Upper Tribunal indicated as follows:

         "16. As I indicated above, there  is  a  third  possible  error  in
         paragraph 23 of the Tribunal's decision. In  the  second  sentence,
         the Tribunal says:

             "Given the fundamental nature of the  respondent's  error,  we
             remit the matter back to the respondent for the  error  to  be
             remedied".

         17.  Ignoring the pleonasm of "remit back" I think it is in general
         doubtful whether the First-tier Tribunal has jurisdiction to  remit
         a matter to a decision-maker. It has a power to allow or dismiss an
         appeal;  and  if  allowing  an  appeal  it  has  a  power  to  give
         directions, with which the Secretary of State must comply. It  does
         not formally have the power to quash the decision under appeal, but
         it is well understood that a decision of the Tribunal to the effect
         that the decision was not in accordance with the law  prevents  the
         decision-maker from relying on it or acting on it, so that it is to
         that extent of no effect. In those circumstances, if  the  decision
         is one which results from an application made by an individual, the
         position is that the application is outstanding, awaiting a  lawful
         decision. No remittal is necessary. Any circumstances arising  from
         the fact that an application has not yet been decided (for  example
         under s.3C of the 1971 Act, or s.77 of the 2002 Act) will continue,
         and will be treated as not having been interrupted by the  unlawful
         decision. If there is any doubt about the  matter,  the  First-tier
         Tribunal, in allowing the appeal, can direct the decision-maker  to
         treat the applicant accordingly."

12. I conclude that a direction is appropriate rather  than  remittal.  The
    Secretary of State is directed to consider the  claimant's  application
    afresh in light of the concession made that Paragraph 245ZX(l) does not
    apply.

Decision

13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside. The appeal by the
    claimant against  the Secretary of State's decision is allowed to the
    extent that the decision was not in accordance with the Immigration
    Rules as Paragraph 245ZX(l) does not apply on the facts of this case.

14. The Secretary of State is directed to consider the claimant's
    application afresh in light of the concession that Paragraph 245ZX(l)
    does not apply.


Signed   P M Ramshaw   Date 11 September 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw
