
S-T
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/36307/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 28 May 2015                       |On 29 May 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         VIKAS NARENDRABHAI PANCHAL
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Nizami, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The respondent to this appeal, Mr Panchal, is a citizen of India born
       on 9 February 1976. The appellant is the Secretary of State  for  the
       Home Department, who has appealed with the permission of  the  First-
       tier Tribunal against a decision of Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
       O'Hagan, allowing Mr Panchal's appeal against  immigration  decisions
       to refuse him leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General)  Student  Migrant
       and to remove him on the ground he  had  used  deception  in  seeking
       leave to remain.

    2. It is more convenient to refer to the parties as they were before the
       First-tier Tribunal. I shall therefore refer to Mr Panchal  from  now
       on as "the appellant" and the Secretary of State as "the respondent".

    3. I was not asked and saw no reason to make an anonymity direction.

    4. The appellant came to the UK in on 24 June 2009. He was  granted  two
       extensions of leave as a Tier 4 student both of which were curtailed.
       The appellant submitted an application for  further  Tier  4  student
       leave on 25 January 2014. His wife  and  child  applied  for  further
       leave as his  dependants.  The  applications  were  refused  and  the
       appellant appealed.

    5. The First-tier Tribunal identified the key issue to  be  whether  the
       respondent had established the appellant had in fact sat his  English
       test by means of a proxy, as alleged by the test provider,  ETS.  The
       evidence relied  on  by  the  respondent  consisted  of  two  witness
       statements made by Home Office officials, Rebecca Collings and  Peter
       Millington, which contained generic evidence of the type of behaviour
       of which the appellant was accused and steps taken to investigate and
       prevent such abuses. However, the judge found  this  evidence  of  no
       assistance  in  establishing  the  appellant  had   personally   used
       deception. The respondent also relied on a print-out  confirming  the
       view of  ETS  that  the  appellant's  test  results  were  considered
       invalid. The judge regarded this evidence as a bare  assertion  which
       was not sufficient to establish deception.

    6. The respondent sought permission to appeal, arguing  there  were  two
       errors in the decision. Firstly, it was argued the judge  had  failed
       to engage properly with  the  respondent's  evidence.  Secondly,  the
       judge wrongly  described  the  respondent  as  exercising  a  "quasi-
       judicial"  role  and  abrogating  all  responsibility  to  the   test
       provider.

    7. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
       Scott-Baker.

    8. The appellant did not file a response.

    9. I heard submissions as to whether the First-tier Tribunal had made  a
       material error of law.  Mr  Tarlow  relied  on  the  grounds  seeking
       permission to appeal and argued the judge had not engaged  adequately
       with the respondent's evidence. Ms Nizami argued that  there  was  no
       material error of law  in  the  judge's  decision  and  he  had  been
       entitled to allow the appeal for the reasons he gave.

   10. I find  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
       decision. My reasons for this conclusion are as  follows.  The  judge
       correctly identified the sole issue for determination. He was plainly
       aware of the evidence submitted by the respondent in support  of  her
       decision that the appellant did not meet the Suitability requirements
       of the rules because he had exercised deception. The judge considered
       that evidence with care and in detail. He correctly directed  himself
       as to the burden and standard of proof in these circumstances. Having
       done so he was  perfectly  entitled  to  conclude  that  the  generic
       evidence consisting of the witness statements and the bare  assertion
       made by ETS in the print-out were not  sufficient  to  discharge  the
       burden resting on the respondent.

   11. The First-tier Tribunal's decision does  not  disclose  any  material
       error of law and shall stand.

NOTICE OF DECISION

       The First-tier Tribunal did not make a material error on a  point  of
       law and its decision allowing the appeal under the Immigration  Rules
       shall stand.

       No anonymity direction has been made.






                               Signed   Date 28 May 2015


                               Judge Froom, sitting as a Deputy Judge of
                               the Upper Tribunal
