
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/36303/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26th August 2015                  |On 17th September 2015               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Israt Jahan Azad
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Iqbal, Counsel instructed by Liberty Legal
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Hillis made following a hearing at Bradford on 9th January 2015.

Background

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Bangladesh born  on  14th  February  1991.
    She entered the UK on 8th October 2011 as a Tier  4  (General)  Student
    and had valid leave to remain until 30th November 2015.

 3. On 28th August 2014 the Secretary of State curtailed her leave alleging
    that she had used deception in order to gain leave to remain in the UK,
    specifically that she had used a proxy test taker in her speaking  test
    with the Educational Testing Service (ETS).

 4. The claimant has always strenuously denied the allegation.

 5. On 28th August 2014 she was served with a notice to a person liable  to
    removal, and, on 2nd September 2014, she was served with a decision  to
    remove an illegal  entrant/person  subject  to  administrative  removal
    under Section 10 of the Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  1999.   She  was
    informed that she was entitled to appeal  against  the  decision  under
    Section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 after
    she had left the UK.

 6. Nevertheless the  appeal  was  listed  before  Judge  Hillis  when  the
    Presenting Officer raised  the  issue  of  jurisdiction.   It  was  her
    submission that the judge had no jurisdiction to determine  the  appeal
    since the claimant had no valid in country right of appeal.

 7. The judge wrote as follows:

         "I heard lengthy submissions from both representatives which lasted
         an hour and ruled that I did have jurisdiction  to  deal  with  the
         appeal in country as  there  are  issues  of  fairness,  procedural
         regularity and adherence to the Secretary of State's  own  guidance
         as  set  out  in  her  enforcement  instructions  and  guidance  at
         paragraph 50.12 to be resolved in this appeal.   In  reaching  this
         conclusion I have taken particular guidance from the decision in  R
         (Mohamed Bilal) v SSHD (section 10 removal) IJR [2014] UKUT 00265.

         I find a significant issue in this appeal is  that  the  respondent
         did not at any time seek any explanation from the appellant nor did
         they seek to interview her or to speak  to  her  college  tutor  at
         Bradford College where she is currently studying an LLB law course,
         the degree being conferred by Leeds Metropolitan  University.   She
         did not serve any of the original documentation concerning the  ETS
         investigation into this appellant's test result and did not curtail
         the appellant's leave to remain under paragraph 322(1A)  as  stated
         in the witness statement of Rebecca Collings at paragraph 38."

 8. The judge then considered the appeal on its merits and  concluded  that
    the removal decision was not in accordance with the law.

The Grounds of Application

 9. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the judge had materially misdirected himself in considering that he had
    jurisdiction to hear the  appeal  and   had  failed  to  give  adequate
    reasons for rejecting the Secretary of State's evidence in  support  of
    her assertion that the claimant had employed deception.

10. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Judge  Parkes  for  the
    reasons stated in the grounds on 10th March 2015.

The Hearing

11.  The  claimant  appeared  at  the  Bradford  hearing  centre  but   her
    representative unfortunately misread the hearing  notice  and  attended
    Field House instead.

12. This  case  has  been  adjourned  on  two  previous  occasions  at  the
    instigation of the Tribunal and on  a  third  at  the  request  of  the
    claimant's representative who asked that it be heard after the Court of
    Appeal decision in R (on the applications of Sheraz Mehmood and Shabbat
    Ali) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 744.  This has now been promulgated. I  was
    therefore most reluctant to adjourn on a fourth occasion.  I  explained
    to the claimant that I would request her representative to  fax  to  me
    written submissions in support of her  case,  which  I  would  consider
    before reaching my decision.  I then heard brief  representations  from
    Mrs Pettersen, who relied on her grounds.

13. An hour  later  I  received  a  detailed  skeleton  argument  from  the
    claimant's  representative   resisting   the   Secretary   of   State's
    application. In summary, it is as follows.

14. The claimant argues that making a decision under Section 10 of the 1999
    Act is a discretionary power in  that  the  Secretary  of  State  could
    either make a decision under Part 9  of  the  Immigration  Rules  which
    would give rise to an in country right of appeal or under Section 10 of
    the 1999 Act.  In this case she had not exercised her discretion  which
    rendered the decision unlawful.  The claimant relies on  the  authority
    in Ukus (discretion: when reviewable) [2012] UKUT 00307 when the  Upper
    Tribunal said:

         "Where the decision maker  has  failed  to  exercise  a  discretion
         vested in him, the Tribunal's jurisdiction on appeal is limited  to
         a decision that the failure renders the decision 'not in accordance
         with the law' (Section 86(3)(a)).  Because the discretion is vested
         in the Executive, the appropriate course will be for  the  Tribunal
         to require the decision maker to complete his task  by  reaching  a
         lawful decision on the outstanding application, along the lines set
         out in SSHD v Abdi [1996] Imm AR 148.  In such a case, it makes  no
         difference whether there is such a statutory power as is  mentioned
         in paragraph 1 above."

15. If the Secretary of State enjoyed unrestricted liberty to  subject  the
    claimant to a decision under Section 10 then every such claimant  could
    be deprived of an in country right of appeal which cannot have been the
    intention of Parliament.

16. In order to make a Section 10 decision the Secretary of  State  had  to
    have credible evidence of deception in compliance  with  her  published
    policy which states that the evidence should be clear  and  unambiguous
    and proved to a high degree of probability that deception had been used
    to gain leave.  The Secretary of State did not refer  to  the  guidance
    anywhere in her correspondence, decision  letters  or  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal.  A public body cannot act otherwise than in accordance with its
    published policy and to act otherwise renders the decision unlawful.



Findings and Conclusions

17. In this case the relevant decision was made under Section  10(1)(b)  of
    the 1999 Act which states that a person who is not  a  British  citizen
    may be removed from the UK in accordance with directions  given  by  an
    Immigration  Officer  if  he  uses  deception   in   seeking   (whether
    successfully or not) leave to remain.

18. Under Section 82(1) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002, where an immigration decision is made in respect of a  person  he
    may appeal to the Tribunal.

19. Immigration decisions are  defined  in  Section  82(2).   The  relevant
    subparagraph here is Section 82(2)(g), i.e. a decision that a person is
    to be removed from the UK by way of directions under Sections 10(1)(a),
    (b), (ba) or (c) of the Immigration and Asylum  Act  1999  (removal  of
    persons unlawfully in the UK).

20. Section 92 of the  2002  Act  identifies  which  types  of  immigration
    decision may be appealed by a person whilst he is still in the UK,  and
    which attract only an out of country appeal.  It is  quite  clear  from
    Section 92 that a decision under Section 82(2)(g) may only be  appealed
    out of country.

21. In R (on the applications of Mehmood)  the  Court  of  Appeal  recently
    considered the question of whether an out  of  country  appeal  was  an
    adequate alternative remedy.  Indeed it was not argued that the out  of
    country appeal was not adequate in  general  terms.   At  paragraph  49
    Beatson LJ said:

         "It was common ground that it is only where there are  'special  or
         exceptional factors' that  the  court  will  permit  a  substantive
         challenge to a removal decision by the Secretary of State  pursuant
         to Section 10 of the 1999 Act to proceed by judicial review  rather
         than by the appeal channel provided by Parliament, here an  out  of
         country appeal: see R (Lim) v SSHD  [2007]  EWCA  Civ  733,  R  (RK
         (Nepal)) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 359; and R (Anwar and Adjo) v  SSHD
         [2010] EWCA Civ 1279."

22. The courts have consistently  held  that  the  out  of  country  appeal
    provided by Parliament is not unlawful. There is absolutely no  support
    at all for  the  argument  put  forward  that  Parliament  cannot  have
    intended the result of Section 10 of the 1999 Act to be the deprivation
    of in country appeal rights.  The Act is absolutely clear  about  which
    decisions attract an in country right of appeal and which do  not.   In
    this case the decision made attracts an out of country appeal only.

23. It follows that all arguments about  whether  the  Secretary  of  State
    unlawfully failed to exercise her discretion or  whether  the  evidence
    she relied on was capable of supporting  the  allegation  of  deception
    could not have been considered by the judge at all.  They can  only  be
    considered in the context  of  an  out  of  country  appeal  which  the
    claimant should exercise if she feels that the decision was wrong.

24. The judge plainly had no jurisdiction to determine this appeal.

Notice of Decision

The original judge's decision is set aside.  It is remade as  follows.   The
appeal is dismissed for want of jurisdiction.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
