
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/36998/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24 July 2014                               |On 30 July 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE LEWIS
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Mr Teejo Thomas

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Richardson, Counsel


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against a decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  dated
    18 April 2014.  By that decision the Tribunal allowed an appeal  by  Mr
    Teejo Thomas against the decision of the Secretary  of  State  refusing
    leave to remain and deciding  to  remove  Mr  Thomas  from  the  United
    Kingdom.  The appeal was allowed  on  the  basis  of  Article  8.   The
    Secretary of State appeals against the decision of the Tribunal.

 2. The facts are as follows.  The respondent, Mr Thomas, is a national  of
    India.  He was born in October 1979.  He arrived in the United  Kingdom
    as a student.  He did extremely well  as  a  student.   His  leave  was
    extended on a number  of  occasions  and  he  had  a  number  of  visas
    including  visas  for  graduate  studies,  for  post-study   work   and
    eventually as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant.

 3. He was first self-employed and then he became employed by a  particular
    company.  The original anticipation was that Mr Thomas  would  work  in
    the United Kingdom for some time and work  abroad  for  some  time  and
    return to the United Kingdom.  Due to circumstances connected with  the
    employment  he  spent  longer  outside  the  United  Kingdom  than  was
    originally anticipated.

 4. On 24 February 2013 Mr Thomas applied for indefinite leave to remain in
    the United Kingdom  on  the  basis  of  ten  years'  continuous  lawful
    residence  in  the  United  Kingdom.   We  have  emphasised  the   word
    continuous residence.  That is  defined  in  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules and the two important aspects of the  definition  are
    these.

 5. Firstly, continuous residence means residence in the United Kingdom for
    an unbroken period, and for  these  purposes  a  period  shall  not  be
    considered to have been broken where an applicant is  absent  from  the
    United Kingdom for a period of six months or  less  at  any  one  time,
    provided that the applicant in question had existing limited  leave  to
    remain at that stage.

 6. There is a second aspect of the  definition  that  must  be  met.   The
    applicant must not have spent a total of more than eighteen months away
    from the United Kingdom during the period in question.   If  there  are
    periods in total of more than eighteen months out  of  the  same  years
    then the continuous residence has been broken.

 7. Following the decision of the Secretary of State Mr Thomas appealed the
    decision  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  Tribunal  recorded   at
    paragraphs 6 and 7 the reasons why  it  was  that  Mr  Thomas  had  had
    periods of absence abroad.  The periods of absence are these.  Firstly,
    there was one period when Mr Thomas was away from  the  United  Kingdom
    for more than six months.  There was one period when he was absent from
    30 August 2010 to 10 July 2011.  That is a total of 313 days.

 8. Looking at all the days of absence in total they amounted to more  than
    eighteen months.  It appeared to have been a total of 575 days,  so  Mr
    Thomas did not meet the two  parts  of  the  definition  of  continuous
    residence.  There was one period when he had been away  for  more  than
    six months and then a total absence of more than eighteen months.

 9. As I say, the reasons given which deal with his employer, it  had  been
    anticipated that he would work for two weeks abroad and  two  weeks  in
    the United Kingdom, and that would have enabled  him  to  maintain  his
    continuous residence requirement but due to circumstances  to  do  with
    his work he spent more time  in  Qatar  and  in  India  than  had  been
    anticipated.  The Tribunal also records that it was accepted  that  the
    respondent could not satisfy the Immigration Rules in relation to  long
    residence for those reasons.

10. At paragraph 10 the Tribunal referred to the  well-known  cases  of  MF
    (Nigeria) and Nagre  [2013]  EWHC  720  (Admin),  the  latter  for  the
    proposition that only if there may be arguably good grounds for a grant
    of leave outside the Immigration Rules was it necessary for  Article  8
    purposes to consider if there were compelling circumstances.

11. Then at paragraph the Tribunal says this:

         "In  the  present  case,  in   view   of   the   somewhat   unusual
         circumstances, I find that there are sufficiently good grounds  for
         considering the matter under  Article  8  outside  the  Immigration
         Rules",

    and the Tribunal then proceeded to do so.

12. In terms of the fourth stage recognised by the case  of  Razgar  [2004]
    UKHL 27 the Tribunal  said  this.   That  question  is  concerned  with
    whether or not there is, to put it broadly, a legitimate aim which  the
    Secretary of State is pursuing in terms of Article 8.  It is whether it
    is an interference necessary in a democratic society in  the  interests
    of national security, public safety, economic wellbeing, the prevention
    of disorder or crime,  the  protection  of  health  or  morals  or  the
    protection of the rights and freedoms of others, and what the  Tribunal
    said is this:

         "17. Thus there are two aspects to the matter, namely  whether  the
             interference is necessary in a democratic society  or  whether
             it is in the  interests  of  the  economic  wellbeing  of  the
             country.

         18.  In addressing those matters I find that the  appellant  is  in
             fact an asset to the United Kingdom, rather than  a  drain  on
             its resource.  He has used his undoubted skills to benefit the
             British economy by bringing  large  sums  of  money  into  the
             country  from  hundreds  of  overseas  students  whom  he  has
             recruited to educational institutions.   The  amount  involved
             has not been specifically quantified but it  is  said  by  his
             former employer to amount to millions of pounds.  His  efforts
             were pursued at  the  cost  of  his  ability  to  qualify  for
             indefinite leave  to  remain  through  ten  years'  continuous
             lawful residence of which he was fully aware, yet he  remained
             loyal to his employer company (a British company) so  that  it
             would be able to continue trading for  longer  than  it  might
             otherwise have done, thus helping to preserve  other  people's
             jobs.  He seeks to make his home in this country where he  has
             established a strong private life over the last  eleven  years
             and is working  again  for  a  British  company  servicing  an
             international client, American Express, thereby bringing  more
             money into the economy.

         19.  In these circumstances, I find that it is neither necessary in
             a democratic society  nor  is  it  in  the  interests  of  the
             economic wellbeing  of  the  country  to  interfere  with  the
             appellant's rights under Article 8(1) of the ECHR.   The  only
             reason for doing so would be to maintain the strict letter  of
             the system of immigration control  which,  by  itself,  is  an
             insufficient reason to justify such interference."

13. For those reasons the Tribunal  found  that  there  was  no  legitimate
    interest at stake which the Secretary of State was  pursuing,  and  for
    completeness I note that at paragraph 21 the Tribunal said: "It is  not
    in  those  circumstances  we  need  to  consider  whether  or  not  any
    interference was proportionate on the facts of this case"  although  it
    did say it thought it would have had little difficulty holding that the
    interference was not proportionate.

14. We turn then to the general law.  It is important  to  start  with  the
    terms of Article 8 of the  ECHR  itself.   That  provides  as  follows.
    Under the heading "right to respect for private  and  family  life"  it
    says this:

         "1.  Everyone has the right to respect for his private  and  family
             life, his home and his correspondence.

         2.   There shall be no interference by a public authority with  the
             exercise of this right except such as is  in  accordance  with
             the law and is  necessary  in  a  democratic  society  in  the
             interests of national security, public safety or the  economic
             well-being of the country, for the prevention of  disorder  or
             crime, for the protection of health  or  morals,  or  for  the
             protection of the rights and freedoms of others."

15. Against that background we bear in mind the following.   First,  it  is
    important to bear in mind that Article 8  does  not  entail  a  general
    obligation for a state to respect  an  immigrant's  choice  as  to  the
    country in which they wish to reside.  States are entitled  to  control
    entry and residence of foreign nationals into the state.  That has been
    recognised numerous times, for example by Lady Hale in ZH (Tanzania)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011] UKSC 4  at  paragraph
    18.

16. Secondly, Article 8 is a qualified right.  Interference with the  right
    to respect for private and family life will not contravene Article 8 if
    it is in accordance with the law, it is in pursuit of a legitimate aim,
    that is one  of  the  aims  recognised  in  Article  8(2)  and  if  the
    interference is proportionate.

17.  Thirdly,  the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration  control  is  a
    legitimate aim.  That aim is as a minimum an aspect of  the  protection
    of the economic wellbeing of the country.  Should authorities for  that
    be necessary one can read the observations of Lady Hale in the decision
    in Razgar at paragraph 45.

18. As noted by the House of Lords in Huang [2007] 2 AC  167  there  is  an
    interest in ensuring the desirability of  applying  known  Rules  in  a
    system of immigration which are workable, predictable,  consistent  and
    fair as between one applicant and another; conversely there  is  damage
    to good administration and effective control if a system  is  perceived
    unpredictable, porous or perfunctory.

19. Fourthly, if there is an interference in accordance with the law and if
    it is done for a legitimate aim it is thereafter necessary to  consider
    whether the action taken is proportionate to that aim.  The approach to
    the question of proportionality is  in  our  judgment  well-settled  by
    decisions such as those of  Mr  Justice  Sales  in  The  Queen  on  the
    application of Nagre v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin),  MF  (Nigeria)  [2014]  1  WLR  544  and  most
    recently by the Court of Appeal in Haleemudeen [2014] EWCA Civ 558.

20. The starting  point  for  the  assessment  of  proportionality  is  the
    Immigration Rules.  As Lord Justice Beatson explains in paragraph 40 of
    Haleemudeen this is because the Immigration Rules are a central part of
    the  legislative  and  policy  context  in  which  the   interests   of
    immigration control are balanced against the interests  and  rights  of
    people who have come to this country and wish to settle in it.

21. Overall the Secretary of State's policy as to when an interference with
    an Article 8  right  will  be  regarded  as  disproportionate  is  more
    particularised in the new Rules than it had previously been.   The  new
    Rules require stronger bonds with the United Kingdom before leave  will
    be  given  under  them.   The  decision-maker  should  therefore  first
    consider whether or not the applicant is entitled to  leave  to  remain
    under the Rules.

22. As Mr Justice Sales explained in Nagre, the new Rules do provide better
    explicit coverage of the factors  identified  in  case  law  which  are
    relevant to an analysis of proportionality under  Article  8  than  was
    formerly  the  position,  so  in  many  cases  the  main   points   for
    consideration in relation to Article 8 will be addressed  by  decision-
    makers applying the new Rules.

23. Pausing there, in our judgment what Mr Justice Sales is saying is  that
    the factors that are relevant to an assessment of Article 8 may well be
    specifically addressed  and  contained  within  the  Immigration  Rules
    themselves.  If so,  the  application  of  the  Rules  themselves  will
    usually  indicate  the  answer  as  to  whether  or   not   action   is
    proportionate or disproportionate.

24. Where, however, there are circumstances which are not governed  by  the
    Rules then it may be necessary to go outside the Rules to  see  whether
    there are good grounds or  what  in  some  cases  are  referred  to  as
    compelling circumstances for granting leave outside  the  Rules.   That
    approach has been endorsed recently in our judgment  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in Haleemudeen, see for example paragraph 43 of that judgment.

25. We have noted the argument of Mr Richardson on behalf of Mr Thomas that
    that approach is not now necessary or at the very  least  the  Tribunal
    could depart from it.  The basis of his submissions was effectively the
    decision of the Court of Appeal  in  the  case  of  The  Queen  on  the
    application  of  MM  (Lebanon)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  985.   In  particular  he  relied   upon
    paragraphs 1 to 8.

26. However, one needs to bear in mind two things.  Firstly, this Court  of
    Appeal decision was not seeking to  depart  from  the  other  Court  of
    Appeal decisions nor would it do, which approves the approach in Nagre,
    and secondly, it is quite clear that in  the  MM  case  the  court  was
    dealing not with individual claims nor  whether  action  in  individual
    cases was disproportionate.  Rather it was dealing with whether or  not
    a particular Rule was itself a breach of Article 8.   The  context  was
    therefore different.

27. In the Nagre line of cases the court was  looking  at  whether  or  not
    action is disproportionate.  Where the factors that  were  relevant  to
    that were factors that were already dealt with and  weighed  up  within
    the Rules there would need to be  some  other  compelling  circumstance
    different from the ones that had already been weighted in the Rules  to
    justify considering the grant of leave outside the Rules.  That is  the
    situation we are dealing with here.  Where, however, you are dealing in
    the abstract where the question is whether or not a legal provision  is
    contradictory to Article 8 different  considerations  may  or  may  not
    apply.

28. Turning then to the Tribunal's decision in the  present  case,  in  our
    judgment the Tribunal erred in law  in  a  number  of  different  ways.
    Firstly, the starting point here is the Immigration Rules.   The  basis
    on which the respondent was seeking to justify being allowed to  remain
    in the United Kingdom was the length of residence he had had here.  The
    longer you have resided in a place the stronger the bonds you will have
    formed in that place.  However, those factors are dealt with under  the
    Rules and the respondent cannot establish a right to remain in  the  UK
    on the basis of residence under the Rules.  He has not established  ten
    years' continuous residence.

29. In those  circumstances  the  Tribunal  would  need  to  identify  what
    compelling circumstances might exist such as were not  covered  by  the
    Rules which would make it appropriate to consider the  grant  of  leave
    outside the Rules.  The Tribunal, however, does not identify  any  such
    compelling circumstances.  It refers  to  what  it  calls  the  unusual
    circumstances of the respondent's case but  the  only  circumstance  in
    which the appellant  in  fact  had  erred  is  in  the  fact  that  the
    respondent for particular reasons does not satisfy the requirements  of
    ten years' continuous residence.  Consequently the Tribunal has not  in
    fact identified any compelling circumstances in a situation not covered
    by the Rules which could justify consideration  of  a  grant  of  leave
    outside the Rules.  Rather, the Tribunal is treating the fact that  the
    respondent cannot satisfy the  Immigration  Rules  as  itself  being  a
    compelling circumstance for going  outside  the  Rules.   That  in  our
    judgment is an error in approach and reflects a failure  to  apply  and
    understand the relevant case law.

30. Secondly, the Tribunal erred in concluding that the defendant  was  not
    acting in a way that was in pursuance of a legitimate  aim  within  the
    meaning  of  Article  8(2).   The  maintenance   and   enforcement   of
    immigration control including  as  it  does  the  fair  application  of
    provisions governing eligibility based on  residence  is  a  legitimate
    aim.  It is a reflection of the protection of the economic wellbeing of
    the country.  It is therefore action which potentially seeks to  pursue
    a legitimate aim.  The Tribunal erred in paragraphs 17  to  19  by  not
    treating the maintenance of fair and effective immigration control as a
    legitimate aim.

31. Thirdly, the Tribunal erred in conflating the question  of  what  is  a
    legitimate aim for the purposes of Article 8(2) with its view as to the
    value of the contribution made by the respondent and his  work  to  the
    economy.   In  our  judgment  that  is  an  incorrect  approach.    The
    protection of the  economic  wellbeing  of  the  country  entitles  the
    executive to set out Rules governing when a person may enter and remain
    in the United Kingdom.  Those Rules will strike a balance  between  the
    interests of those seeking to come to the country and the interests  of
    society as a whole.  The balance will include the identification of the
    periods of residence that a person  needs  to  establish  in  order  to
    demonstrate the requisite ties and bond with this country in  order  to
    qualify for leave to remain.

32. The Tribunal erred in conflating the establishment of such Rules  which
    do reflect a legitimate aim with the different and separate question of
    whether it is proportionate in a particular case to apply  those  Rules
    to  a  particular  individual  given   that   individual's   particular
    circumstances.

33. Put another way, the Tribunal allowed  its  personal  judgment  of  the
    value of the respondent's employment to be used as a means  of  denying
    the existence of a legitimate  aim  in  the  maintenance  of  fair  and
    efficient enforcement of the Immigration Rules.  That in  our  judgment
    is an inadmissible approach.

34. For each of those separate reasons we are satisfied that  the  Tribunal
    erred in its determination and the determination must be set aside.

35. We then go on to remake the decision.  We start by reminding  ourselves
    that we are dealing with Article 8(1) and  the  claimed  private  life.
    This does not involve the claim for family life.  The private  life  is
    essentially that Mr Thomas came to this country as  a  student  and  he
    said in his witness  statement  to  the  Tribunal  below  that  he  has
    established a  close  circle  of  friends  and  has  a  meaningful  and
    satisfying job in the United Kingdom.  He has had connections now  with
    the United Kingdom for over eleven years and he feels that  he  has  in
    his own words "taken root here".

36. Secondly, we bear in mind that in terms of the strength of  integration
    as evidenced by long residence the Immigration Rules require ten years'
    continuous  residence.   The  respondent  does  not  have  ten   years'
    continuous residence.  He was absent for a period of almost a year from
    30 August 2010 to 10 July 2011.  Also, in the last  ten  years  he  has
    spent more than eighteen months outside the United Kingdom.

37. Thirdly, we consider carefully the gist of the grounds of appeal.  What
    they allege is that there were good reasons why Mr Thomas  was  abroad,
    good reasons why he was not able to continue with his plans  of  coming
    back to the United Kingdom and maintaining  his  continuous  residence.
    He was abroad for much of this period,  probably  all  of  it,  at  the
    request of his United Kingdom employer doing work which  benefited  the
    UK employer and indeed the UK economy generally.

38. Mr Richardson on his behalf also emphasised strongly that the ties that
    Mr Thomas had established were ones that he  established  when  he  was
    lawfully here making a valuable contribution and  in  the  category  of
    immigrants who if  they  complied  with  the  Immigration  Rules  would
    eventually be able to obtain settlement.

39.  We  have  considered  those  submissions  and  Mr  Thomas'  particular
    circumstances very carefully.  In our judgment, however, the  claim  is
    essentially based on the length of residence that Mr Thomas has in  the
    United Kingdom.  The Rules require  ten  years'  continuous  residence.
    That requirement strikes a fair  and  reasonable  balance  between  the
    interests of those who wish to settle in the  United  Kingdom  and  the
    wider community.  Mr Thomas does not satisfy those Rules.

40. We do not see  any  other  factors  which  would  in  truth  amount  to
    compelling circumstances which would justify consideration of  a  grant
    of leave notwithstanding that he does not meet those Rules.  Using  the
    language of Nagre, we consider that the factors that are relevant to Mr
    Thomas' case are on analysis ones that were already dealt with  in  the
    Rules  and  he  does  not  meet  the  Rules.   We  see  no   compelling
    circumstances not already covered by  the  Rules  which  would  justify
    consideration of a grant of leave outside those Rules.

41. Furthermore, if we were wrong about that and if it were appropriate  to
    consider the matter outside the Rules we would not regard the  decision
    to refuse leave and remove Mr Thomas as disproportionate.  We recognise
    that there will be an impact on his private life although we  recognise
    also that his private life is limited to his circle of friends and  the
    fact that he has been employed here.  But against that Mr Thomas  would
    have known that he could only have expected to remain  indefinitely  in
    the United Kingdom if he satisfied the Rules on  continuous  residence.
    He did not satisfy those Rules on continuous residence.

42. In all the circumstances therefore we  would  not  have  considered  it
    disproportionate for the Secretary of State to take the action that she
    did.

43. In those  circumstances  we  dismiss  Mr  Thomas'  appeal  against  the
    decision of the Secretary of State.






Signed                                  Date


Mr Justice Lewis

