
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/36585/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|Oral determination given following hearing    |On 22 September 2015         |
|On 20 August 2015                             |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           AFOLABI SUNDAY OTULAJA

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Nwaekwu, Moorehouse Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. This is an appeal brought by the Secretary of State against a  decision
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Nichols who had allowed the appeal  of  Mr
    Otulaja against the  Secretary  of  State's  refusal  to  grant  him  a
    permanent residence card. For ease of reference I shall throughout this
    determination refer to Mr Otulaja  who was the  original  appellant  as
    "the claimant" and to the Secretary of  State,  who  was  the  original
    respondent, as "the Secretary of State".

 2.  The  claimant  was  married  in  2009  to  a  national  of   Portugal.
    Unfortunately the couple were divorced on 23 July 2013.  By  virtue  of
    the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006   under
    Regulation 10(5) a person satisfies the conditions in that paragraph if
    he ceased to be a family member of an EEA  national  with  a  permanent
    right of residence on the termination of the marriage if at  that  date
    he was  residing  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  accordance  with  these
    Regulations and he also satisfies the conditions in subparagraph (6) of
    Regulation 10 and (which  is  relevant  in  this  case)  prior  to  the
    initiation of proceedings  of  the  termination  of  the  marriage  the
    marriage had lasted for at  least  three  years  and  the  parties  had
    resided in the  United  Kingdom  for  at  least  one  year  during  its
    duration.

 3. In the hearing before Judge Nichols the judge found  and  there  is  no
    challenge to this finding that the parties had been married in 2009  so
    that the marriage had lasted for at least  three  years  prior  to  the
    instigation of divorce proceedings, that the claimant's wife  had  been
    working as at the date of divorce and that the  couple  also  had  been
    residing in the United Kingdom for over  one  year.   Accordingly  this
    claimant had acquired the right to reside and continue residing in this
    country under the 2006 Regulations.

 4. By virtue of Regulation 15, however, in order to  be  entitled  to  the
    permanent right of residence under the 2006  Regulations  the  claimant
    needed to show that as at the date of decision he had been residing  in
    the UK in accordance with the Regulations for a "continuous  period  of
    five years".  In the context of theses Regulations that means  that  he
    had to show a combination of his wife having worked in accordance  with
    the Regulations before the divorce and he himself having then worked in
    what would have been in accordance with the Regulations were he an  EEA
    national after the divorce.

 5. The decision in this case  was  made  by  the  Secretary  of  State  in
    September 2014 and on any  view  it  is  accepted  that  there  was  no
    evidence before the judge that the claimant's wife had been  exercising
    treaty rights in this country before April 2010.  So on any view as  at
    the date of the Secretary of State's decision the application could not
    have succeeded.

 6. Judge Nichols  while  finding,  as  I  have  already  noted,  that  the
    requirements under Regulation 10 had been satisfied found also in terms
    at paragraph 13  that  "The  evidence  before  me  does  not  establish
    residence in accordance with the Regulations for the required period of
    five years" although he acknowledged that this might be "simply on  the
    basis of an absence of clear evidence".

 7. In light of this finding what ought to have  followed  was  a  decision
    dismissing the appeal  because  the  claimant  had  not  satisfied  the
    necessary  requirements  to  entitle  him  to  a  grant  of   permanent
    residence.  However, notwithstanding  this  finding,  which  the  judge
    repeated at the end of paragraph 13 when he said that "I am  unable  to
    record a finding whether  the  appellant  has  resided  in  the  UK  in
    accordance with the Regulations for the required period of five years",
    the judge nonetheless allowed the appeal.

 8. Unsurprisingly  the  Secretary  of  State  has  appealed  against  this
    decision  on  the   basis  that  in  light  of  the  finding  that  the
    requirement to establish that the claimant  had  been  living  in  this
    country in accordance with the Regulations for a continuous  period  of
    five years had not been satisfied there was no proper  basis  on  which
    the appeal could  have been  allowed.

 9. On behalf of the Secretary of State Mr  Wilding  submits  that  in  any
    event there is no clear evidence showing continuous working before 2013
    but this is not a matter which I have to determine.

10. On behalf of the claimant, Mr Nwaekwu does  not  seek  to  assert  that
    there had been  any evidence before  the  Tribunal  to  show  that  the
    claimant's ex-wife had been  exercising treaty rights in  this  country
    prior to 12 April 2010 and in these circumstances was unable to mount a
    submission that the decision was sustainable.   It is accordingly clear
    that this Tribunal has no alternative other than to find that there was
    a material error of law in Judge Nichols' decision such that it must be
    set aside and remade by  this  Tribunal  and  in  the  absence  of  any
    evidence showing that the claimant had been  residing in  this  country
    for a continuous period of five years in  accordance  with  his  treaty
    rights prior to the date of decision it follows that the appeal against
    the respondent's refusal to issue him with a permanent  residence  card
    must be dismissed.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the  claimant's  appeal  is
set aside as containing a material error of law.

The Tribunal remakes the decision, dismissing the claimant's appeal.



Signed:

[pic]
Upper                 Tribunal                  Judge                  Craig
                     Date: 18 September 2015


