
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/36140/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 August 2015                    |On 26 August 2015                    |
|Oral judgment                        |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                              RENA PETULA BOGLE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Adophy, Rana & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is  an  application  challenging  a  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Colvin promulgated following a hearing at  Taylor  House
    on  8  October  2014.   Before  the  Tribunal  today   Mr   Adophy,   a
    representative  who  appeared  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,   has
    attended to represent the appellant.  Mr Tufan is here on behalf of the
    Secretary of State.

2.   The First-tier Judge correctly  noted  that  the  immigration  decision
    under challenge was a refusal to grant a permanent right  of  residence
    under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006, dated 7 August 2013.  The
    appellant's case is set out at  paragraphs  3-6  of  the  determination
    followed by details of the documentary evidence provided,  submissions,
    and statement of law.

3.   The judge accepted that  the  appellant  continued  to  live  with  her
    husband from their marriage in August 2006 until about  September  2010
    when he left the matrimonial home without giving her  any  warning  and
    with no forwarding address. The judge also  found  that  there  was  no
    reason to doubt the appellant's evidence that she has  been  unable  to
    discern the whereabouts  of  her  ex-husband  since  he  left  and  she
    divorced him in June 2013.

4.   In relation to the issues under the EEA provisions, the judge sets  out
    the findings at paragraphs 13  and  14  of  the  determination.   Under
    paragraph 13 the judge finds "it is  accepted  that  the  appellant  is
    unable to  show  that  her  ex-husband,  the  EEA  national,  has  been
    exercising treaty rights during the continuous  five  years  so  as  to
    bring her within Regulation 15(1)(b) of the  EEA  Regulations.   It  is
    therefore necessary to consider in the alternative whether she is  able
    to show that she is a family member  who  has  retained  the  right  of
    residence so as to fall within paragraph 15(1)(f)  of the  Regulations.
    However, under paragraph 10(5)(a), a family member who has retained the
    right of residence, the appellant still has to show that she ceased  to
    be a family member of a qualified person or of an EEA national  with  a
    permanent right of residence on the termination of marriage. This means
    she either has to show that her ex-husband continued to exercise treaty
    rights or had a permanent  right  of  residence  at  the  time  of  the
    divorce. As mentioned above, she is unable to show this for the reasons
    given".

5.   The judge therefore concludes in paragraph 14 that she  was  unable  to
    find that the appellant had shown she is entitled to a permanent  right
    of residence under the EEA Regulations.  The judge thereafter  makes  a
    comment  regarding  whether  consideration  should  be  given   to   an
    application being made to the Home Office under Section 40  of  the  UK
    Borders Act.

6.   In paragraph 9 of the determination the judge does record that  in  the
    submissions that were made by Mr Adophy is  was  said  that  Regulation
    10(5)(d) (iv) may apply on  the  basis  that  the  continued  right  of
    residence  of  a  person  is  warranted  by   'particularly   difficult
    circumstances'.   Mr Adophy told the judge  he  was  unsure  whether  a
    request had been made under section  40  of  the  UK  Borders  Act  for
    information on the sponsor from HMRC.

7.   The basis of the challenge to the determination is set out clearly  and
    succinctly and asserts that notwithstanding  that  point  being  raised
    with regard to Regulation 10(5)(d)(iv) the judge failed to deal with it
    and to set out findings with regard to whether 'particularly  difficult
    circumstances' as contemplated by the Regulations  existed.   There  is
    also a challenge to the decision  and  consideration  under  Article  8
    which I will put aside for the moment.

8.   Permission was initially refused by a Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    but granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds on a renewed  application  on
    18 May 2015.

9.   Regulation 10(5) sets out the  requirements  for  a  family  member  to
    attain a right of residence.

10.  Regulation 10(5) states a  persons  satisfies  the  condition  in  this
    paragraph if....., and then sets out various criteria that have  to  be
    met.  It is asserted that the judge did not deal with  any  element  or
    the required elements of  that  paragraph.   Regulation  10(5)(a),  for
    example, requires a person to show that they satisfy the conditions  if
    they ceased to be a family member of a qualified person or  of  an  EEA
    national with a permanent right of residence on the termination of  the
    marriage, which was in June 2013.   The  judge  specifically  found  in
    paragraph 13 that that had not been proved to be the case on the  basis
    of the evidence made available to the tribunal and the limited evidence
    made available to  the  appellant  relating  to  her  former  husband's
    circumstances.

11.  The difficulty for the appellant and for Mr Adophy in relation to  this
    matter, is that the appellant did not have the benefit  of  having  her
    husband come along to give evidence or the benefit  of  being  able  to
    have information to hand to the judge to prove her husband's status  in
    the United Kingdom at the relevant time.

12.   The  tribunal  spent  some  time  discussing  which  of  the  relevant
    provisions  the  appellant  was  able  to  satisfy,  leading  down   to
    Regulation 10(5)(iv).  If it was the  case  that  the  requirements  in
    10(5)(a)(i) - (iii) could be satisfied and the only issue at large  was
    whether the appellant was able to succeed on the  basis  of  (iv),  the
    existence of particularly difficult circumstances, then it has not been
    established on the basis of the discussions we have had today that  any
    error the judge may have  made  in  relation  to  this  matter  in  not
    specifically setting out findings in relation to that paragraph are  in
    fact material.

13.  It is submitted that the 'particularly  difficult  circumstances'  this
    appellant faced relate to the fact that  she  was  unable  to  get  any
    information relating to her husband's circumstances.  That  is  clearly
    not the type of situation envisaged by the author of the provisions and
    indeed there is an example, and I appreciate it  is  only  an  example,
    within the provision itself where it is said "such as the family member
    has been a victim of domestic violence  while  the  marriage  or  civil
    partnership was subsisting".  It must be remembered that what is  being
    proposed is that the person has  the  ability  to  succeed,  to  obtain
    status under European law by relying on such a provision, when they are
    unable to attain that status by being able to demonstrate that they can
    satisfy any other requirement(s) of the Regulations. The burden is upon
    the appellant to prove.

14.  It was submitted today on behalf  of  the  appellant  that  in  fact  a
    request was made under Section 40 to the Secretary of State asking  for
    information relating to the appellant's husband's circumstances.  It is
    accepted that not all the details relating to that individual, such  as
    the national insurance number, could be provided but I accept  that  is
    probably the reality of  the  situation  where  an  individual  has  no
    knowledge of such facts because information of  that  nature  would  be
    with the former spouse.

15.  It has not been established that any request  was  made  to  HMRC.  The
    request was made to the Secretary of State.  It is said  the  Secretary
    of State failed to respond to that request and this in some respect  is
    a situation identical to that faced by the appellant  in  the  case  of
    Amos and Others [2011] EWCA Civ 552 in which the Court of  Appeal  gave
    consideration to the position of a divorced spouse  where  difficulties
    existed in relation  to  obtaining  information  and  consideration  of
    whether there was a positive obligation upon the Secretary of State  to
    assist by obtaining such information as may exist from  those  such  as
    HMRC to assist an appellant in  proving  that  they  were  entitled  to
    status.

16.  That was an issue that  had  been  at  large  within  the  jurisdiction
    following a case in another jurisdiction, not immigration  and  asylum,
    which seemed to suggest that there was such a positive  obligation  and
    in fact a shared burden of proof between the Secretary of State and the
    appellant in that particular case.  The Court of  Appeal  held  that  a
    divorced spouse had to establish that  he  or  she  had  the  right  of
    residence before the question of whether a retained right existed.  The
    Court of Appeal rejected the argument that there was a shared burden of
    proof and left the responsibility for proving the allegation fairly and
    squarely upon the person making such an allegation. The Court of Appeal
    held that there was no authority for the contention that the department
    concerned had a  duty  to  obtain  information  from  other  government
    departments and that the Home Office could not be expected to ask  HMRC
    or the Department of Work and Pensions whether  the  EEA  national  was
    working or was self-employed.

17.  Within Amos it was considered  and  accepted  that  if  a  request  for
    information had been made of the Home Office, the Home Office could not
    be forced to obtain information and if a direction was sought it  would
    only yield the information  which  the  Home  Office  happens  to  hold
    itself.  Notwithstanding that being the official position it  is  known
    that in some cases the Secretary of State for the Home Department  will
    make a request to ascertain whether such information  is  held  by  the
    Inland Revenue to assist cases, although there is a limited  number  of
    such  applications/requests  available.  What  the  Court   of   Appeal
    recognised in Amos is that if  such  information  was  not  forthcoming
    there was the possibility to seek  a  direction  under  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Procedure Rules, or to seek a witness summons if the  location
    of the EEA national was known.

18.  It is said today that no response was received from  the  Secretary  of
    State, yet no decision was made to make any form of application  or  to
    make use of the remedies that  exist  within  the  judicial  system  to
    provide an effective remedy against the Secretary of State in  relation
    to her silence in response to the request made.

19.  The position, therefore, is that this is  a  matter  in  which  it  was
    known there was no information from the EEA national.   It  is  said  a
    request was made to the Secretary of State.  It is said  the  Secretary
    of State failed to respond yet no further application was made.  It  is
    quite properly accepted today by Mr Adophy  that  with  hindsight,  the
    benefit of the crystal clear vision that hindsight gives you,  that  in
    fact such an application should have been  made.

20.  The other issue to note is that at the hearing before Judge  Colvin  no
    application was  made  to  adjourn  or  to  seek  a  direction  and  no
    indication given that the appellant was other  than  ready  to  proceed
    with the hearing before the judge, albeit on the limited evidence  that
    was made available.

21.   The  question  of  whether  the  lack  of  such  evidence   can   form
    'particularly difficult circumstances' has not been made out.  The case
    of Amos was examining a similar situation and did not find that in  the
    event an individual could not obtain  information  that  there  was  an
    alternative right  permitting  that  an  individual  to  succeed  under
    Regulation 10(5)(iv) on this basis.  Indeed Mr Adophy's  response  when
    asked whether the Court of Appeal had made such a finding  was  to  say
    that the Court of Appeal had "not been so generous".

22.  In that submission he is absolutely right   because  it  has  not  been
    established, and I accept there is no authority on the point, that  not
    having such information and/or the Secretary of State not responding to
    the request, is sufficient to satisfy the definition  of  'particularly
    difficult circumstances'.  It is a question of fact in each case and no
    hard and fast rules can be set as to what may  constitute  particularly
    difficult circumstances or not, but on the facts of this case it as not
    been established that such circumstances exist.  The  specific  wording
    suggests a stringent  test,  not  just  'difficult'  but  'particularly
    difficult'.

23.  In conclusion two points arise.  First, the judge  did  not  find  that
    the necessary status of the EEA national had been  established  and  if
    that shows that Regulation 10(5)(a) could not be satisfied, or  any  of
    the relevant parts of 10(5) that are required before moving on to (iv),
    the judge had dealt with the submission made in relation to 10(5).   If
    the matter was that of 10(5)(d)(iv) on the facts before  the  judge  it
    has not been shown that if an error has been made in  not  setting  out
    findings in relation to this issue, that it is material to the decision
    to dismiss the appeal under the Regulations in any event.

24.  The second ground of  challenge  relates  the  judge's  findings  under
    Article 8.  The judge set out the Article 8 matter. He  refers  to  the
    long residence provisions within the Immigration Rules,  notes  he  had
    been asked to consider the case under Article  8,  did  not  find  that
    there  were  any  exception  or  compelling  circumstances  to  justify
    consideration outside the Rules and found that the  appellant  was  not
    able to succeed within the new Rules reflecting Article 8.

25.  There may be arguable merit  in  the  fact  that  as  this  is  an  EEA
    decision the  new  Rules  are  not  applicable  but  there  is  a  more
    fundamental issues in relation  to  this  matter.  The  decision  under
    challenge is a refusal to recognise a particular status  claimed  under
    the EEA Regulations.  It is not a decision  to  remove.  It  is  not  a
    decision that will result in any disruption to or interference  with  a
    right to family or private life within the United Kingdom  such  as  to
    engage Article 8 at all.  It is known, and Mr Tufan  has  assisted  the
    Tribunal in relation to this matter, that the application of Article  8
    in an EEA appeal  has  been  examined  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  a
    determination is forthcoming dealing with this point but that  was  not
    available on 8 October 2014 and so I make no further reference to it.

Notice of Decision

26.  I do not find it has been established on the facts of this matter  that
    a material legal error has been made and on that basis  I  dismiss  the
    appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 20 August 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date: 20 August 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

