
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/36567/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30th September 2015                        |On 2nd November 2015          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                             mr abdoulie harding
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D. O'Callaghan of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr L. Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Gambia born on 16th  February  1980.   He
    appeals against  a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lawrence
    sitting at Hatton Cross  on  1st  April  2015  who  had  dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal against a decision  of  the  Respondent  dated  29th
    August 2014.  That decision was to refuse the  Appellant's  application
    for variation of leave and to remove the Appellant by way or directions
    under Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

2.   On 24th August 2007 the Appellant  entered  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    dependant of his mother Mrs Elizabeth Harding who was the Gambian  High
    Commissioner (now Ambassador) to the United Kingdom.  As a  result  the
    Appellant was  exempt  from  immigration  control  as  a  member  of  a
    diplomat's family.  On 15th October  2008  the  Appellant  applied  for
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a student  which  was  granted
    until 31st May 2010.  He was granted further leave to remain as a  Tier
    1 Post Study graduate valid until 23rd March 2013.  On 20th March  2013
    three days before  that  leave  was  due  to  expire  he  submitted  an
    application to remain in the United Kingdom on the basis  that  refusal
    would put this country in breach of its  obligations  under  Article  8
    (right to respect for private and family  life)  of  the  Human  Rights
    Convention to require him to leave the United Kingdom.  The refusal  of
    that application has given rise to the appeal proceedings

The November 2013 Hearing

3.   The March 2013 application was refused by the  Respondent  on  1st  May
    2013 and the Appellant appealed against that decision.  The appeal came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Sullivan sitting at  Hatton  Cross  on
    25th November 2013.  Evidence was given  to  Judge  Sullivan  that  Mrs
    Harding was accredited as ambassador to nine countries as  well  as  to
    the United Kingdom and was away from London for a week  or  two  almost
    every month.  As the eldest male child  of  the  family  the  Appellant
    oversaw the household in his mother's absence.  The Appellant  had  two
    brothers living in the United Kingdom aged 24 and 31 years,  they  were
    both students.  A third brother was in the Gambia.

4.   Judge Sullivan was not satisfied that  the  Appellant  had  established
    family life in the United Kingdom for the purposes of Article  8.   The
    Appellant was 33 years of age and in employment embarking on a business
    venture with a business partner.  She was satisfied that the  Appellant
    had established a private life as he had lived in  the  United  Kingdom
    lawfully since August 2007.  The Appellant  had  studied  at  Middlesex
    University and obtained a BA in Business Administration and an  MSc  in
    Management.  The Respondent's decision was not in accordance  with  the
    law as the Respondent had failed to consider that the interference with
    the Appellant's private life was proportionate  under  Article  8.   As
    this was a case in which the Judge found "particular sensitivities such
    that the Respondent  should  consider  the  application  of  Article  8
    properly" she declined to consider Article 8  herself  stating  instead
    that the decision remained outstanding before the Respondent.

The Respondent's Second Decision

5.   The Respondent considered the matter further on 29th  August  2014  but
    again refused the application.  The Respondent noted that the Appellant
    had lived in the United Kingdom for seven years and  was  aged  34,  as
    such the Appellant could not  satisfy  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE(1) of the Immigration Rules since he had not lived  continuously
    in the United Kingdom for at least twenty years and was over the age of
    25 years.  He had failed to provide evidence that he  had  severed  all
    social, cultural and family ties to Gambia.  He had resided  in  Gambia
    up to the age of 27 and would have retained a knowledge  of  the  life,
    language and culture of that country.

6.   The Respondent  considered  the  Appellant's  application  outside  the
    Immigration Rules under Article 8.  The Appellant had not shown that he
    and his siblings were reliant on his mother or on each other.   He  had
    been granted leave to remain in the United Kingdom in his own right  as
    a student and was not exempt from immigration control in line with  his
    mother as were his siblings.  It was not accepted  that  he  should  be
    offered leave to remain purely for the reason that he was not  eligible
    to be given exemption.  Although the Appellant wished to  continue  his
    business in the United Kingdom he was unable to apply for further leave
    to remain under the Tier 1 Rules.   There  was  no  obligation  on  the
    United Kingdom to provide the Appellant with an opportunity  to  manage
    his business.  The Appellant's family continue to own  a  residence  in
    Gambia  and  the  Appellant  retained  strong  ties  to  that  country.
    Whatever the disruption to his private life was it was proportionate to
    the legitimate aim of maintaining effective immigration control.

The Hearing at First Instance

7.   The Appellant appealed against that decision arguing that  it  breached
    Article 8 and the matter came before Judge Lawrence on 1st  April  2015
    when the Appellant was represented by Counsel who appeared both  before
    me and before Judge  Sullivan.   The  Judge  heard  evidence  from  the
    Appellant's mother Mrs Harding and from the Appellant himself.  It  was
    acknowledged on behalf of the Appellant that the appeal was only  under
    Article 8.  At paragraph 9 and 10 the Judge set out  the  evidence  and
    his views thereon.  He wrote:

    "9.  The evidence before me is that the Appellant  has  enrolled  on  a
        course of studies at Nottingham  University.   He  lives  with  his
        mother and siblings in  London.   He  commutes  four  days  a  week
        between London and  Nottingham.   He  is  still  a  member  of  his
        mother's household.  There is no evidence that he is  pursuing  his
        business activities.  He is now a full-time student.  The  position
        has changed since 23rd March 2013 application and since the  matter
        was previously before the Tribunal.

    "10. In my view the  Appellant  has  two  options  before  recourse  to
        Article 8.  He could either seek leave  to  remain  in  the  United
        Kingdom as a student or seek exemption from immigration control  on
        the basis that he is a member of his mother's household.  She is  a
        diplomat.  I have been provided  evidence  that  his  siblings,  at
        least one of them (Muhammed Alieu Harding) enjoys exemption.   This
        issue was raised at the hearing.  Mr O'Callaghan submits  that  the
        Appellant wishes to have leave to remain in the UK in his own name.
         He does not wish for diplomatic exemption status  for  his  mother
        who is the Gambian representative for not only the UK but ten other
        countries.  She may be moved by her Government or  to  any  one  of
        those or recalled.  In either event  the  Appellant  will  be  left
        without any rights to remain and continue with his  studies.   That
        is of course a difficulty.  However to avoid  this  predicament  if
        that transpires, the Appellant has the option of seeking  leave  to
        remain as a student under the Immigration Rules.  His position  has
        changed since the  date  of  the  application  and  the  date  11th
        December 2013 when the Tribunal previously determined  his  appeal.
        Had the position been that the Appellant is seeking to  pursue  his
        business activities as was the evidence before the Tribunal in  the
        previous appeal the position may  well  be  different.   He  is  no
        longer in business.  He is a full-time student.  He could apply  to
        remain as a student".

8.   After citing a number of authorities including Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27
    the Judge concluded that the refusal to grant the  Appellant  leave  to
    remain did not put the United Kingdom in breach of  Article  8  and  he
    dismissed the appeal.

The Onward Appeal

9.   In his grounds of onward appeal the  Appellant  argued  that  following
    advice provided by the Foreign Office to  the  Appellant's  mother  the
    Appellant's entry clearance was amended on 15th October 2008 so  as  to
    establish that he was granted leave to remain as a student, such  leave
    expiring on 31st May 2010.  The Appellant  secured  a  BA  in  Business
    Administration  from  Middlesex  University  in  2009  and  an  MSc  in
    Management Studies in 2010.   The  Appellant's  university  studies  at
    Nottingham University Business School concluded in September 2015.  The
    Judge  had  refused  the  appeal  on  a  ground  not  advanced  by  the
    Respondent, namely that before  being  able  to  rely  upon  Article  8
    outside of the Immigration Rules the Appellant should either seek leave
    to remain  in  this  country  as  a  student  or  seek  exemption  from
    immigration control as a member of his mother's household.   The  Judge
    had only raised that issue during the course of submissions.  The Judge
    had  made  no  enquiries  to  whether  the  Appellant  could  make   an
    application for exemption from the Immigration Rules as a member  of  a
    diplomat's household.

10.  The grounds quoted  from  the  Respondent's  guidance  EXM  4(b)  which
    related to children under 18 or up to the 25th birthday if in full-time
    education.  Applications from dependent children aged 25 or  over  must
    be referred to Diplomatic Missions and International Organisations Unit
    for a decision.  I pause to note here that the Appellant was 27 when he
    entered the United Kingdom and thus his case would need to be  referred
    to the DMIOU and Protocol Directorate of the Foreign  and  Commonwealth
    Office for a decision.

11.  The grounds continued that there was no requirement that the  Appellant
    should exhaust other potential  means  of  remaining  in  this  country
    before relying upon Article 8.  He was lawfully present in  the  United
    Kingdom and was entitled before the conclusion of his  last  period  of
    leave to remain to make an application for further leave to  remain  on
    Article 8 grounds.  During the course of  the  first  instance  hearing
    Counsel had identified scenarios where someone might  prefer  to  enjoy
    Article 8 leave such as where they were had already commenced a  course
    of study but did not  wish  to  engage  with  the  Tier  4  maintenance
    requirements or where a diplomat  parent's  tenure  might  change  with
    little notice.  These scenarios were advanced as examples but  did  not
    relate to instructions received.  They were not  the  position  of  the
    Appellant.

12.  The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Osborne  on  30th  June  2015.   In  granting
    permission to appeal  Judge  Osborne  recited  the  grounds  which  had
    asserted that the Judge's approach resulted  in  the  right  of  appeal
    provided by statute being nullified. The Appellant enjoyed  Section  3C
    leave after lodging his appeal but could not then make a further Tier 4
    (General) Student application for leave. An application  for  exemption
    would require an exercise of discretion.

13.   Despite  providing  his  view  that  the  Appellant  should  make   an
    application either for student leave or diplomatic exemption the  Judge
    nonetheless went on to consider the Appellant's appeal under Article 8.
     It was at least arguable that the view reached by the Judge  that  the
    Appellant should make one or other of the applications  before  relying
    on Article 8 infected the Judge's consideration of the Article 8 appeal
    to the extent that it amounted to a material error of law.  It  was  at
    least arguable that the Judge should have determined  the  appeal  that
    was before him on the basis of  the  case  which  was  pursued  by  the
    Appellant and the fact that the Judge failed to do so  amounted  to  an
    arguable material error of law.  All grounds could be argued.

14.  The Respondent replied to this grant of permission  on  3rd  July  2015
    stating that the Judge had conducted a  proportionality  assessment  on
    all material matters.  It was open to the Judge to take account of  the
    options that the Appellant had in respect of  alternative  applications
    as to whether the refusal of the Appellant's application  would  amount
    to a disproportionate breach of the Appellant's Article 8 rights.

The Hearing Before Me

15.  In oral submissions to me Counsel argued that evidence had  been  given
    to the Judge but not put in his determination that she had been advised
    by the UK Foreign Office that the Appellant should apply for  leave  to
    remain as a student (and not rely on the  diplomatic  exemption).   Mrs
    Harding relied on Foreign Office advice which  was  why  the  Appellant
    went down the immigration route.  The difficulty for the Appellant  was
    that once a decision was made and he appealed he would  have  3C  leave
    but during the course of that 3C leave he could not  make  a  variation
    application once there was an appeal.  The  Respondent's  decision  was
    dated 29th August 2014 but the Appellant did not become a student until
    September 2014.  He could not therefore during the  course  of  his  3C
    leave whilst he appealed against  the  August  2014  decision  make  an
    alternative application for leave to remain as a student on the  course
    which he had just begun.  He was lawfully entitled to become a  student
    but the operation of Section 3C of the Immigration Act  1971  prevented
    him from applying for a variation.  His only remedy would  be  judicial
    review.

16.  There was no requirement in  the  Immigration  Rules  to  make  another
    application under the Rules.  The Judge had erred by reading  into  the
    Rules a requirement that was not there.  It had  taken  the  Respondent
    over a year to reconsider the matter.  The Judge had not  engaged  with
    the detailed submissions relating to Article 8.  That the Appellant was
    prevented from making an application  as  a  student  by  operation  of
    Section 3C was a factor which should have been taken  into  account  by
    the Judge in the Article 8 proportionality exercise.

17.  In reply the Presenting Officer relied  on  the  Respondent's  Rule  24
    reply which I have summarised at paragraph 14 above.  The Judge had not
    made a material error of law.  The Appellant had other  options  before
    recourse to Article 8.  Some options were more attractive than  others.
    On the point of the Appellant's membership of  his  mother's  household
    the Presenting  Officer  noted  that  the  Appellant  was  studying  at
    Nottingham four days per week. There  was  no  material  error  in  the
    determination.

18.  In reply Counsel argued that in 2013 the Appellant was not  a  student.
    If it was said that the Appellant had options other than to apply under
    Article 8 those options must be real not fanciful.  The Judge  had  not
    engaged with that point.  If the Appellant had  been  granted  a  short
    period of discretionary leave he could  then  apply  to  be  a  student
    again, but the Judge did not have that in mind.

The Error of Law

19.  Having heard the submissions in this case I announced my decision  that
    I found there was an error of law in the  determination  such  that  it
    fell to be set aside and the appeal reheard.  I now give my reasons for
    that  decision.  The  Judge  had  not   correctly   carried   out   the
    proportionality exercise when assessing whether the  interference  with
    the Appellant's private life was disproportionate.  Although the  Judge
    had  indicated  that  the  Appellant  should  have  applied  under  the
    Immigration Rules either as a student or as a member of the  diplomat's
    household before applying for Article 8 he had nevertheless gone on  to
    consider Article 8. The complaint is not that he had failed to consider
    Article 8 at all.

20.  As Judge Osborne pointed out in granting permission to  appeal  it  was
    at least arguable that when approaching Article 8 the Judge had in  the
    back of  his  mind  the  consideration  that  it  weighed  against  the
    Appellant that he had not made an application as  a  student  or  as  a
    member of a diplomatic household before applying under Article  8.   In
    fact the Appellant could make neither application.   First  of  all  he
    could not amend his application for leave to remain while he enjoyed 3C
    leave.  Once  the  Respondent  had  taken  a  decision  to  refuse  his
    application the Appellant could theoretically still make an application
    for leave to remain as a student but it would then be on the basis that
    he had no leave to remain (as he would have to withdraw his  notice  of
    appeal against the Respondent's decision) and that in turn  would  mean
    he would  lose  any  right  of  appeal  against  a  subsequent  adverse
    decision.  Similarly, he could not make any application as a member  of
    a diplomat's household because he was over the age of  25  and  outside
    the protection given in the Guidance to Immigration Officers  cited  by
    the Appellant in the grounds of onward appeal against Judge  Lawrence's
    decision.

21.  I  therefore  decided  that  the  issue  of  whether  the  Respondent's
    decision breached this country's obligations under Article 8 should  be
    reheard.  There had been two substantive hearings already  at  which  a
    great deal of evidence had been given.  In the circumstances it did not
    appear to me to be suitable that I should remit the matter back to  the
    First-tier to be heard again as the findings of fact were likely to  be
    relatively narrowly based.   The  direction  had  been  issued  by  the
    Tribunal when giving notice of the  Upper  Tribunal  hearing  that  the
    parties should prepare for that hearing on the basis that if the  Upper
    Tribunal decided to set  aside  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal any further evidence  including  supplementary  oral  evidence
    that the Upper Tribunal might need to consider if it decided to  remake
    the decision can be so considered at that hearing.  There  was  nothing
    to  prevent  me  from  proceeding  to  a  substantive  rehearing.   The
    Appellant was in court and was able to give evidence.  I  was  informed
    that the Appellant's mother due to professional commitments was  unable
    to attend but she had given evidence on the last occasion.  Insofar  as
    there were gaps in Judge Lawrence's record of the oral  evidence  given
    by Mrs Harding that could  be  supplemented  by  information  from  the
    Appellant's Counsel Mr O'Callaghan who as I  have  indicated  has  been
    present at all three hearings of this case.

The Substantive Rehearing

22.  The Appellant attended and gave oral testimony.  He  was  examined  and
    cross-examined but not re-examined.  He stated  that  having  completed
    his course he was expecting results in November and  was  expecting  to
    pass that course.  At present  he  was  residing  with  his  mother  in
    Kilburn.  She was at the Embassy that day.  She had  recently  been  to
    Ireland and had to travel to Spain in the next few  weeks.   In  cross-
    examination the Appellant explained why he wanted to stay in the United
    Kingdom with immigration leave in his own right. He and his family (his
    mother and brothers) were here and they were very close.  He  had  lost
    his father at the age of 16.  His life here was the life  he  was  used
    to.  His mother's role as Ambassador was a heavy responsibility and she
    was a single parent.  He had helped her in any way he  could.  Once  he
    received his results for his MBA course  he  said  he  would  want  the
    opportunity which the natural progression of  his  qualifications  gave
    him.  His mother had paid for his fees.

23.  In closing for the  Respondent  reliance  was  placed  on  the  refusal
    letter.  The Appellant was an adult who had been fortunate in having  a
    mother who had distinguished employment.  She had the financial ability
    to support his studies but beyond that there  was  nothing  exceptional
    about this family.  All of the Appellant's siblings were of the age  of
    majority and able to find their own way in life.  There was  no  reason
    why Article 8 should be engaged in this case at all or if it  was  that
    the Respondent's decision would disproportionately interfere  with  the
    Appellant's Article 8 rights.

24.  In closing for the Appellant Counsel relied on  his  skeleton  argument
    which broadly followed the grounds of the onward appeal  which  I  have
    summarised above (see paragraphs 9 to 11).  In  considering  the  claim
    under Article 8 a number of public interest  matters  should  be  taken
    into  account.   Countries  should  be  delicate  in  interfering  with
    diplomatic families; no pressures should be placed upon  diplomats  via
    their families. Gambia had a sensitive  relationship  with  the  United
    Kingdom having withdrawn from the Commonwealth on 2nd October 2013 as a
    result  of  which  his  mother  was  the  Ambassador   not   the   High
    Commissioner. His mother had confirmed she was aided by  the  Appellant
    looking after her household while she regularly travelled to Europe  in
    her role as Ambassador to several countries; the  Appellant  should  be
    allowed to enjoy his life here whilst his mother  remained  Ambassador.
    He was not seeking permanent residence in this country.

25.  The Respondent had delayed reconsidering the application after  it  was
    sent back to the Respondent by Judge Sullivan. The  Appellant  did  not
    fall within the Immigration Rules but the refusal letter did not engage
    with the issues in the case.  The Appellant helped to run the household
    whilst his mother was abroad and she could be away for periods of time.
     When the Appellant came back from his studies in Nottingham  he  would
    run the household for her.  His involvement aided her to  get  on  with
    her professional duties.  As no pressure should  be  put  on  diplomats
    care should be taken over how their  relatives  are  dealt  with.   One
    could not get away from the fact that this  was  a  diplomatic  family.
    The Ambassador Mrs  Harding  would  be  affected  by  the  Respondent's
    decision.  He helped her fulfil her role.  It would have helped to have
    had a more informed view from the Respondent  on  the  public  interest
    requirements of the effect on diplomatic families.

26.  The Appellant was placed in a difficult position because  of  what  the
    Foreign Office had told his mother.   He  will  be  left  in  a  weaker
    position than his brothers who were advised to apply as members of  the
    diplomatic household.  The Foreign Office advice  to  Mrs  Harding  had
    been that the Appellant should go down the student route.  As a  result
    the Appellant had made his first application (in 2008) because of  that
    advice.  The other three siblings had been allowed to be in the  United
    Kingdom because they had the appropriate diplomatic exemption.  If  the
    Appellant had also gone down that path he to would have acquired exempt
    status.  When he came in  (in  August  2007)  he  was  exempt  but  the
    following year he was advised to become a student.

27.  Where the dependent is over 25 discretion has to be  exercised.   There
    was no time limit on exempt status so the  Appellant  could  have  been
    here  until  his  mother  the  Ambassador  left  the   United   Kingdom
    permanently.  She had not been given that advice (to apply for leave to
    remain  for  her  other  children)  in  any  other  category.   It  was
    inappropriate to separate him.  His  brother  had  entered  the  United
    Kingdom since the Appellant had entered  and  had  received  diplomatic
    exemption.  Application was made for an anonymity order  as  notice  of
    the proceedings had been reported back  in  the  Gambia  and  incorrect
    information  had  been  put  out  that  the   Ambassador   was   having
    difficulties.   The  Appellant  was  not  claiming   asylum   but   the
    proceedings had been misconstrued as if he was.

Findings

28.  In this case  it  is  accepted  that  the  Appellant  cannot  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE.   He  has  not  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom for more than twenty years and he is over the age  of  25.   He
    must therefore  rely  on  the  provisions  of  Article  8  outside  the
    Immigration  Rules.   He  must  show  that  there  are  compelling   or
    compassionate circumstances such that his application should be allowed
    outside the Rules, due weight being given to the fact  that  he  cannot
    meet the Rules.  The Appellant argues that the only reason why he is in
    this position is because his mother was advised  approximately  a  year
    after the Appellant entered  the  United  Kingdom  that  the  Appellant
    should apply for any further leave to remain in  this  country  through
    the Immigration Rules rather than  continue  to  rely  on  the  special
    exemption status which is given to family members of diplomats.

29.  I do not consider that this  evidence  is  particularly  controversial.
    The Appellant had entered the United Kingdom at the  age  of  27  which
    meant that his case would have to be specifically  considered  by  both
    the Respondent and the Foreign Office as he  fell  outside  the  normal
    parameters for guidance on exempt family members.  It is clear from the
    guidance  contained  in  4.2  EXM  4(b)  that  exemption  for   overage
    dependants, that is to say in this case persons over the age of 25, are
    looked at  particularly  carefully  by  a  specific  unit,  a  Protocol
    Directorate of the Foreign Office, for a decision.

30.  I appreciate  the  Appellant's  argument  that  the  specifics  of  the
    approach of the British Government to a situation such as this were not
    included in the second refusal letter,  (the  one  issued  after  Judge
    Sullivan "remitted" the matter back to the Respondent).   It  is  clear
    from the tenor of the exemption guidance that exemption status for over
    25s is a matter for specific consideration on a case by case basis  and
    dependent on the particular facts of the case. It  is  not  for  me  to
    speculate on the motives of the Foreign Office but it is  difficult  to
    avoid the conclusion that the Ambassador received the advice she did in
    2008 (that her son should apply for status under the Immigration  Rules
    rather than through a diplomatic exemption) was that the authorities at
    the time did not wish to make a decision outside the  guidance  in  the
    Appellant's favour.  The Appellant's argument is  that  whatever  their
    motives, the effect of the advice he received was that he lost a  right
    which he would otherwise have had.  That is  to  say  he  gave  up  his
    diplomatic status and instead went into the  immigration  system  where
    ultimately he was unsuccessful.

31.  I do not accept that argument.   The  exemption  provisions  for  those
    dependants over 25 require that they must show  that  they  are  indeed
    dependants and it is not at all clear that  the  Appellant  could  have
    shown that status in 2008 because he was by then a 28 year old man with
    an ability to work and provide for himself (he  reported  that  he  had
    ambitions  to  run  a  business).   Secondly,  the  provisions  of  the
    exemption state that an exempt vignette (i.e.  certification  that  the
    person is entitled to the exemption) should be granted valid  for  five
    years or for the length of  the  posting,  whichever  is  the  shorter.
    Clearly in this case the length of the posting has  been  substantially
    longer than five years, but in any event the Appellant would only  have
    been entitled to an exempt vignette for up to five years. At some point
    the Appellant would have had to have sought leave under  the  Rules.  I
    accept the argument that by the  time  the  appeal  came  before  Judge
    Lawrence the Appellant was not entitled to apply for exemption  as  the
    member of a diplomat's family, but I do not  draw  the  inference  from
    that, that as a result, the refusal of the Appellant's application  was
    disproportionate under Article 8.

32.  I do not accept the argument that there  are  particular  sensitivities
    in this case such that the Appellant's application should be given some
    form  of  exceptional  treatment  or  otherwise  looked  at  with   any
    particular degree of sensitivity over and above the duty already placed
    on the Tribunal in a human rights appeal. That Gambia is  no  longer  a
    member of the Commonwealth appears to  have  little  relevance  to  the
    case. In giving the Appellant's mother the  advice  they  did  in  2008
    (that the Appellant should apply under  the  immigration  route  if  he
    wished to remain in this country), the Foreign Office would  appear  to
    be making it clear to her that they did not consider that withdrawal of
    the exemption status gave rise to any difficulties or  public  interest
    considerations.  Had that been the case it appears implausible that the
    Foreign Office would have given the advice which they did.

33.  As a result in carrying out the balancing act, I do not find  that  any
    weight is to be attached to the Appellant's argument that  he  and  his
    mother were in some way misinformed or misled by the Foreign Office  or
    that the Appellant has lost some form  of  status  which  he  otherwise
    would have had but for the  information  and/or  advice  given  by  the
    Foreign Office in 2008.

34.  The issue in this case is simply  whether  the  Appellant  can  succeed
    under Article 8 outside the Rules.  The  Appellant  has  established  a
    private life in this country but I agree with Judge  Sullivan,  he  has
    not established a family life over and above or beyond normal emotional
    ties. When in the household (and not away  studying)   he  assists  his
    mother with the running of the household as and when  her  duties  call
    her away. I accept that given the number of countries she is Ambassador
    to she will be away for  significant  periods  of  time.  However,  the
    Appellant's siblings are themselves all over the age of 18 and much  of
    the running of the household will  in  fact  be  merely  the  Appellant
    looking after himself whilst his mother is away.   That  the  Appellant
    from  time  to  time  assists  his  mother  by  relieving  her  of  one
    consideration (how to run the household) while she  is  away  does  not
    amount to more than the normal emotional ties between a mother and son.



35.  Having found  that  the  Appellant  has  established  a  private  life,
    particularly given that he has been resident in this country for  seven
    years and has studied here successfully, the next question  is  whether
    the Respondent's decision would interfere with that  private  life.   I
    find that it would.  Although the Appellant, judging by his evidence to
    me, appears to have no very clear plans  for  the  future  and  on  the
    papers it has been indicated in the past that at some point he proposes
    to return to the Gambia, his  enforced  removal  at  this  stage  would
    interfere with the private life he has  built  up.   That  interference
    would be in accordance with the legitimate aim of  immigration  control
    and since the Appellant has completed  his  studies  there  is  now  no
    reason why he cannot return to  the  Gambia,  there  being  no  further
    studies for him to undertake.

36.  The issue comes down to whether the interference with  the  Appellant's
    private life is proportionate to the legitimate aim  pursued.   On  the
    one side of the balance I give weight to the fact  that  the  Appellant
    cannot succeed under the  Immigration  Rules,  as  a  result  of  which
    compelling and/or compassionate reasons are required for the  Appellant
    to show that the interference will be disproportionate.  On  the  other
    side of the balance the Appellant's leave to remain has been precarious
    throughout. Since he was granted leave to remain as a student he  could
    have no expectation that that leave to remain would be made  permanent.
    I have dealt at some length with his argument that he should have  been
    exempt from leave to remain.  In view of my findings on that  issue  no
    weight can be given on the  Appellant's  side  of  the  scales  to  the
    argument that he should have had exempt status.

37.  The Appellant is a healthy adult male  with  a  substantial  number  of
    qualifications.   He  could  return  to  the   Gambia   and   use   his
    qualifications to establish a business there  or  otherwise  engage  in
    employment.  There are no compelling or compassionate circumstances  in
    this case such that the Appellant's appeal should  be  allowed  outside
    the Immigration Rules.  I  therefore  dismiss  the  Appellant's  appeal
    against the Respondent's decision to refuse to vary leave to remain and
    to remove the Appellant.

38.  An application was made in closing for an anonymity order on the  basis
    that these proceedings were  being  misrepresented/misreported  in  the
    Gambia.  There may sometimes be  a  risk  that  court  proceedings  are
    misreported, indeed it is not unknown for such matters to happen in the
    United Kingdom to the frustration of  Judges  and  other  court  users.
    However that of itself  is  not  a  sufficient  pretext  to  rebut  the
    presumption that there should be open justice.  No evidence  was  given
    to me that anyone is at risk of harm as a result of  unfounded  rumours
    based on inaccurate reporting of these proceedings, nor do  I  see  any
    reason why the Ambassador Mrs Harding should be in a difficult position
    with her Government or anyone else  as  there  has  been  no  criticism
    whatsoever of her in any of these proceedings.

Notice of Decision

     The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
    error of law and I have set it aside.  I remake the  decision  in  this
    case by dismissing the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    decisions.

     Appeal dismissed.

     I make no anonymity order in this case (see above).

Signed this 30th day of October 2015

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed this 30th day of October 2015


.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft


