



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/36062/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London                    |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 24th June 2014                               |On 25th July 2014          |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                               Mr shuhan ahmed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Rahman

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    Judge Ferguson promulgated on 11th March 2014, in which he allowed  the
    appeal of the Respondent against the Appellant's decision of 24th  July
    2013 refusing the Respondent further leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

 2. For the sake of clarity in this determination,  I  will  refer  to  the
    Secretary of State as "the Respondent" and  Mr  Shuhan  Ahmed  as  "the
    Appellant" which is how they were referred  to  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.

 3. By way of background the Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born 15th
    April 1995, and is now therefore 19 years of age. He entered the United
    Kingdom in June 2005 entering on a family visit  visa  along  with  his
    mother and sister. His mother departed the United Kingdom  leaving  the
    Appellant and his sister with  family  relatives.  The  Appellant  made
    application on 23rd April 2009 for indefinite  leave  to  remain.  That
    application was refused. He was however granted discretionary leave  to
    remain until 22nd April 2012. On 22nd April 2012  he  made  an  in-time
    application  to  extend  this  status  but  this  was  refused  by  the
    Respondent on 24th July 2013. It is that decision which  the  Appellant
    appealed and which came before the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

 4.  There  are  two  components  to  the  Respondent's   grounds   seeking
    permission.

      i) The  first  ground  asserts  that  the  Judge's  finding  that  the
         Appellant should be granted  discretionary  leave  was  irrational;
         this is on the  basis  that  the  Judge  made  significant  adverse
         credibility  findings  against  the  Appellant,  finding  that  the
         Appellant and others had  not  been  honest  with  respect  to  the
         contact that the Appellant had with his mother.

     ii) The second ground asserts that there is misdirection in law in that
         the Judge's  determination  demonstrates  that  he  did  not  fully
         understand the decision of the Secretary of  State  and  failed  to
         remind himself, when considering the discretionary leave issue, the
         basis on which discretionary leave had been granted  in  the  first
         place. The Appellant had been granted discretionary leave under the
         policy relating to unaccompanied  minors.  Under  this  policy  the
         Appellant could only have been granted discretionary leave until he
         reached the age of 17 years 6 months. As pointed out to  the  judge
         at the FtT hearing, at the date of decision the Appellant was  over
         18 years of age. It is difficult therefore to see any reason why he
         should be granted a further period of discretionary leave  when  he
         no longer fulfils a basic requirement of that policy.

 5. It is correct to say that when the Appellant appealed to the First-tier
    Tribunal he relied on several factors in pursuing his appeal. These are
    set out by the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  in   [9]  and  [10]  of  his
    determination as follows;

         "Mr Ali highlighted facts which  were  not  contentious:  that  the
         application was made on 19th April 2012 when  Mr  Ahmed  still  had
         discretionary leave to remain and was still aged under 18  and  had
         lived in the United Kingdom for 6 years and 10 months in the United
         Kingdom  (sic).  If  the  Secretary  of  State  had  assessed   the
         application within a reasonable length of time Mr Ahmed would  have
         been under 18 and would have completed 7  years  residency  in  the
         United Kingdom. Taking the relevant date as the  date  of  decision
         not application he could have come within paragraph 276ADE (iv).

         Mr Ali's primary submission however was that  the  application  had
         been made before the introduction of the new rules on 9th July 2012
         and those rules  should  not  have  been  applied  retrospectively.
         Instead,  the  Secretary  of  State  should   have   assessed   the
         application under the transitional provisions. She had not acted in
         accordance with her own policy on discretionary leave,  a  copy  of
         which was provided which showed the  Transitional  Arrangements  at
         page 16. It was submitted that there were no circumstances to  show
         that the Secretary of State should have departed from the grant  of
         a further three years leave. The delay since  April  2012  was  the
         fault of the Secretary of State taking  15  months  to  decide  the
         application and if the case was looked at even within 6  months  of
         the application then nothing would have changed from  the  time  he
         was given DL. The  terms  of  the  guidance  were  not  considered.
         Reference was made to Fatima Mohammed [2012] EWHC  3091  to  submit
         that the failure of the Secretary of State to apply the policy made
         the decision unlawful. That concluded the submissions".

 6. In allowing the appeal the Judge noted:

         "Although the respondent considered that  there  was  a  change  of
         circumstances the only change which was considered appears to  have
         been the fact that the Appellant had,  by  the  date  of  decision,
         attained 18 years of age. There was no consideration of any of  the
         other factors, and assessment of the relevance of the age was  made
         only under paragraph 2876ADE which was not in force at the date  of
         the application. The Secretary of State delayed making  a  decision
         for 15  months.  Had  the  application  been  considered  within  a
         reasonable period of time, which I accept should be assessed  as  6
         months, the situation would have been that Mr Ahmed would have been
         still aged under 18 and would have lived in the United Kingdom  for
         more than 7 years at the date of decision".

 7. The Respondent sought permission  to  appeal.  Thus  the  matter  comes
    before me to decide whether the First-tier Tribunal erred in law.
    Before me  Mr  Whitwell  essentially  relied  on  the  grounds  seeking
    permission. Those grounds are fully set out in [4] above.

 8. In response Mr Rahman submitted that the FtT Judge had  not  erred.  He
    referred to[15] of the determination and  said  that  the  Respondent's
    delay in making a decision had worked to the Appellant's detriment. The
    Judge had found that had the application been considered  in  time  the
    appellant would have been under 18years of  age  and  would  have  been
    granted  a  further  period  of  leave.  He  asked  that  I  find   the
    determination sustainable and dismiss the respondent's appeal.

Error of Law

 9. I find favour with Mr Whitwell's submissions. I  find  that  the  Judge
    materially erred in his consideration  and  the  conclusions  which  he
    reached in this determination, such that the decision must be set aside
    and remade. I find I am in  a  position  to  remake  the  decision.  My
    reasons for setting aside the decision and remaking it are as follows.

10. It is not challenged that the Appellant entered the United Kingdom as a
    visitor accompanied by his mother and sister. He was a  minor  at  that
    time. His mother returned to Bangladesh and  he  and  his  sister  were
    apparently left in the care of their first cousin Afsar Khan.

11. In 2009 the Appellant applied for  further  leave  to  remain.  He  was
    granted discretionary leave to remain as an unaccompanied  minor.  This
    leave was granted in accordance with the Respondent's policy  in  force
    at that time and in line with that  leave  the  Appellant  was  granted
    discretionary leave to remain up to 17 years  6  months  of  age.  This
    leave expired on 22nd April 2012.

12. Shortly before the expiry of that  leave,  the  Appellant  applied  for
    further discretionary leave to remain. On 24th July 2013 the Respondent
    refused that application applying 276ADE of the Immigration Rules which
    came into effect on 9th July 2012.

13. The Appellant as is known appealed that refusal  and  when  the  matter
    came before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  he  made  the  following
    findings none of which have been seriously challenged:

         "I accept the submissions of  Mr  Sheridan  as  to  the  facts.  Mr
         Ahmed's mother, aunt and cousin have together made arrangements  to
         bring him and his sister to the  United  Kingdom  and  ensure  they
         remain here for the "better life" referred to by  Mr  Khan.  To  do
         this they have not been honest about the contact that Mr Ahmed  and
         others in the family have with his mother.  Mr  Ahmed  was  not  an
         honest witness at  all,  beginning  with  the  clumsy  lie  in  his
         statement that his "Bangla language skills were not that  good"  in
         comparison to his English language skills, and continuing with  his
         inability to explain how he knew about his mother's situation if he
         was not in contact with her and why he was not  more  concerned  to
         locate her if she was in fact missing without explanation".

14. The error with the  Judge's  determination  starts  at  [13].  This  is
    because the Judge fails  to  recognise  and  remind  himself  that  the
    Appellant had been granted discretionary leave on account  of  his  age
    and under a policy (then in force) which  was  limited  to  minors  and
    which could no longer apply to the Appellant,  he  having  reached  his
    majority. In [13] the Judge sets out  the  change  to  the  Immigration
    Rules  on  9th  July  2012,  which  were  accompanied  by  Transitional
    Arrangements applicable to those who  had  been  granted  discretionary
    leave before 9th July 2012. What the Judge fails to recognise  is  that
    those arrangements state:

         "Decision makers must consider whether the circumstances prevailing
         at the time of the original grant of leave continue at the date  of
         decision. If the circumstances remain the same and the  criminality
         thresholds  do  not  apply  a  further  period   of   three   years
         discretionary leave should normally be granted".

    It stands to reason that there has been a  significant  change  in  the
    Appellant's circumstances in that he has reached the  age  of  majority
    and  therefore  cannot  take  advantage  of  the  policy  relating   to
    unaccompanied minors.

15. Further the assertion by the Appellant that the Respondent had  delayed
    in making her decision, and that this had in some  way  prejudiced  the
    Appellant, is without merit. The Appellant has suffered no prejudice by
    any claimed delay, since he has been allowed to remain in the UK in any
    event until after his 18th birthday. It is of  further  note  that  the
    Respondent in coming to  her  decision,  took  into  account  paragraph
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules at present in force. Finding  that  the
    Appellant could  not  meet  those  requirements,  she  then  considered
    whether his application raised any circumstances  which  had  not  been
    considered above and which could be said to be exceptional  within  the
    meaning of the Article 8 ECHR jurisprudence. No such circumstances were
    raised and likewise none were raised at  before me.

16. For the foregoing reasons  the  appeal of the  Respondent   is  allowed
    and the decision of the First -tier Tribunal set aside and re-made.

DECISION

17. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal, contains a material error
    of law. It is set aside. I hereby remake the decision.  The  appeal  of
    Shuhan Ahmed against the SSHD's decision of 24th July 2013 refusing him
    further leave to remain in the United Kingdom  is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made



Signature                                             Dated
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signature                                             Dated

