
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/36247/2014

                              THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |                   Decision & Reasons |
|On 21 October 2015                    |Promulgated                           |
|                                      |On 2 November 2015                    |
|                                      |                                      |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                              ms imen kebbache
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:       Mr Saeed, Legal Representative, Legal Solutions
For the Respondent:    Mr Jarvis, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Maxwell  sitting  at  Richmond  Magistrates
    Court on 7 May 2015) whereby the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT")  dismissed
    her appeal against the decision by the Secretary of State to refuse  to
    vary her leave to remain for a purpose not covered by  the  immigration
    rules, and against her concomitant decision made on 3 September 2014 to
    make directions for her removal pursuant to Section 47 of the 2006 Act.
    The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction, and  I  do
    not  consider  that  the  appellant  requires   anonymity   for   these
    proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a national of Algeria, whose date of birth is  25  May
    1991. On 11 July 2013 she was given limited leave to enter the UK until
    11 January 2014 as a visitor. On 3  September  2014  the  Secretary  of
    State gave her reasons for refusing her application for leave to remain
    dated 9 January 2014 based on her relationship with Mr Ali  Imran,  and
    her pregnancy in consequence of that relationship. As of 18 August 2014
    she was 20 weeks pregnant, and so she  was  still  eligible  to  travel
    abroad. As the child was unborn, s55  was  not  engaged.  The  evidence
    provided did not show she was in a genuine and subsisting  relationship
    with Mr Ali, given its short existence. She had also expressed  a  fear
    of return to Algeria which would fall for consideration under Article 3
    ECHR, and so would constitute a claim for international protection  and
    an asylum application under paragraph 327(b) of the Rules.  This  claim
    should therefore be made in person at the ASU.

The Hearing before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 3. At the hearing before Judge Maxwell, Mr Saeed appeared on behalf of the
    appellant. There was no Presenting Officer. Mr Saeed submitted that her
    circumstances had changed since the refusal decision, as  she  had  now
    given birth to a child who was a British national.

 4. The judge dismissed the appeal for the reasons he  gave  in  paragraphs
    [4] to [7].  He  found  that  there  was  no  decision  to  remove  the
    appellant. As her application for leave to remain had been made outside
    the rules and there was no removal decision, he held that there was  no
    appealable immigration decision and so he dismissed the appeal for want
    of jurisdiction. The appellant's only recourse  was  to  make  a  fresh
    application based on her new circumstances.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

 5. Permission to appeal was granted as it was arguable that the judge  was
    wrong to find that the appellant did not face removal and wrong to find
    that she did not have a right of appeal, despite the respondent  saying
    that she did have an in-country right of appeal in the Notice.

Discussion

 6. As was accepted in the Rule  24  Response  and  by  Mr  Jarvis  at  the
    hearing, Judge Maxwell was wrong to find that  the  appellant  did  not
    face removal and wrong to find that she did not have a right of appeal,
    despite the respondent saying that she did have an in-country right  of
    appeal in the Notice of Decision and in the Reasons for Refusal letter.
    The Notice of Decision dated 3 September 2014 also contained  a  notice
    of decision to remove the appellant under s47 of the 2006 Act.

 7. The issue which I need to resolve is the future disposal of the appeal.
    Mr Jarvis submitted that the appeal should be remitted to the  FtT.  Mr
    Saaed submitted that the matter should go  back  to  the  Secretary  of
    State for fresh consideration in the light of the  appellant's  changed
    circumstances. She was now the primary  carer  of  a  British  national
    child, her relationship with the father  of  the  child  having  broken
    down. It would be better, he submitted,  if  the  Secretary  of  State,
    rather than the FtT, was the primary decision-maker. He  relied  on  JO
    and Others (section 55 duty)  Nigeria  [2014]  UKUT  00517  and  on  MK
    (section 55 - Tribunal options) Sierra Leone [2015] UKUT 0023.

 8. It would be better if the Secretary of State was  able  to  assume  the
    role of primary decision-maker, but this can only  come  about  if  the
    appellant abandons her current appeal and makes  a  fresh  application.
    The fact that her circumstances have changed since the date of decision
    does not engender a right on her part to have her original  application
    reconsidered by the Secretary of State as part of  her  ongoing  appeal
    against the decision. There is no jurisdiction to compel the  Secretary
    of State to reconsider the decision unless it can  be  shown  that  the
    decision was unlawful, and a lawful  decision  is  still  awaited.  The
    decision appealed against was  not  unlawful.  There  was  no  duty  to
    consider the impact on the unborn child of the prospective  removal  of
    the  mother.  As  she  is  facing  removal,  the  appellant  can  raise
    additional grounds by way of appeal that did not exist at the  date  of
    decision; and, once raised, the FtT has to  be  the  primary  decision-
    maker on these additional grounds. If the FtT is not satisfied that  it
    is sufficiently equipped to make an adequate  assessment  of  the  best
    interests of any affected child, the solution in a case  such  as  this
    (where there has been no breach of s55 in the assessment of the  impact
    on the child in the refusal letter) is to seek  further  evidence  from
    the parent(s) and/or their representatives. As stated in MK,  the  onus
    rests with the appellant to show a past or prospective  breach  by  the
    Secretary of State of her duties under s55. There is  no  onus  on  the
    Secretary of State.

Notice of Decision

 9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of law  such
    that the decision should be set aside and remade.

10. The parties have been deprived of a fair hearing in the FtT, and so the
    appeal is remitted to the FtT at Taylor House for  a  de  novo  hearing
    before any judge apart from Judge Maxwell.

Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

