
[pic]


|Upper Tribunal                       |                                     |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)     |Appeal numbers: IA/36308/2014        |
|                                     |& IA/38168/2014                      |
|the immigration Acts                                                        |
|Heard at: Field House               |Decision promulgated                  |
|On 14 July 2016                     |On 2 August 2016                      |
|Before                                                                      |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Gill                                                   |
|                                                                            |
|Between                                                                     |
|                                                                            |
|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department    |Appellant    |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|                                                                            |
|           |S.O.                                              |             |
|           |J.D.                                              |Respondents  |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)                            |             |


    ANONYMITY ORDER


    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) and given that these  proceedings  involve  a  minor
    child, I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a  Court
    directs otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
    publication  thereof  shall  directly  or   indirectly   identify   the
    Respondents, referred to in the body of this decision as the claimants.

Representation:

For the  appellant:          Mr  E  Tufan,  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
                 Officer.
For the respondent:     Mr  J  H  Trumpington,  of  Counsel,  instructed  by
                  Immigration & Legal Advisory Services


                           Decision and Directions


 1. The Secretary of State  has  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  the
    decision of Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  I  M  Scott  who,  in  a
    decision promulgated on 7  December  2015  following  a  hearing  on  6
    October 2015, allowed the appeals of Ms S.O. (hereafter "Ms O) and  her
    son, Master J.D. (hereafter "JD") (together the  "claimants"),  against
    decisions of the respondent of 31 August 2014 to remove them  from  the
    United Kingdom made under s.10 of the Immigration and Asylum  Act  1999
    (the "1999 Act").

 2. The claimants are nationals of Nigeria. Ms O was born on [ ] 1978.  She
    arrived in the United Kingdom as a visitor on 25 December 2005  at  the
    age of 27 years and overstayed.  JD was born in the United Kingdom on [
    ] 2007. On 10th March 2014, Ms O applied for leave to remain  on  human
    rights grounds with JD as her dependant.  The application  was  refused
    on 1st April 2014 with no right of appeal.  Judicial review proceedings
    were commenced. The proceedings were resolved on  the  basis  that  the
    Secretary of State would reconsider the application  and,  if  it  were
    decided to maintain the refusal decision, would also issue a notice  to
    remove the claimants, thereby giving rise to a right of appeal.  On  13
    August 2014, the Secretary of State decided  to  maintain  the  refusal
    decision and gave directions for the claimants' removal from the United
    Kingdom.  The reasons for refusal are set out in a letter of  the  same
    date.

The legal framework

 3. Before turning to the judge's decision, it is appropriate  to  set  out
    the provisions of s.117A and s.117B of the Nationality, Immigration and
    Asylum Act 2002 (the "2002 Act") and para 276ADE of  the  Statement  of
    Changes in the Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended) (the "Rules").

 4. Section 117A and s.117B of the 2002 Act provide:


        117A Application of this Part


        (1)  This Part applies where a court or  tribunal  is  required  to
              determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-


         (a) breaches a person's right to respect for  private  and  family
              life under Article 8, and
         (b) as a result would be unlawful under section  6  of  the  Human
              Rights Act 1998.


        (2)  In considering the public  interest  question,  the  court  or
              tribunal must (in particular) have regard-
         (a) in all cases, to the considerations listed  in  section  117B,
              and
         (b) in cases concerning the deportation of foreign  criminals,  to
                   the considerations listed in section 117C.
        (3)  In subsection (2), "the public interest  question"  means  the
              question of whether an interference with a person's right  to
              respect for  private  and  family  life  is  justified  under
              Article 8(2).


        117B Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in  all
              cases


        (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
              public interest.


        (2)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
              interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,
              that persons who seek  to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United
              Kingdom are able to speak English, because  persons  who  can
              speak English-


         (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
         (b) are better able to integrate into society.


        (3)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
              interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,
              that persons who seek  to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United
              Kingdom are financially independent, because such persons-


         (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and
         (b) are better able to integrate into society.


        (4)  Little weight should be given to-


         (a) a private life, or
         (b) a relationship formed with  a  qualifying  partner,   that  is
              established by a person at a time when the person is  in  the
              United Kingdom unlawfully.


        (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
              a person at a time when the person's  immigration  status  is
              precarious.


        (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
              public interest does not require the person's removal where-


         (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
                   with a qualifying child, and
         (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
              United Kingdom.

 5. The version of para 276ADE(1) that was in force as at the date  of  the
    decision and the date of the hearing before the judge provided, insofar
    as relevant, as follows:


        276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to
        remain on the grounds of private life in the UK  are  that  at  the
        date of application, the applicant:


     (i)  does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in  Section  S-
             LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. in Appendix FM; and


     (ii) has made a valid application for leave to remain on the grounds of
             private life in the UK; and


     (iii)    ...; or


     (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the  UK
             for at least 7 years (discounting any period of  imprisonment)
             and it would not be reasonable  to  expect  the  applicant  to
             leave the UK; or


     (v)  ...; or


     (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or above, has lived
             continuously in the UK for less than 20 years (discounting any
             period of imprisonment) but there would  be  very  significant
             obstacles to the applicant's integration into the  country  to
             which he would have to go if required to leave the UK

The judge's decision

 6. It was not suggested before the judge that the claimants satisfied  the
    requirements of Appendix FM or that Ms O satisfied the requirements  of
    para 276ADE(1).

 7. Before the judge, reliance was placed upon the  position  of  JD  under
    para 276ADE(1)(iv), i.e. that he was under the age  of  18  years,  had
    lived in the UK for 7 years and it would be unreasonable to expect  him
    to leave the UK.

 8. Before the judge, JD's private life  claim  included  his  relationship
    with his two cousins. Ms O and JD lived with  Ms  O's  sister  and  her
    daughter, "S". Ms O's younger brother also lived in  the  UK  with  his
    wife and two children, aged 5 years and 6 years.

 9. The judge heard oral evidence from Ms O and her  sister  who  he  found
    credible. The evidence was that Ms O and JD see Ms O's brother and  his
    family at least twice a week. The four cousins (i.e. including JD) have
    all grown up together. Ms O and JD are supported by Ms O's siblings. Ms
    O's parents still live in Lagos  but  she  has  no  contact  with  them
    because they disapprove of her divorce from JD's father, for  religious
    reasons. The judge heard evidence that Ms O did not  work  in  Nigeria.
    She would not be able to provide for herself and JD in  Nigeria.  There
    is no one to help them. Ms O is estranged from her  parents  and  would
    have no home or accommodation in Nigeria.

10. The judge considered whether it would be reasonable  to  expect  JD  to
    leave the UK at paras 25-31 of his decision. He found that it would not
    be reasonable to expect JD to  leave  the  UK  and  therefore  that  JD
    satisfied the requirements of para 276ADE(1)(iv). Paras 24-31  read  as
    follows:


         24. Instead, reliance was placed upon the position of  [JD]  under
             paragraph 276ADE (1) (iv).  As noted, he is under the  age  of
             18 years and had resided in the United  Kingdom  for  7  years
             before the date of application.  The question,  therefore,  is
             whether it would be reasonable to  expect  him  to  leave  the
             United Kingdom.


         25. In answering that question, regard must be had, as  a  primary
             consideration,  to  the  best  interests,  not  just  of  [JD]
             himself, but also of his cousin [S], as required by section 55
             of the 2009 Act.


         26. I find that it is in [JD]'s best interests to  remain  in  the
             care of his mother, the appellant, as he is only  eight  years
             old, has been cared for by her since birth and has no  contact
             with his father.  It is also in his best interests  to  remain
             in the family unit which he and his mother  have  formed  with
             his aunt and his cousin [S], and to continue his education  in
             the United Kingdom.  I accept that [JD] and [S] have formed  a
             particularly strong bond, having been brought up together  for
             the last eight years, virtually  the  whole  of  [JD]'s  life.
             Their relationship is essentially that of brother and  sister.
             They share the same interests and attend the same school where
             they are getting on well.


         27. It is also relevant that [JD] has spent his entire life in the
             United Kingdom and has never left the country. In  particular,
             he has never been to Nigeria and has no connection  with  that
             country apart from his nationality.


         28. On the other side of the balance, it must  be  borne  in  mind
             that [JD] and his mother are not  British  citizens  and  that
             neither of them has had any leave to  remain  here  since  the
             appellant's visit visa expired.  That, however, is not  [JD]'s
             fault.  He had no choice in the matter and is not to be blamed
             for  his  birth,  and  subsequent  residence,  in  the  United
             Kingdom.


         29. The respondent's decision means that [JD] and his mother would
             be removed together.   The respondent points out that there is
             a functioning education system in Nigeria, that English is the
             official language there and that the appellant lived  in  that
             country until the age of 27 so that she would be able to  help
             [JD] adjust to the different culture and customs.


         30.  The respondent also says that the appellant would be able  to
             provide for their maintenance and accommodation  but,  on  the
             evidence,  the  reality  is  that  they  face  destitution  in
             Nigeria.  The appellant has never worked there and has no job.
              They would have  no  accommodation  and  no  obvious  way  of
             securing any.  The only family members left in Nigeria are the
             appellant's parents, but they have disowned her because of her
             divorce so that there is no-one in Nigeria to help or  support
             them.   On the evidence, I find that the prospects for  [JD]'s
             future in Nigeria are bleak.


         31. Balancing all these factors, I have  come  to  the  conclusion
             that it would not be reasonable to expect [JD]  to  leave  the
             United  Kingdom,  with  the  result  that  he  satisfies   the
             requirements of paragraph 276ADE (1) (iv).

11. The judge then considered the position of Ms O outside the Rules, under
    Article 8, at paras 32-38. At para 37, he applied s.117B(1)-(6) of  the
    2002 Act. I now quote paras 32-38 of the judge's  decision  insofar  as
    relevant:


        Article 8 ECHR


        32.  It  is  appropriate  now  to  consider  the  position  of  the
              appellant under Article 8 of the ECHR outside the Immigration
              Rules because a possible result of  my  finding  that  Jayden
              satisfies paragraph 276ADE (1) (iv) is that  mother  and  son
              will be separated by her  removal  from  the  United  Kingdom
              while he is entitled to remain.


        33.  There  is  no  doubt  that  family  life  exists  between  the
              appellant and Jayden and that  the  appellant  has  a  strong
              private life with her sister, with whom they  both  live,  as
              well as with her brother and his family.


        34.  In considering Article 8, I adopt the approach set out in  the
              House of Lords case of Razgar [2004] UKHL 27  in  which  Lord
              Bingham, at paragraph 17, posed five questions which have  to
              be addressed:
         ...


        35.  I have no difficulty in finding that  the  first  four  Razgar
              questions fall  to  be  answered  in  the  affirmative.   The
              remaining question concerns proportionality,  in  considering
              which I must balance the public interest against the  private
              rights  of  the  appellant  and  the  other  family   members
              concerned.


        36.  Public  interest  considerations  which  must  be  taken  into
              account are set out  in  section  117B  of  the  Nationality,
              Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended) which is in  the
              following terms:-


             (1)  ...


             (2)  ...


             (3)  ...


             (4)  ...


             (5)  ...


             (6)  ...


        37.  As regards those considerations:-


         (1) As well as noting the public interest in maintaining effective
                    immigration controls, I remind myself that the State has
                    the right to control entry to  its  territory  and  that
                    Article 8 does  not  confer  a  right  to  choose  where
                    private and family life is to be established.


         (2) The appellant speaks English.


         (3) The appellant is financially independent.  As  well  as  being
                    accommodated by her sister, she is supported by her  and
                    by their younger brother.


         (4) The private life upon which the appellant seeks to  rely  with
                    her sister and other  family  members  can  be  accorded
                    little weight because it has been established since 2007
                    by which time the appellant no  longer  had  any  lawful
                    basis for being in the United Kingdom.  No question of a
                    relationship with a qualifying partner arises.


         (5) This does not apply because the appellant's  presence  in  the
                    United Kingdom is unlawful and not merely precarious.


         (6) This consideration goes to the heart of the matter.  There  is
                    no doubt that the appellant has a genuine and subsisting
                    parental relationship with Jayden, who is a  "qualifying
                    child" in terms of section 117D  (1)  (b),  and  I  have
                    found that it would not be reasonable to expect  him  to
                    leave the United Kingdom.  It follows  that  the  public
                    interest does not require the appellant's removal.


        38.  The result is that the appellant's right to  respect  for  her
              family life under Article 8 of the ECHR is not outweighed  by
              the public interest and,  therefore,  that  the  respondent's
              decision is disproportionate.

12. The judge therefore allowed JD's appeal under the Immigration Rules and
    Ms O's appeal on human rights grounds (Article 8).

The Secretary of State's grounds

13. The Secretary of State's grounds may be summarised as follows:

    i.   The judge's finding that it would be unreasonable for JD to  leave
         the UK was irrational or wrong in law and inadequately reasoned.

    ii.  The judge failed to make any finding as to why Ms O was unable  to
         secure herself employment or find employment in Nigeria. There  was
         no evidence that she was unfit to work. In any  event,  no  reasons
         were put forward as to why the financial  support  that  was  being
         provided by Ms O's siblings could not  continue  if  the  claimants
         were to return to Nigeria.

    iii. The judge's finding that it would be unreasonable to expect JD  to
         leave the UK infected his assessment of  Ms  O's  Article  8  claim
         outside the Rules.

Submissions

14. Upon commencing my list on the hearing day,  I  drew  Mr  Trumpington's
    attention to  the  recent  judgment  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  MA
    (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA  Civ  705,  to  the  effect  that  wider  public
    interest considerations must be taken into account  when  applying  the
    reasonableness criterion in para 276ADE(1)(iv).

15. Mr Trumpington submitted that the judge  had  taken  into  account  the
    various public interest considerations in s.117B(1)-(6) at paras 28 and
    36 of the  decision.   He  submitted  that  no  other  public  interest
    considerations other than those considered by the judge at para 28 were
    relevant or material because: (i) Ms O had never committed any criminal
    offences; (ii) she has never worked; and (iii) she has  been  supported
    by her siblings. He submitted that the most  powerful  aspect  of  this
    case was the fact that JD and his cousin, S, daughter of Ms O's sister,
    have lived together all of their lives in one family unit.

16. Mr Trumpington informed me that there was little information about  the
    precise financial support provided by Ms O's siblings to  her.  If  the
    claimants were to be removed to Nigeria, the rent paid by  Ms  O's  for
    her accommodation would remain the same. Her utility bills would not be
    halved. Any savings in the form of pocket money provided to Ms O  would
    not be sufficient to support her and JD in Nigeria. Ms O's sister would
    have to pay for childcare.

17. Mr Trumpington accepted that it was for the claimant to establish  that
    financial support to them in the UK could  not  continue.  However,  he
    submitted that the judge dealt with the issue of reasonableness on such
    evidence as was before him. He had evidence  that  the  claimants  were
    being accommodated and maintained in a two-bedroom flat and that  Ms  O
    was proving child care for her sister. Thus, he must have assumed  that
    any savings would not be substantial. The judge found that Ms O and  JD
    would be destitute in  Nigeria.  It  was  therefore  implicit  that  he
    accepted that there would not be sufficient financial support available
    to the claimants from Ms O's siblings.

18. I referred Mr Trumpington to para (6) of the head note in  AM  (2.117B)
    Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC) and paras 58 and 60 of  EV  (Philippines)
    and others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874.

19. Mr Trumpington accepted that the judge erred  when  he  said  that  the
    claimants were financially independent. In making this finding, he must
    have been referring to the fact that they were not  claiming  benefits.
    He submitted that, as the judge was aware that JD was  accessing  state
    education, he must have taken into account that  he  was  doing  so  at
    public expense. He implicit took this into account at paras 36  and  37
    of the decision.

Assessment

20. The Court of Appeal recently delivered its judgment in  MA  (Pakistan).
    The judge did not have the benefit of the judgment  in  MA  (Pakistan).
    However,  it  is  clear  from  MA  (Pakistan)  that   public   interest
    considerations must be taken into account when assessing whether it  is
    reasonable for a child to leave the  UK  under  para  276ADE(1)(iv)  of
    Appendix FM. It was therefore necessary for  the  judge  to  take  into
    account public interest considerations,  including  those  set  out  at
    s.117B of the 2002 Act in reaching his finding that it was unreasonable
    for JD to leave the UK.

21. I reject Mr Trumpington's submission that the  judge  had  nevertheless
    taken into account the relevant public interest considerations at paras
    28, 36 and 37, for the following reasons:

    i)   At para 28, the judge referred to the fact that neither Ms  O  and
         JD had leave to remain since Ms O's visa expired.  However,  it  is
         clear from the second and third sentences of para 28 that the judge
         effectively proceeded to exclude  this  factor  his  assessment  of
         reasonableness. He therefore left out of  account  the  immigration
         background in reaching his finding on reasonableness.

    ii)  At paras 36 and 37, the judge considered the Article 8 claim of Ms
         O outside the Rules, having already reached his  finding,  at  para
         31, that it would not be reasonable to expect JD to leave  the  UK.
         This is plain not only from the structure of the  judge's  decision
         but also his reasoning at paras 24-31 in relation to JD  and  paras
         32-38 in relation to Ms O. Indeed, there is nothing at all  in  his
         application, at para 37,  of  the  public  interest  considerations
         listed in s.117B which he set  out  in  the  immediately  preceding
         paragraph (para 36) that shows that he took into account any public
         interest considerations in relation to JD. To the contrary,  it  is
         plain from, for example, from paras 37(2)-(4) in  particular,  that
         he focused on assessing the  public  interest  considerations  only
         insofar as they were relevant in relation to Ms O's Article 8 claim
         outside the Rules. Paras 37(2)-(4) simply cannot  be  read  in  any
         other way.

22. I do not accept  Mr  Trumpington's  submission  that  no  other  public
    interest considerations other than those considered  by  the  judge  at
    para 28 were relevant. In the first place, as I have said  above,  para
    28 shows that  the  judge  did  not  in  fact  take  into  account  the
    immigration background. This is because he effectively  discounted  the
    immigration background  because  he  considered  that  the  immigration
    status of Ms O and JD was  not  JD's  fault  and  that  he  should  not
    therefore be blamed for his birth and subsequent residence in  the  UK.
    Of course, there is no question of any blame being apportioned  to  JD.
    Nevertheless, MA (Pakistan) establishes that the fact that Ms  O's  and
    JD's residence has been unlawful, save for the period covered by Ms O's
    visit visa, is a relevant consideration when  assessing  reasonableness
    under para 276ADE(1)(iv).

23. At first sight, it may seem harsh that a young child  who  has  had  no
    control over the place of his birth or where he is brought up  and  who
    has accessed state education at public expense not by  his  own  choice
    but because his parent or parents have put him in the position of doing
    so should have the fact that he is accessing state education at  public
    expense taken into account in reaching a decision as to whether  it  is
    reasonable to expect him  to  leave  the  UK.  However,  prior  to  the
    amendment of the Rules on 9 July 2012  and  the  introduction  of  para
    276ADE, judges reached a view as to whether  it  is  reasonable  for  a
    child to leave the UK without taking account of the public interest but
    it was then necessary to proceed  to  perform  the  balancing  exercise
    taking proper account of the public  interest  to  decide  whether  the
    decision was disproportionate. The only  difference  now  is  that  the
    balancing exercise forms part of the assessment of  reasonableness;  it
    is no longer a separate step in the analysis. Whilst it may be counter-
    intuitive to take account of public interest considerations in deciding
    whether it is reasonable for a child to leave the UK, there is no  real
    difference.  Whereas previously the  public  interest  was  taken  into
    account to decide whether a decision is disproportionate having made  a
    finding on reasonableness, it is now taken  into  account  in  deciding
    whether it is reasonable for a child to leave the UK. If  it  were  not
    so, the public interest would be left out of account  completely.  This
    would be contrary to the previous approach,  contrary  to  s.117A(2)(a)
    and cannot have been intended by Parliament.

24. I am satisfied that the judge did fail to take account of the fact that
    JD is accessing state education  at  public  expense  in  reaching  his
    finding that it would not be reasonable for him to  leave  the  UK.  In
    doing so, he failed to take into account a material consideration.

25. Furthermore, it is also  clear  from  MA  (Pakistan)  that  the  public
    interest considerations in s.117B(4) should also have been  taken  into
    account in assessing the reasonableness of  JD  leaving  the  UK.  This
    means that the judge should have attached little weight to any  private
    life established by JD since it was established whilst his  status  was
    unlawful. The judge did not  do  so.  Although  s.117B(4)  states  that
    "little weight" is to be given to such private  life,  this  is  not  a
    fixity. There is some room, albeit limited, to calibrate the amount  of
    weight that is given to JD's private life to take account of  the  fact
    that JD established his private life in the UK through no fault of  his
    own. To do so would not  amount  to  discounting  the  public  interest
    considerations  in  JD's  case,  as  the  judge  effectively  did,  but
    calibrating the application of s.117B(4) according  to  the  individual
    circumstances provided that overall little weight given to his  private
    life.  However, the judge did not take that approach. It is plain  that
    he  made  a  positive  decision  not  to  weigh  any  public   interest
    considerations against JD's circumstances in order to reach his finding
    that it would not be reasonable to expect JD to leave the UK.

26. In summary, therefore, I am satisfied that the judge erred  in  law  in
    reaching his finding that it would not be reasonable to  expect  JD  to
    leave the UK by failing to take into account relevant  public  interest
    considerations. He failed to assess the strength of the public interest
    on account of the following considerations and weigh them in  assessing
    the reasonableness criterion:

    (i)  JD's immigration background.

    (ii) The fact that JD is accessing education at state expense and  will
         continue to do so if allowed to remain.

    (iii)    That JD's private life was established whilst his  immigration
         status was unlawful (s.117B(4))

27. Each of these  errors  is  material.  Although  I  recognise  that  the
    strength of the instant case is that JD and his cousin, S,  have  grown
    up together in one family unit, it cannot be said, in my judgment, that
    it is clear that, on the  materials  before  the  judge,  any  rational
    Tribunal must have come to the same conclusion if each  of  the  errors
    had not been made. In the  alternative,  the  combined  effect  of  the
    errors is material.

28. Mr Trumpington submitted that Ms O has  never  committed  any  criminal
    convictions or worked in the UK. These facts cannot  render  immaterial
    the errors made by the judge by failing to  take  into  account  public
    interest considerations described  above  in  assessing  reasonableness
    under para 276ADE(1)(iv).

29. Accordingly, the judge's decision that JD  satisfied  the  criteria  in
    para 276ADE(1) falls to be set aside.

30. It is plain from para 37(6) of the judge's decision that he relied upon
    his finding that it would not be reasonable to expect JD to  leave  the
    UK in order to reach his finding, in assessing Ms O's Article  8  claim
    outside the Rules, that the decision to remove her is disproportionate.
    It is plain that this was material to his decision  on  her  Article  8
    claim outside the Rules.

31. In my judgment, the judge also made two other errors of law,  which  of
    which were material, in assessing Ms O's Article 8  claim  outside  the
    Rules, as follows:

    (i)  As Mr Trumpington accepted, the judge erred when he found that  Ms
         O was financially independent. There was simply no  evidence  about
         her financial circumstances  at  all  before  him.  Mr  Trumpington
         submitted that the judge must have been referring to the fact  that
         the claimants did not claim benefits. However, the mere  fact  that
         the claimants were not receiving benefits does not mean  that  they
         were financially independent if, for example, the  result  is  that
         they are living below a minimum threshold.

    (ii) The judge considered Ms O's Article  8  claim  outside  the  Rules
         without taking into account the fact that she did not  qualify  for
         leave on the basis of her private life  under  para  276ADE(1).  In
         other words, he failed to consider her claim "through the  lens  of
         the Rules": paras 39 and 40 of the judgment of Sales LJ in  SSHD  v
         AJ (Angola) [2014] EWCA Civ 1636.

32. I am therefore satisfied that the judge made three  errors  of  law  in
    assessing Ms O's Article 8 claim outside the Rules, as described above.
    I am further satisfied that each of these errors  is  material.  Again,
    although I recognise that the strength of the instant case is  that  JD
    and S have grown up together in one family unit, it cannot be said,  in
    my judgment, that it is clear that, on the materials before the  judge,
    any rational Tribunal must have come to the same conclusion if each  of
    the errors had not been made. In the alternative, the  combined  effect
    of the three errors is material.

33. For all of the above reasons, I set aside the decision of  Judge  Scott
    to allow JD's appeal under the Rules and  Ms  O's  appeal  outside  the
    Rules on the basis of Article 8. His summary of the evidence he  heard,
    at paras 16-20 of his decision, shall stand as a record of the evidence
    given to the First-tier Tribunal.

34. In the majority of cases, the Upper Tribunal  when  setting  aside  the
    decision  will  be  able  to  re-make  the  relevant  decision  itself.
    However, the Practice Statement for the Immigration and Asylum  Chamber
    of the Upper Tribunal at  para  7.2  recognises  that  it  may  not  be
    possible for the Upper Tribunal to proceed to re-make the decision when
    it is satisfied that:

         "(a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
             First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for
             that party's case to be put to and considered  by  the  First-
             tier Tribunal; or

         (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial  fact  finding  which  is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-
             made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-
             tier Tribunal."

35. In my judgment, this case falls within para 7.(b). In  addition,  given
    that the claimants won their appeals before the First-tier Tribunal and
    having regard to the Court of Appeal's judgment in JD (Congo) &  Others
    [2012] EWCA Civ 327, I am of the view that a remittal to the First-tier
    Tribunal is the right course of action.

36. Given that the main aspect of JD's case is his  relationship  with  his
    cousin, S, the judge considering JD's appeal under para  276ADE  should
    do so by considering (amongst other matters) whether  his  relationship
    with S amounts to family life because this will  inform  the  balancing
    exercise that  must  be  performed  in  weighing  the  public  interest
    considerations against JD's circumstances to  reach  a  finding  as  to
    whether it is reasonable to expect JD to leave the UK. In addition, the
    claimants  should  be  ready  to  address  the   issue   of   financial
    independence beyond JD accessing state education, for  example,  access
    to the health services,  as  well  as  the  availability  of  financial
    support for the claimants from Ms O's sister and brother either for the
    foreseeable future or until Ms O obtains employment.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  errors  on
points of law such that the decision to allow JD's appeal  under  the  Rules
and Ms O's appeal outside the Rules is set aside. This appeals are  remitted
to the First-tier Tribunal for the decision to be re-made on the  merits  on
all issues by a judge other than  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  I  M
Scott.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date: 31 July 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill
