
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/36354/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3 July 2014                                |On 15 July 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM

                                   Between

                              rozita akbarzadeh

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     No representation
For the Respondent:    Mr S Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Iran and her date of  birth  is  13  June
    1984.  She entered the UK on 19 February 2011 when she was aged 26 as a
    Tier 4 (Migrant) Student having been granted leave  until  16  November
    2011.  On 15 November 2011 she made an application to extend her leave.
     She asked for a decision to be put on hold until December 2011 because
    she was waiting for the IELTS results.   The  application  was  refused
    with a right of appeal.  Her appeal was dismissed by Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Pedro on 28 June 2012.  The  appellant  appealed  against
    this decision.  Permission to appeal was granted on 8 November 2012.

2.   On 11 February 2013 the  appellant's  appeal  was  dismissed  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Coker who found there to be no error of law in  relation
    to the substantive decision.  However, she went on  to  find  that  the
    Judge erred in relation to Section 47 of the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006.  As  a  result  of  Judge  Coker's  decision  the
    appellant made further  representations  against  removal  and  another
    decision was generated by  the  respondent  of  13  August  2013.   The
    Secretary of State made a decision under Section 10 of the 2006 Act and
    refused the application under paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules
    relating to the  appellant's  private  life.   The  appellant  appealed
    against this decision.  Her appeal was dismissed by Judge of the First-
    tier  Tribunal  North  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  Article  8.
    Permission to appeal against this decision was granted by Judge of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Molloy in a decision of  21  May  2014.   Thus  the
    matter came before me.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

3.   The matter came before Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  North  on  8
    April 2014.  The grounds of appeal before Judge North raised Article 8.
    The appellant's case  was  that  she  had  a  new  student  application
    pending.  The appellant did not attend the hearing before Judge  North.
    She had requested an oral hearing.  Judge North refers to a letter of 7
    April 2012 (it is obvious that this is a typographical  error  and  the
    Judge should have recorded 2014).  The letter was from Mr Fred  Oboloje
    who  refers  to  himself  as  a  "host/family  representative"  of  the
    appellant.  In the letter  it  is  asserted  by  Mr  Oboloje  that  the
    appellant was very ill and undergoing medical  treatment.   The  letter
    went on to say that the appellant has suffered a "massive reaction to a
    recent operation"  and  had  been  referred  to  hospital  for  further
    treatment.  It was asserted by Mr Oboloje  that  the  appellant  had  a
    hospital appointment on 8 April at 10:00am and that Mr  Oboloje  had  a
    hospital appointment on the same day at 1:00pm and so would not be able
    to attend the hearing either.

4.   There are two documents attached to the letter of 7  April  2014  which
    appear to be copies of appointment cards.  One  bears  the  appellant's
    name and is dated 1 April 2014.  It indicates that the appellant has an
    appointment on 8 April 2014 at the GP surgery.  The  second  bears  the
    name of Mr Oboloje and is also dated 1 April 2014  indicating  that  he
    has an appointment on 8 April 2014 at 1.00pm at the GP surgery in order
    to see the phlebotomist.

5.   In relation to the letter and attachments  the  Judge  at  [3]  of  the
    determination said as follows:

         "I  perused  the  attachments  to  that  email  and   no   hospital
         appointment was attached.  There was a document  which  was  headed
         'appointment  details'  bearing  the  appellant's  name  and  dated
         Tuesday 1/4/14 giving an appointment on  8/4/14;  that  appointment
         had therefore been arranged some seven days in  advance.   Further,
         it was not an appointment at a hospital as Mr Oboloje stated in his
         letter, but was an appointment at the  appellant's  GP  surgery  in
         Arbury Road at 10am.  I was  not  satisfied  that  the  appointment
         could not have been rearranged and neither was I satisfied that, if
         the  appellant  was  suffering  a  massive  reaction  to  a  recent
         operation, she would be required to wait one week before seeing her
         GP; it was more consistent that if that was the situation she would
         have been able to seek  access  to  her  recent  surgeon  urgently.
         Further, the notice of the  hearing  before  me  was  sent  to  the
         appellant on 24/10/13; I am satisfied that the appellant could have
         made an alternative appointment with her GP  so  as  to  avoid  the
         hearing of which she had been given  ample  notice.   Further,  the
         sponsor also said that he would be unable to  attend  the  hearing,
         because he also had an appointment at hospital at 1:00pm on 8/4/14.
          He also supplied a document headed 'appointment details'.   Again,
         that appointment had also been made on  1/4/2014  and  appeared  to
         have  been  deliberately  arranged  to  coincide  with  the  appeal
         hearing.  Moreover, it was not an appointment to attend a hospital,
         but merely to attend a phlebotomist (a blood sample taker)  at  the
         GP's surgery.  I was not satisfied that  such  an  appointment  was
         either  urgent  or  immoveable.   I  was  not  satisfied  that  the
         appellant had shown that she had good grounds for  an  adjournment.
         I resolved to refuse the adjournment application and deal with  the
         matter in the appellant's absence.  I heard  submissions  from  the
         Presenting Officer and considered the evidence before me."


6.   Later that morning the Judge received a fax from Mr Oboloje of 8  April
    2014 stating that the appellant was unable to attend  because  she  was
    seriously ill and had been diagnosed with an appendicitis and  referred
    to Addenbrooke's Hospital  with  immediate  effect.  Attached  to  this
    letter was a note headed "consultation confirmation sheet" showing that
    the appellant had been diagnosed by a GP registrar at the GP surgery on
    8 April with an appendicitis as a result  of  having  severe  abdominal
    pain and that she had been referred to a surgeon.

7.   In relation to this further  evidence  the  Judge  made  the  following
    findings:

         "Mr Oboloje attached to that letter  a  note  headed  "consultation
         information sheet"  purportedly  showing  that  the  appellant  had
         attended an  appointment  with  a  Dr  Mohammad  (GP  registrar)  a
         trainee, on 8/4/2014 at 10:15.  The timing of that appointment  was
         entirely inconsistent with a statement made by Mr  Oboloje  in  his
         letter of 7 April that the appellant had an appointment at  10:00am
         on that date at hospital.  The note from  the  trainee  GP  gave  a
         history  of  the  appellant's  condition,  he  apparently  made   a
         diagnosis of appendicitis and the appellant was  offered  analgesia
         and, after discussion  with  the  GP  liaison  sister,  was  to  be
         referred  to  a  surgeon  at  Addenbrooke's  Hospital.    What   is
         significant about that GP consultation information sheet is that it
         makes no reference at all  to  the  appellant  having  'suffered  a
         massive reaction to a recent operation' as mentioned by Mr  Oboloje
         in his letter of 7 April,  or  to  the  fact  that  the  appellant,
         according to him, already had a hospital appointment for Tuesday  8
         April at 10:00am.  I do not accept that if the appellant's  history
         had been as Mr Oboloje set out in his letter of  7/4/14,  it  would
         not have been mentioned at least in passing by Dr Mohammad when  he
         saw her on 8 April.  Further, I note that  although  the  appellant
         complained of being feverish the previous night,  Dr  Mohammad  did
         not observe fever when he saw the appellant on  the  morning  of  8
         April 2014.  I conclude that there are significant  inconsistencies
         in the documents placed before me in  support  of  the  adjournment
         request.  I was not satisfied prior to the hearing, and I am  still
         not satisfied prior to promulgating my determination, that  neither
         the appellant  nor  the  sponsor  had  a  medical  condition  which
         prevented either from attending the hearing before me."




 The Grounds Seeking Leave to Appeal and Submissions

8.   The permission application appears to have been drafted by  Mr  Oboloje
    and it can be summarised.  The appellant was not given the  opportunity
    to give evidence.  She had to have emergency treatment on  the  day  of
    the hearing.  It is argued that she suffered a massive  reaction  to  a
    root canal treatment and she had been given medication by  her  dentist
    and advised that if the condition did not improve she should attend the
    doctor's surgery.  That was the reason why an appointment was  made  at
    10:00am  on  8  April.   It  was  her  intention  to  re-schedule  this
    appointment to 7 April so that  she  could  attend  the  hearing.   The
    appellant recovered from this condition but started to complain about a
    sharp pain in her abdomen and this led to the  appendicitis  diagnosis.
    It is argued that the appellant should be granted exceptional leave  in
    order to continue her studies in the United Kingdom.

9.   The respondent submitted a response pursuant to Rule  24  of  the  2008
    Procedure Rules.  Paragraph 3 of the response reads as follows:

         "It was clear that the Judge was concerned with the inconsistencies
         within the evidence before him, and that he  was  not  prepared  to
         accept that  the  appellant  was  suffering  from  appendicitis  as
         claimed.  It may  be  that  the  appellant  is  in  a  position  to
         demonstrate that she required emergency treatment on that day,  and
         that the Judge has procedurally  erred  in  law.   However  without
         having this evidence before me, I would not  be  prepared  at  this
         stage to accept that the Judge has materially erred as claimed."


10.  Neither the appellant nor Mr Oboloje attended the  hearing  before  me.
    I was satisfied that a notice of the  hearing  had  been  sent  to  the
    appellant.  There had been no attempt to  submit  further  evidence  in
    accordance with the directions of the Tribunal issued on 27 May 2014.

Conclusions

11.  Crucially what the Judge found is that the evidence before him did  not
    provide a consistent picture of the appellant's circumstances  and  for
    this reason he found it unreliable. In my view, the evidence before the
    Judge  relating  to  the  appellant's  health  was   inconsistent   and
    unreliable. It failed to provide a coherent picture of the  appellant's
    circumstances.  Mr Oboloje attempted to resolve this in the  permission
    application in which he raises issues that were not before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  In particular he referred to the appellant having had a
    root canal operation. There was no attempt by the appellant  to  submit
    further  evidence  (including   that   the   appellant   had   attended
    Addenbooke's Hospital and was operated upon) and the appellant did  not
    attend the hearing  before  me.   The  Judge  did  not  find  that  the
    appellant needed emergency treatment on the day of  the  hearing  which
    was a finding that was open to him. There is no procedural irregularity
    in the decision to refuse to adjourn the proceedings.

12.   The  grounds  seeking  leave  to  appeal  attack  the  merits  of  the
    substantive decision (under Article  8).  I  note  that  there  was  no
    witness statement before the First-tier Tribunal.  There are assertions
    made by Mr Oboloje  in  the  permission  application  relating  to  the
    appellant's private life, but there was  no  cogent  evidence  of  such
    before  Judge  North.   There  was  no  persuasive  evidence  that  the
    appellant was studying or that she had made an  application  to  study.
    The Judge found at paragraph 4 as follows:

         "The respondent issued a decision to  remove  the  appellant  under
         Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.  In the decision
         dated 4/2/2013, Judge Pedro dismissed the appeal against refusal to
         vary the appellant's leave to remain in the United Kingdom.  He had
         considered human rights grounds and was satisfied at that time that
         Article 8 was not engaged and found no reasons  why  the  appellant
         should not be expected to return to Iran  where  she  could  resume
         living with her immediate family in the family home  in  which  she
         had resided prior to coming to the UK.  That decision must  be  the
         starting point of my deliberations.  The appellant has  not  raised
         any additional human rights grounds or issues  relating  to  either
         her private of family life either by way of further submissions  to
         the respondent or in the grounds of appeal.  I  conclude  that  the
         appellant has not demonstrated that the  respondent's  decision  is
         contrary to the UK's obligations under the ECHR."

13.  In my view it was open to the Judge to dismiss the  appellant's  appeal
    under Article 8 of the 1950 Convention on human  rights.   The  grounds
    amount  to  an  attempt  to  re-argue  the  appellant's  case   and   a
    disagreement with the findings as made by the First-tier Tribunal.  The
    decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal under Article 8 stands.


Signed        Joanna McWilliam                        Date 15 July 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
