

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
    Appeal Number: ia/36906/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At    Royal Courts of Justice          |                        Decision and    |
|                                       |Reasons Promulgated                     |
|On    14 December 2015                 |                        On 22 December  |
|                                       |2015                                    |

                                   Before

                      Upper Tribunal Judge John FREEMAN

                                   Between

                              Daniel John SMART
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the appellant:  Adam Pipe  (counsel instructed by Charles Allotey & Co)
For the respondent: Miss N Willocks-Briscoe

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



1.     This is an appeal, by the appellant,  against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Stokes),  sitting  at  Taylor  House  on  27
    March, to dismiss an article 8 appeal by a citizen of Nigeria,  born  2
    February 1982.

 2. The appellant has overstayed his original visit visa ever since 6  July
    2005. He was given notice of illegal entry on 12 May 2010,  since  when
    he has made various applications to remain.  On  20  November  2012  he
    married Esther, who has leave to remain till March  2017,  and  already
    had a son J, born here 4  March  2005.  They  all  live  together  with
    Esther's mother in her house.


 3. The relevant provisions of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002, as amended, are as follows

       117B Article 8: public  interest  considerations  applicable  in  all
       cases
       (1) The maintenance of effective  immigration  controls  is  in  the
          public interest.
       (2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests
          of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who
          seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
          are able to speak English, because persons who can speak English-
           (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
           (b) are better able to integrate into society.
       (3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests
          of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who
          seek to enter or remain in  the  United  Kingdom  are  financially
          independent, because such persons-
           (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and
           (b) are better able to integrate into society.
       (4) Little weight should be given to-
           (a) a private life, or
           (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,
          that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is  in
          the United Kingdom unlawfully.
       (5) ...
       (6) In the case of a person who is not liable  to  deportation,  the
          public interest does not require the person's removal where-
        a) the person has a genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship
           with a qualifying child, and
        b) it would not be reasonable to expect  the  child  to  leave  the
           United Kingdom.

 4. The judge found that  the  appellant  had  a  'genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship' with J, who was clearly  a  'qualifying  child',
    and that it would not be reasonable to expect J to leave this  country,
    where he had been born and spent the first ten years of his  life.  She
    also found that the appellant had a genuine relationship  with  Esther;
    but of course little weight was to be given to that, since it had  been
    established while he was  unlawfully  here.  He  did  not  qualify  for
    admission under the Rules, either as a partner  or  a  parent,  without
    getting entry clearance for the purpose.

 5. So the judge's decision  depended  on  whether  s.  117B  (6)  gave  an
    absolute entitlement to someone with that kind of a relationship with a
    child in those circumstances not to be removed from  this  country;  or
    whether, as she  held,  it  had  to  be  considered  on  the  basis  of
    proportionality, as between the positive  factor  it  represented,  and
    those which were either negative (apart from the appellant's  knowledge
    of English) or of little weight, raised by the other parts of s. 117B.

 6.  The  judge  was  writing  several  months  before  the  appearance  of
    Treebhawon and others (section 117B(6)) [2015] UKUT  674  (IAC)  on  19
    November. The relevant part of the judicial head-note reads:

    Section 117B (6) is a reflection of the  distinction  which  Parliament
    has chosen to make between persons who are, and who are not, liable  to
    deportation. In any case where  the  conditions  enshrined  in  section
    117B(6) of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  are
    satisfied, the section 117B(6) public interest prevails over the public
    interests identified in section 117B (1)-(3).

 7. Treebhawon was a decision of McCloskey J, President and Judge  Frances:
    despite the terms of the head-note, they declined at  paragraph  22  to
    provide a definitive  answer  to  the  question  of  whether  "...  the
    unambiguous proclamation in Section 117B (6) is in some way weakened or
    demoted" where the appellant has to contend with the negative effect of
    ss. (4) or (5). However, their reasons for not doing so do not apply in
    the present case, where the grant of permission to appeal turns on this
    very point, and there has been ample opportunity to argue it before me.

 8. In those circumstances I made it clear to  Miss  Willocks-Briscoe  that
    Treebhawon needed to be taken as the starting-point for  her  argument:
    while, in view of paragraph 22, I was prepared to consider  submissions
    that it was wrongly decided, it would  be  pointless  to  consider  the
    question raised there as if it were tabula rasa. Miss  Willocks-Briscoe
    was however unable to do more than  to  point  to  the  rubric  in  the
    heading to s. 117B "Public interest considerations  applicable  in  all
    cases".

 9. While rubrics in statutes do not by any means have the same  status  as
    the text, they may provide some guide to interpretation; and it  is  in
    any case clear from the text of s. 117B (1) -  (5)  that  they  are  of
    general application. The question however is whether what the  Tribunal
    in   Treebhawon   understandably   described   as   the    "unambiguous
    proclamation" in (6) is to be given its full effect;  or  regarded,  as
    the  judge  did,  as  if  it  were  no  more  than  one  element  in  a
    proportionality equation.

10. The only reason I can think of for the second alternative was  not  put
    forward by Miss Willocks-Briscoe, and so I have not heard  argument  on
    it. It is based on analogy with the wording of s. 117C:

        (3) In the case of a  foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
          sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or  more,  the
          public interest requires C's deportation  unless  Exception  1  or
          Exception 2 applies.

    This is  not  taken  as  imposing  an  absolute  requirement  in  those
    circumstances for the deportation of  the  person  concerned,  who  may
    still argue that there are 'very compelling circumstances'  to  prevent
    it.

11. However, ss. 117B and C are dealing  with  different  kinds  of  public
    interest, and the legislative separation between them is clearly  there
    for a purpose. Nor is it altogether safe to argue from the effect of  a
    negative provision for the benefit of the public, to reach a conclusion
    on that of a positive one for the benefit of an  individual.  While  s.
    117C (3) may  be worth thinking about in this context, I do  not  think
    it should be allowed to dictate the meaning of s. 117B (6).

12. Returning to s. 117B, it seems to me that its structure  is  reasonably
    clear: (1) - (3) say what considerations are in  the  public  interest,
    while (4) and (5) say which are to be given  little  weight.  (6)  says
    what the public interest does not  require, and I do  not  see  why  it
    should be treated as if it said no more than that a relationship with a
    qualifying child in these circumstances was to be one consideration  to
    be taken with others.

13. It follows that I agree with the decision in Treebhawon, including  the
    statement of the law put  forward  at  paragraph  22.  On  the  judge's
    findings of fact in this case, this means that the  definition  of  the
    public interest in  s.  117B  (6)  did  not  require  this  appellant's
    removal, and so his appeal is allowed.

Appeal



                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)



