
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/36364/2013
     IA/36376/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 3rd September 2014                           |On 10th September 2014     |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                         Mr OMOTAYO OLUSOLA OKEDARA
                              MRS MABEL OKEDARA
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Lee , Counsel, instructed by Rashid & Rashid
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants are citizens of  Nigeria.   The  first  named  Appellant
    (hereafter referred to as the Appellant) sought leave to remain here as
    a Tier 4 Migrant with the second Appellant further leave to  remain  as
    his dependant. Their appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal Judge M
    J Bennett who allowed the appeal "on the sole ground that the decisions
    were not in accordance with the law".

 2. Grounds of application were lodged stating that the judge had erred  in
    two ways.  Firstly, he had made a material misdirection of law in  that
    the Secretary of State had been entitled to refuse the application with
    reference to paragraph 322 (9) of  the  Rules  as  the  Appellants  had
    failed  to  provide  a  completed  application  form.  The  judge   had
    considered whether the Secretary of State ought to have  exercised  her
    discretion but could "see no extenuating circumstances  "  and  such  a
    finding was inconsistent with  a finding that the decision was  not  in
    accordance with the law.

 3. The second ground was that the judge had found  that  paragraph  322(9)
    should not be applied in this case  essentially  on  the  basis  of  an
    allegation of poor conduct by the  Appellant's  former  solicitors.  In
    that regard reference  was  made  to  BT  (Former  solicitors'  alleged
    misconduct) Nepal [2004] UKIAT 00311 in that there has to  be  evidence
    that those allegations were put to the former representatives and  that
    had not been done.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis of  the  grounds.   There
    was no Rule 24 notice lodged and thus the matter came before me on  the
    above date.

 5. For the Secretary of State, Mr  Wilding  indicated  that  there  was  a
    requirement for the Appellant to complete an  application  form.   That
    had not been supplied and therefore the case had to fail.  In  response
    to submissions from Mr Lee, it was said that there was nothing  to  say
    that the Secretary of  State's  decision  was  unlawful.   It  was  not
    unlawful at the time he made it.  While the Secretary  of  State  would
    always entertain a fresh application the dispute the Appellant had  was
    really with those solicitors who had dealt with the case on his behalf.

 6. Mr Lee submitted that the ratio of BT was not  relevant  in  this  case
    because there was nothing to put to the solicitors.  The solicitors had
    misled the Appellant.  The requirement under 322(9) was a discretionary
    one and it was perfectly open to the judge to take into account all the
    evidence supplied and conclude that the  discretion  should  have  been
    exercised differently.  It was clear from all the  correspondence  that
    the solicitors had  fallen  into  serious  error  in  so  advising  the
    Appellant. Given that, the judge had not erred  in  law  in  concluding
    that the decision of the Secretary of State was unlawful.

 7. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

 8. The case of BT (Nepal) is something of a red herring in  this  case  in
    that this involved an appeal where there  were  allegations  against  a
    firm of solicitors who had been given no opportunity at all to reply to
    them.  That is not the position in this case.  Indeed the  opposite  is
    true as the solicitors  involved  in  this  case,  Dean  Manson,   were
    perfectly aware of the position as they advised the Secretary of  State
    that they did not understand the contents of her  letter  namely   that
    they were requesting the Appellant to  forward  new  forms  which  they
    regarded as unnecessary.  Accordingly the position  of  the  solicitors
    was very clear. No doubt they considered that they were acting  in  the
    best interests of their client.

 9. The judge set out the terms of paragraph 322(9) noting that this was  a
    ground on which leave to remain should normally be refused where  there
    was a failure by an applicant "to  produce  within  a  reasonable  time
    information, documents or other evidence required by the  Secretary  of
    State to establish his claim to remain under these Rules".

10. The judge went on  to  note  that  it  was  very  unfortunate  that  no
    application forms had been  submitted and concluded that the Respondent
    was entitled to ask them to do so as the Secretary of State  was  doing
    no more than asking the Appellant to comply with paragraph 34(E) of the
    Immigration Rules.

11. Accordingly on the findings of the judge the  Secretary  of  State  was
    entitled to ask the Appellant to complete fresh application forms which
    the Appellant, through solicitors, pointedly refused to do.  Given that
    finding it followed inexorably that the Secretary of State was entitled
    to refuse the application under paragraph 322(9).

12. What the judge did was to note the Appellant's evidence who  said  that
    if he had known that it was necessary to do so he would certainly  have
    filled in a fresh application form.  It was  on  that  basis  that  the
    judge went on to find that 322(9) should not have been applied in  this
    instance and the decision was therefore not in accordance with the law.

13. I agree with what was said by  Mr  Wilding.   The  Secretary  of  State
    cannot be said to have acted unlawfully when an  applicant  refuses  to
    comply with a part of the Immigration Rules.  The judge appears to have
    conflated the willingness of the Appellant to  comply  with  the  rules
    with the application  of  the  rules  themselves  and  hold  that  this
    willingness was enough to conclude that the decision of  the  Secretary
    of State was unlawful. No doubt the judge was trying to do  justice  to
    the Appellant who found himself in an unfortunate situation because  of
    the advice given to him by his solicitors.

14. However it seems to  me  that  whatever  the  good  intentions  of  the
    Appellant that matter is distinct from whether or not the Secretary  of
    State was acting unlawfully in refusing the application.  As the  judge
    put it, the appeals were allowed on the sole ground that the  decisions
    were not in accordance with the law.  In my view, for the  reasons  put
    forward above, that was a clear error of law.  The Secretary  of  State
    had not acted unlawfully and indeed it  is  very  hard  to  see  how  a
    different  decision  could  have  been  made  in  the  absence  of   an
    application form.  It follows that this decision must be set aside  and
    a fresh decision made dismissing the appeal.









Decision

15. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

16. I set aside the decision.

17. I remake the decision in the appeal by dismissing it.





Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald

