
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/36836/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 6 October 2015                    |On 8 October 2015                     |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                                   Mrs S M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Khalid, Solicitor (Lords Solicitors LLP)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1.     The Appellant appealed to the  Upper  Tribunal  with  permission
         granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge PJM Hollingworth  on  23  July
         2015 against the decision and reasons of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
         Shiner who had dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the refusal
         on 4 September 2014 of her application for further leave to  remain
         outside  the  Immigration  Rules  on  human  rights  grounds.   The
         decision and reasons was promulgated on 29 October 2014.

    2.     The Appellant is a national of  Pakistan,  born  on  27  October
         1986.  She has a dependant son Master  M  H,  also  a  national  of
         Pakistan, who was born on 4 January 2014.   The Appellant had  last
         entered the United Kingdom as a visitor on 8 April 2009.   She  had
         been granted limited leave to remain on 29 October 2013,  until  15
         April 2014.   The judge found in effect that the Appellant had  not
         lost her ties to Pakistan and could not meet  Appendix  FM  of  the
         Immigration Rules.  There were no exceptional  circumstances.   Any
         interference with the respect due to her private  and  family  life
         pursuant to Article  8  ECHR  was  proportionate.  The  appeal  was
         determined on the papers as the Appellant had requested.

    3.     Permission to appeal was granted by Judge  Hollingworth  because
         he considered that it was arguable that the Appellant had  not  had
         the opportunity to adduce evidence at the hearing.  By implication,
         it was arguable that there may have been a procedural error of  law
         leading to an unfair and thus unsustainable decision.

    4.     Standard directions were made by the tribunal.

    Submissions

    5.     Mr Khalid for the Appellant relied on  the  grounds  of  onwards
         appeal and the grant of permission to appeal.  He submitted that it
         was relevant that the Appellant  had  been  granted  DLR  and  that
         nothing had changed since that grant was made.  The  Appellant  had
         indeed requested that her oral hearing  be  converted  to  a  paper
         hearing, but she had expected that a new date would be given to her
         and so she would have the opportunity to submit evidence.

    6.     Mr Walker for the Respondent relied on the rule 24  notice.   He
         submitted that there was no error  of  law  and  the  determination
         should stand.  The onwards appeal should be dismissed.

    7.     There was no reply.

    8.     The tribunal indicated at the conclusion of submissions that  it
         found  that  there  was  no  error  of   law   and   reserved   its
         determination, which now follows.

    No error of law finding

    9.     The tribunal is bound to say that it has had some difficulty  in
         understanding  why  permission  to   appeal   was   granted.    The
         Appellant's hearing had been fixed for hearing at the Taylor  House
         hearing centre on 15 April 2015.  On 14 April  2015  the  Appellant
         wrote  to  the  tribunal  by  fax  requesting  "you  to  decide  my
         immigration  appeal  on  papers  rather  than  on   oral   hearing.
         Therefore kindly delist my immigration appeal for an  oral  hearing
         and send an  amended  hearing  of  Notice"  (sic).   This  fax  was
         transmitted from the office of the solicitors now acting  for  her,
         which firm was not on the tribunal record at that stage, but rather
         another firm.

    10.    The tribunal complied  with  the  Appellant's  request  and  the
         appeal was determined on the papers as she requested.   Her  letter
         said nothing about any wish for an adjournment so  that  she  could
         submit further evidence.  Since her hearing had been fixed  for  15
         April 2015, she had been obliged to lodge all evidence on which she
         sought to rely at latest 3  weeks  before  that  hearing:  see  the
         notice of hearing dated 20 October 2014, which had given her  fully
         6 months to prepare.  Whether or  not  the  tribunal  sent  out  an
         "amended hearing of Notice" following  the  change  to  the  papers
         hearing was up to the tribunal.  It was in  fact  obvious  that  no
         such notice was needed, as the notice of oral hearing  had  already
         fixed the deadline for the filing of evidence, and there was in any
         event no new hearing date  as  the  appeal  was  to  be  determined
         without a hearing.

    11.    Mr Khalid was unable to identify any part of the  2014  Tribunal
         Procedure Rules which had been breached by  the  judge  or  by  the
         tribunal staff.  Rule 26 had self evidently been complied with when
         the original notice of hearing had  been  sent  to  the  Appellant.
         Rule 25(a) had been complied with, because  it  was  the  Appellant
         herself  who  had  specifically  requested  that  her   appeal   be
         determined without a hearing.  There was no dispute or fact nor any
         special legal difficulty which might have prompted the tribunal  to
         consider whether  an  oral  hearing  was  needed.   Even  then  the
         tribunal cannot compel either party to appear.  The Appellant  (who
         plainly had access to legal advice) took the last minute chance  of
         not attending her hearing and she can  hardly  complain  about  the
         compliance with her request.

    12.    There was accordingly no procedural unfairness of  any  kind  by
         the judge and the application  for  permission  to  appeal  had  no
         foundation.

    13.    There was no attempt to challenge the substance of  the  judge's
         decision, rightly in the tribunal's view as  it  was  a  fully  and
         carefully reasoned determination.

    14.    The tribunal accordingly holds that there was no error of law in
         the decision and reasons and there is no basis for interfering with
         the judge's decision.

    DECISION

    The making of the previous decision did not involve the  making  of  an
    error on a point of law and stands unchanged




    Signed Dated


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
