
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/37472/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 July 2017                               |On 31 July 2017               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Ms Thuy An Luong
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms M Mac, of Mac & Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against the decision promulgated on 5 October 2016 of
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  I  Howard.   The  decision   allowed   the
    respondent's application for a residence permit recognising her derived
    right of residence as the parent of EEA nationals.

 2. For the purposes of this decision I refer to the Secretary of State  as
    the respondent and to Ms  Luong  as  the  appellant,  reflecting  their
    positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The background to this matter is that Ms Luong, a  citizen  of  Vietnam
    born on 7 July 1984, came to the UK as  a  domestic  worker.   She  was
    granted leave in that capacity until 13 May 2011.  She  applied  for  a
    derivative residence card on 28  May  2014  but  that  application  was
    refused on 23 August 2014.

 4. The appeal was first heard by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Boylan-Kemp,
    who in a decision promulgated on 27 July 2015  allowed  the  appeal  on
    Regulation 15A/Zambrano grounds.

 5. That decision was found to contain an error by  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Chamberlain in a decision promulgated on 10 February  2016.   The
    error  of  law  decision  specifically  identified  that  the  findings
    concerning whether the appellant was the only carer  available  to  the
    children and whether  their  British  fathers  could  assist  were  not
    sufficient.

 6. In paragraphs [8]-[10], Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Chamberlain  found
    as follows:

         "8.  I find that there are insufficient findings  to  back  up  the
             inference at paragraph [24] that the children's fathers  would
             not be able to care for them, and therefore that the  children
             would have to leave the United Kingdom were the  Appellant  to
             leave.

         9.   In relation to the finding of the  Appellant  is  the  primary
             carer of the children, again I find  that  inadequate  reasons
             are given  for  this  finding.   Ms  Mac  submitted  that  the
             evidence pointed to  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  was  the
             children's primary carer, and that the documents inferred that
             this was the case.  The  judge  finds  that  the  nursery  fee
             requests are addressed to the  Appellant,  but  there  was  no
             evidence before the judge as to any financial input which  the
             Appellant  may  receive  from  the  children's  fathers.   The
             inference is also made that, as the  Appellant  lives  with  a
             different man, the children's  fathers  are  not  involved  in
             their care [24].  I find  that  this  is  inference  does  not
             follow logically.

         10.  This is a very  short  decision  in  which  the  findings  are
             confined to only two paragraphs, [23] and [24].  In  paragraph
             [25] the judge concludes that the children's fathers would not
             be in a suitable position to become the primary carers for the
             children, but this is not the test set  out  under  Regulation
             15A(4A).  I was referred to the case of MA and  SM  (Zambrano:
             EU children outside EU) Iran [2013] UKUT  380,  in  particular
             paragraphs [41(ii)], [4(vi)] and [56].  It was submitted by Ms
             Fijiwala that there had been no evidence before the judge that
             the children could not remain with their fathers.   Given  the
             submission by Ms Mac that this issue would have been addressed
             by the oral evidence of the Appellant, who did not attend  the
             hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, I find that  this  is  the
             case.  I find that the decision is inadequately reasoned."

 7. It was in those terms, therefore, that the matter was sent back to  the
    First-tier Tribunal to be decided again by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Howard.

 8. First-tier Tribunal Judge Howard clearly recognised the  terms  of  the
    remittal, summarising the history of the appeal accurately at [12]  and
    [13].  He identifies in [14] that he was required to decide  the  issue
    of whether the appellant was the  primary  carer  of  her  two  British
    children and whether the two different fathers for those children could
    provide care if she were to leave the  UK.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    also sets out at [27] the material parts of the ratio of Ruiz  Zambrano
    v Office national de l'emploi (C-34/09).

 9. First-tier Tribunal Judge Howard found for the appellant on both  those
    points, indicating that she was both the primary carer of the  children
    and that were she to leave the UK they would also have to  do  so.   He
    therefore found that Regulation 15A was met.

10. The respondent challenges the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Howard on the basis that he did not apply a  test  of  "compulsion"  as
    identified in MA and SM (Zambrano: EU children outside EU) Iran  [2013]
    UKUT 00380 (IAC). The grounds cite [41] of that case  which,  in  turn,
    refers to paragraphs from Jamil Sanneh v Secretary of  State  for  Work
    and Pensions and  The  Commissioners  for  Her  Majesty's  Revenue  and
    Customs [2013] EWHC 793 (Admin) which also sets out the test being  one
    of whether "an EU citizen would be compelled to leave the EU to  follow
    a non-EU national upon whom he is dependent". Paragraph  41(iv)  of  MA
    and  SM  identifies  that  "nothing  less  than  such  compulsion"   is
    sufficient to meet the test set down by EEA legislation.

11. The grounds go on to state that:

         "It is plain that it is a very demanding test.  In  this  case  the
         Judge summarises the A's mother's evidence about the children's two
         fathers at para. 22 but in a way that makes it fairly difficult  to
         understand what was said."

12. The grounds go on to state that "there is simply no lawful finding that
    the fathers of the children would not seek to care for the A if the A's
    mother was required to leave the UK/EU".

13. Mr Lindsay elaborated on the written grounds at the  hearing,  pointing
    out that in paragraph [25] of the decision the judge says this:

         "In the context of this appeal  the  sole  test  is  whether  I  am
         satisfied on the balance  of  probabilities  that  removal  of  the
         appellant would lead to the departure from the EU of the children."

14. Mr Lindsay argued that this showed that the judge had applied the wrong
    test, a lower test than that of "compulsion".  He also  maintained  the
    respondent's position was that the evidence could not support a finding
    that the fathers would not be in a position to assist  the  appellant's
    children to remain in the UK were she required to leave.

15. I did not find the respondent's ground as to  the  judge  applying  the
    wrong test to be made out.   Firstly,  as  above,  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Howard clearly understood the task before him. In paragraphs [15]
    to [19] he found that the appellant is the primary carer of both of her
    children.  The grounds of  challenge  now  do  not  suggest  that  that
    finding was in error.  Indeed, at [20] Judge Howard identifies that the
    fact of the appellant being the children's primary carer as required by
    Regulation 15A(7) "is not in dispute".

16. At [21] the judge identifies the remaining question he had  to  address
    as follows:

         "The remaining issue is whether they would be unable to  reside  in
         the UK or another EU  state  if  the  appellant  were  required  to
         leave."

17. At [26] Judge Howard states as follows:

         "The history is that set out above and  based  upon  that  history,
         which includes a history of significant movement around the  UK,  I
         am satisfied it is more likely than  not  that  in  the  event  the
         appellant is required to leave the EU so it is the children will be
         required to accompany them as both their histories has them  living
         exclusively with their mother and I have seen nothing from which  I
         can properly conclude that is a situation that will change."

18. I am satisfied  that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Howard  applied  the
    correct test of compulsion  where  in  paragraphs  [21]  and  [26]  his
    consideration shows his understanding that the  test  was  whether  the
    children would be "unable" to live in the UK without their mother being
    present or would be "required to accompany" her if she were to leave.

19. I also did not find that it  was  arguable  that  the  judge  erred  in
    concluding that the children's fathers are not in a position to provide
    a level of support that would enable the children to remain in  the  UK
    or another EU state were the appellant required to  leave.   The  judge
    finds as follows at [19]:

         "The evidence I have ties both children to  the  various  homes  of
         their mother.  The documents span the period from their  respective
         births.  The addresses are geographically diverse, including Essex,
         Dorset and Wiltshire.  It is clear from the movements of mother and
         children, when taken in  conjunction  with  the  other  documentary
         evidence and the appellant's testimony, that they all live together
         and to that extent the appellant  is  the  primary  carer  of  both
         children."

20. At [22] to [25] the judge states as follows:

         "22. Their fathers are the only  other  potential  primary  carers.
             The only evidence as to their respective ability to  care  for
             their daughter came from the  appellant.   She  told  me  that
             Jessica's father cares for his children to a previous  partner
             and that Sophie's father no lives with his own family now.

         23.  What becomes apparent from this evidence is that each  child's
             father is living in a domestic family situation that  involves
             the care of children.

         24.  Each father  living  in  such  circumstances  it  remains  the
             situation that the girls remain with their mother.  This is  a
             telling piece of evidence.

         25.  In the context of this appeal the sole test is  whether  I  am
             satisfied on the balance of probabilities that removal of  the
             appellant would lead to the  departure  from  the  EU  of  the
             children."

21. The judge's findings at [26], set out above,  find  that  the  children
    have only ever lived with the appellant and  that  there  would  be  no
    change to that those circumstances.

22. The evidence given by the appellant to the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    appears to be entirely consistent with that in her witness statement at
    paragraphs [2] to [7].   The  judge  took  into  account  the  material
    evidence on the situation of the children and the likelihood  of  their
    being cared for by their fathers so as to enable them to remain in  the
    UK.  He identified at [19] that they appeared to have lived  only  with
    their mother from birth.  He  identified  at  [24]  that  he  found  it
    "telling" that they lived with their  mother  only  even  though  their
    fathers appeared to be prepared to care for other children and that was
    a judgment open to the First-tier Tribunal.  In addition, the judge had
    the benefit of oral evidence from the appellant.

23. It is my conclusion that First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Howard  reached  a
    decision open to him on the material before him as to the children here
    being compelled to leave the UK were their  mother  required  to  leave
    because their fathers are not available  to  offer  them  support  that
    would able the children to remain in the UK or another EEA state.

24. Therefore, I do not find an error in the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

    Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not  disclose  an  error  on  a
point of law and shall stand.

Signed: [pic]                   Date: 27 July 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt


