

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/37297/2014
                                                               IA/37299/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Decision issued              |
|on 8th April 2015                             |on 16th April 2015           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                              SHAHIDA PARVEEN &
                                 AQDAS AZIM
                  (No anonymity direction requested or made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Livingstone
                    Brown, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


              DECISION ON APPLICATION FOR PERMISSION TO APPEAL

 1. The appellants seek to appeal against  a  determination  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Blair,  dismissing  their  appeals  against  refusal  of
    variation of leave to remain and against  removal  to  Pakistan.   They
    argued their cases only under  Article  8  of  the  ECHR,  outwith  the
    Immigration Rules.

 2. The first question is whether (exercising the powers of the  First-tier
    Tribunal) time should be extended for seeking permission to  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal.  The application concedes that it is late.  On  2nd
    February 2015 First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Tiffen  purported  to  grant
    permission, but did not deal with extension of time.

 3. Mr Winter relied on the explanation at part B of the application, which
    says that the previous agents for  the  appellants  failed  to  contact
    their clients:

         ... until after twelve days from the date of receiving the decision
         which left them with two days  to  locate  a  new  solicitor.   The
         previous agents only advised the clients of this over the telephone
         and did not provide the clients with an opportunity to instruct new
         agents or seek a second opinion within the appeal deadline.

    The explanation goes on to narrate the actions of present agents and of
    counsel once instructions had been received.  Mr Winter argued that the
    explanation was a reasonable one, that the delay caused no prejudice to
    either party, and that the application should therefore be admitted for
    consideration.

 4. Mrs O'Brien pointed out that although the bulk of the delay was  blamed
    on previous solicitors, there was no evidence that the matter  was  put
    to them for confirmation or comment.  Nor did the  appellants  lay  any
    basis in evidence for the proposition that they had not been  contacted
    until two days before the end of the period.   That  should  have  been
    backed up by witness statements.  Judge Blair found  the  evidence  for
    the  appellants  unreliable,  so  caution  should   be   exercised   in
    approaching this allegation.  Mrs  O'Brien  submitted  that  no  proper
    foundation had been laid for extending time.

 5. Parties agreed that if time were to be extended, the  question  whether
    permission should be granted remained to  be  decided.   The  purported
    decision of 2 February 2015, issued in  error,  did  not  resolve  that
    issue.

 6. At this  point  I  provisionally  preferred  the  submissions  for  the
    respondent, for the reasons given.  I raised the question  whether  the
    strength of the grounds of appeal was relevant to a  final  resolution.
    Mrs O'Brien submitted that it was not.

 7. The potential strength of  the  grounds  cannot  resolve  whether  time
    should be extended.  Any other rule would have  the  effect  that  good
    grounds are not time limited.  However, on the view that  the  strength
    of the grounds might have some bearing, I decided to  hear  submissions
    thereon before finally resolving admission.

 8. I advised  parties  of  three  points  which  might  have  led  me,  if
    considering the matter on the papers, not to admit the grounds:

         (i) The primary criticism of Judge Blair is that he asked  "whether
         there was a good arguable case outside the Rules", but that was the
         approach the appellant asked for.

         (ii)  The grounds of appeal rely heavily  upon  Ganesabalan  [2014]
         EWHC 2712 (Admin) for the  proposition  that  the  judge  erred  by
         asking that question, and should have recognised that there  is  no
         prior threshold.  Ganesabalan is a decision of a Deputy High  Court
         Judge.  The six authorities to which that judge was referred do not
         include MS v SSHD [2013] CSIH 52,  in  which  Lord  Drummond  Young
         expressed the conclusion of the Inner House:

                  [30] In summary, therefore, we are of opinion that in  all
             cases where the right to private and family life under Article
             8  is  invoked  the  first  stage  must  be  to  consider  the
             application of  the  Immigration  Rules.  The  new  rules  are
             designed to cover the considerations that are relevant  to  an
             Article 8 claim in a normal case. The fundamental issue raised
             by Article 8 is an assessment of on one hand the  requirements
             of an effective immigration policy, including the  enforcement
             of that policy by removal from the United Kingdom, and on  the
             other hand the right of the individual concerned to private or
             family  life.  That  exercise  involves   an   assessment   of
             proportionality. In most cases, the new rules will ensure that
             assessment is properly carried out. In  some  cases,  however,
             the rules will not produce a fair  result  that  accords  with
             Article 8. In those cases the Home Secretary,  acting  through
             immigration officials, will need  to  consider  whether  leave
             should be granted outside the  rules.  That  will  require  an
             assessment of the  precise  circumstances  of  the  individual
             case, taking account of all factors that are  relevant.  These
             will include factors mentioned in paragraph 3.2.7d of the Home
             Secretary's instructions and also any other factors  that  may
             be relevant to the particular  assessment  of  proportionality
             that is being  undertaken.  The  relevant  factors  will  also
             include those mentioned in the rules  themselves,  notably  in
             rules 276ADE-276DH, and in appendix FM, including  section  EX
             of that appendix. The purpose of those provisions  is  to  set
             out the factors that  normally  apply  to  the  assessment  of
             Article 8 rights in an immigration context; consequently  both
             the terms of those provisions and the underlying  policy  that
             can be discerned from those  terms  are  of  importance.  They
             must,  of  course,  be  weighed  against  the  other   special
             considerations that apply in the particular case. Before it is
             necessary to embark on that  second-stage  exercise,  however,
             the application for leave to enter or remain must  demonstrate
             a good arguable case that leave should be granted outside  the
             rules: that a distinct assessment of proportionality should be
             made  to  determine  whether  removal   would   infringe   the
             applicant's Article 8 rights. If that is not demonstrated,  it
             can be assumed that the applicant's Article 8 rights  will  be
             adequately dealt with by applying the new rules. Finally,  the
             test of exceptionality should not be used any longer; instead,
             decision-makers should focus on the question  of  whether  the
             applicant has shown a good  arguable  case  that  his  or  her
             application should be dealt with outside the rules.

         Judge Blair's test reflects  not  only  what  was  put  to  him  by
         representatives but the authority of the Court.

         (iii) The outcome of this case might not  realistically  have  been
         any different whether Judge Blair approached it through one or  two
         stages.

 9. On (i) and (ii), Mr Winter submitted that  the  cases  on  the  correct
    approach to Article 8 are now reconciled by Singh [2015] EWCA  Civ  74,
    which approved Ganesabalan.  Although MS was not expressly  considered,
    it was based on Nagre, which was cited in Singh.  A judge who relied on
    the submissions of parties might nevertheless fall into error  of  law.
    As to (iii), Mr Winter went through the relevant factors in  this  case
    and argued that these had to be considered outwith the Rules as well as
    inside the Rules.  Cases had succeeded on quite similar facts.  It  was
    not inevitable if the judge had taken into  account  all  the  relevant
    circumstances outside the Rules that he would  have  reached  the  same
    result.  The error was therefore material.

10. I was not persuaded that the application should be admitted.

11. Singh leaves it open to a decision-maker to find  that  all  Article  8
    issues are addressed while determining a claim under  the  Rules.   The
    Court does seek to reconcile the cases, but  that  includes  a  finding
    that Nagre remains good law.  Significantly, at paragraph 66  of  Singh
    Underhill LJ adds certain comments in the light of being "conscious  of
    how practitioners in this field can sometimes seek to exploit even  the
    faintest ambiguity".  I do not think there is any more than that in the
    principal argument for the present appellants.

12. While preparing this judgment I  note  that  in  AAA  [2015]  CSOH  37,
    published today, Lord Armstrong simply applied MS.

13. On the proposed grounds for the appellants apart from the alleged error
    of legal approach,  I  note  in  relation  to  (ii)  that  Judge  Blair
    approached the case throughout on the basis of  the  evidence  from  Mr
    Azim that he would not be returning to Pakistan - see paragraphs 25, 26
    and 39.  That choice was Mr Azim's.  It did not require the  First-tier
    Tribunal to assess the  appeal  on  the  basis  that  the  respondent's
    decision enforced separation of husband  and  wife.   Ground  (iii)  is
    based on the second appellant, no longer a child, possibly nevertheless
    having family life with his father for Article  8  purposes.   This  is
    faintly raised by the submission  (recorded  at  paragraph  18  of  the
    determination) that he was "dependent on his parents".  However,  there
    was no reference to case law and no development of the question whether
    dependence amounted to family life going beyond adulthood for Article 8
    purposes.  There is nothing in those grounds which carries a  realistic
    chance of another outcome.

14. I do not think that the grounds raise any arguably  material  error  of
    law.  Their main complaint is  essentially  one  of  form  and  not  of
    substance.  It is clear from paragraph 39 in the determination that the
    judge would have found the case  to  fall  well  short,  based  on  any
    formulation of the relationship between Article 8 and  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The grounds are not of such strength as to add to the case  for
    extending time.

15. Time is not extended.  The application for permission to appeal is  not
    admitted.  The effect of this decision  is  that  there  is  no  appeal
    pending before the Upper Tribunal.


           [pic]


           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
           8th April 2015
