
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/37700/2014
                                                               IA/37705/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 November 2016                   |On 18 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                        MRS DIVYABEN JAGDISH DABASIYA
                          Mr jagdish virji dabasiya
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. I refer to the Decision on Error of Law and Directions  promulgated  on
    30 September 2016 following a hearing at Field House  on  21  September
    2016 which  is  appended  to  this  decision.   In  summary  the  first
    appellant in this case was born on 12 October 1988 and is a citizen  of
    India and the second appellant is also a citizen of India, born  on  28
    November 1984.  The papers indicate that the first appellant was  first
    granted leave to enter the United Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) Student
    on 20 March 2010.  She was granted leave until 16 January 2012.  On  21
    September 2011 she was refused further leave to remain in the UK  as  a
    Tier 4 (General) Student and on 23 October 2013 she was refused further
    leave to enter the United Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) Student.

 2. The first appellant appealed and her initial appeal was allowed  on  24
    January 2013.  On 24 May 2012 the Home Office revoked  the  licence  of
    the college where the appellant had been  studying.   On  11  September
    2014  the  respondent  issued  a  further  letter  refusing  the  first
    appellant's application to vary her leave and issuing the  decision  to
    remove her by way of directions under Section 47  of  the  Immigration,
    Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  The second appellant is  a  dependant
    on the first appellant's status.

 3. As set out in the Decision on Error of Law and Directions, Judge of the
    First-tier Tribunal Suffield-Thompson dismissed  the  appeals  of  both
    appellants under the Immigration Rules in a decision promulgated on  26
    October 2015.  As indicated in my decision promulgated on 30  September
    2016, there was no error of law in that decision.

 4. However, Judge Suffield-Thompson failed to address  Article  8  despite
    the fact that the appellant in her grounds of appeal to the  First-tier
    Tribunal raised the ground that the respondent's decision was  contrary
    to the provisions of the European Convention on Human Rights.

 5. I found an error of law in the  judge's  failure  to  deal  with  those
    grounds of appeal.  As further indicated in my decision promulgated  on
    30 September 2016 it emerged during evidence from  the  appellant  that
    although she confirmed  that  she  did  not  need  an  interpreter  she
    appeared to be struggling with some of the questions that  were  asked.
    Although it was not clear at that point whether this  was  due  to  her
    difficulties with English and/or simply because she  did  not  have  an
    answer to the questions, in the  interests  of  fairness  I  agreed  to
    adjourn the hearing to obtain an interpreter,  at  the  request  of  Mr
    Tarlow on behalf of the Home Office.

 6. However at the reconvened hearing on  9  November  2016  there  was  no
    appearance by or on behalf of the appellants despite the  fact  that  I
    was satisfied that the notice of hearing had been properly  issued.   I
    noted that the address for service of the notice  of  hearing  was  the
    same address in the appellants' applications to  the  Home  Office  and
    there is no indication that there had been any change in this  address.
    Although the appellants had been represented at the previous hearing by
    Mr L Lourdes of Counsel,  I  understand  that  this  was  under  direct
    representation arrangements and therefore the address for  service  was
    that of  the  appellants.  The  clerk  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  my
    instructions endeavoured to contact the appellants using the  telephone
    number provided on their application to the Home Office.  However there
    was no response from this number which I understand did not  appear  to
    be in service.

 7. I  considered  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
    including the overriding objective at Rule 2 as well as Rule 38.   Rule
    38 provides that if a party  fails  to  attend  a  hearing,  the  Upper
    Tribunal may proceed with the hearing if the Upper Tribunal -

         "(a)  is satisfied that the party has been notified of the  hearing
             or that reasonable steps have been taken to notify  the  party
             of the hearing; and

         (b)  considers that it is in the interests of  justice  to  proceed
             with the hearing."

 8. I was satisfied as noted above that the appellants had been notified of
    the hearing and/or that reasonable steps had been taken to notify them.
     I was satisfied that the appellants had been  given ample  opportunity
    to adduce evidence in support of their Article 8 appeal but had  chosen
    not to do so.  I was satisfied that it was in the interests of  justice
    to proceed with the hearing.

 9. I heard submissions from Mr Tarlow which are recorded in  full  in  the
    Record of Proceedings.

Article 8

10. The respondent refused the first appellant's application in a  decision
    dated 1 July 2014 and 11 September 2014 due to the appellant's  failure
    to comply with the Immigration Rules under the Points-Based System.  As
    noted above, the decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Suffield
    Thompson to dismiss the appellants' appeal against that refusal stands.



11. The appellants do not meet the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules.
    As I noted at  paragraph  17  of  my  Decision  on  Error  of  Law  and
    Directions it was for the  appellants  to  demonstrate  the  compelling
    circumstances  which  might  merit  a  grant  of  leave   outside   the
    Immigration Rules.  No such information or evidence has been  produced.



12. I accept that the appellants are a married couple and therefore share a
    family life.  I also accept that the information  would  indicate  that
    the appellants first entered the UK in 2010.  However there was nothing
    to suggest that the appellants could not return together to  India.   I
    am not satisfied that the decision would  constitute  any  interference
    with their family life.  There was no evidence produced  of  any  other
    family members other than the first and second appellants.

13. In relation to their private lives, although it is  not  disputed  that
    the appellants may have developed a private life in the UK, again there
    was nothing before me to suggest that there  was  anything  about  that
    private life that might require consideration in relation to Article  8
    outside of the Rules.

14. I am not satisfied that the  there  was  any  information  or  evidence
    before me that might  suggest  that  there  was  any  prospect  of  the
    appellants establishing compelling circumstances such that a  grant  of
    leave under Article 8 was appropriate. I have reminded  myself  of  the
    relevant jurisprudence including  that  Article  8  is  not  a  general
    dispensing power and that "the opportunity for a promising  student  to
    complete his course in  this  country,  however  desirable  in  general
    terms, is not in itself a right protected under Article 8" (Patel & Ors
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department {2013] UKSC 72 applied).

15. The appellants, neither in their grounds of appeal nor since then, have
    failed to produce any evidence that might displace that presumption  in
    relation to their private life.

16. The case of Singh  v  SSHD  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  74  at  paragraph  66(2)
    provides:

         "If the decision-maker's view is straightforwardly that all the
         article 8 issues raised have been addressed in determining the
         claim under the Rules, all that is necessary is, as Sales J says,
         to say so."

    I am satisfied that this is such a case.

17. I am therefore satisfied that  no  further  separate  consideration  of
    Article 8,  outside the Immigration Rules, is required.

18. In the alternative that I am wrong, considering the five stage test  in
    relation to  private  life  I  accept  that  the  appellants  may  have
    established private life in the UK and that the  respondent's  decision
    will interfere with that decision.  Such decision is in accordance with
    the law and for  the  purposes  of  maintaining  effective  Immigration
    Control.  Considering the final question as to whether such a  decision
    is proportionate, I have considered in the appellants' favour that they
    have been in the UK  for  approximately  6  years  and  may  well  have
    invested both time and money in their life and education here (although
    as noted no adequate information or evidence was produced).

19. In terms of the public interest I have considered Section  117  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum 2002 Act. I  have  reminded  myself
    that the maintenance of immigration control is the public interest.  As
    the first appellant required an interpreter for  her  hearing,  despite
    studying in the UK, there was no adequate evidence that she could speak
    English and I therefore weigh this in the public interest.   There  was
    no  suggested  that  the  appellants  have  been  anything  other  than
    financially independent in the UK  and  therefore  this  is  a  neutral
    factor.  I have further taken into  consideration  that  little  weight
    should be give to a  private  life  established  at  a  time  when  the
    person's immigration status is precarious, which it is  in  this  case.
    Taking into account all the factors, in the alternative to  my  primary
    findings I am satisfied that the decision  is  not  a  disproportionate
    interference with the appellants' Article 8 rights.



Conclusion

20. The First-tier Tribunal's decision dismissing the  appellants'  appeals
    under the Immigration Rules does not contain an error of law and  shall
    stand (as per my  decision  promulgated  on  30  September  2016).  The
    decision under Article 8 is remade dismissing the appellants' appeal.

No anonymity direction was sought or is made.


Signed                                  Date: 17 November 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson


                                  APPENDIX

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/37700/2014
                                                               IA/37705/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 September 2016                 |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                        MRS DIVYABEN JAGDISH DABASIYA
                          Mr jagdish virji dabasiya
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION Not Made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Lourdes, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                   DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW AND DIRECTIONS

Background

 1. The first appellant in this case was born on 12 October 1988 and  is  a
    citizen of India.  The second appellant is her husband, also a  citizen
    of India and born on 28 November 1984.  On 11 February 2012  the  first
    appellant made an application for leave to remain in the UK as a Tier 4
    (General) Student Migrant under the Points-Based  System  (PBS).   This
    application was refused on 23 October 2012.  The appellant appealed and
    her appeal was allowed on 24 January 2013.  On 24  May  2012  the  Home
    Office revoked the licence of the college where the appellant had  been
    studying.    The  second  appellant  is  a  dependant  on   the   first
    appellant's status.

 2. On 11 September 2014 the respondent issued a  further  letter  refusing
    the appellant's application to vary her leave and making a decision  to
    remove her by way of directions under Section 47  of  the  Immigration,
    Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 3. The respondent in a decision dated 11 September 2014 indicated that the
    appellant was written to on 1 July 2014,  giving  her  60  days  to  30
    August 2014 in which to submit further information but no response  had
    been received to  date.   The  appellant's  case  was  therefore  again
    refused.

 4. In a decision promulgated on 26 October 2015 Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Suffield-Thompson dismissed the  appeals  of  both  appellants
    under the Immigration Rules.

 5. The appellant appealed that decision and was granted permission on  the
    basis that there was an arguable error of law.  The grounds for seeking
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  argued  firstly,  that  the
    judge had failed to adequately apply the relevant case law  in  respect
    of fairness and had failed to clarify  whether  the  Tier  4  sponsor's
    licence was suspended or revoked.  The second ground was on  the  basis
    that the judge had failed to adequately assess Article 8 issues.

Error of Law

Ground 1

 6. I am not satisfied that it has been established there  was  a  material
    error of law.  The judge adjourned the hearing initially  from  9  June
    2015 until 22 October 2015 to enable both the appellant and  respondent
    to  submit  further  information  but  nothing  further  was  produced.
    Although the grounds of appeal make reference to  a  statement  from  a
    Roxana Cram, there is no reference to such an  individual  anywhere  in
    the papers before me and Mr Lourdes did not take this any further.

 7. Mr Lourdes argued that the appellant had been unable to secure  another
    college as she was not given either her passport.  As  I  indicated  at
    the hearing, this was the first time this issue had been raised  and  I
    noted from the appellant's witness statement which was before the First-
    tier Tribunal and dated 4 June 2015, that there  was  no  reference  in
    that witness statement to the appellant not receiving  a  copy  of  her
    passport.

 8. I also drew Mr Lourdes' attention to the respondent's letter of 1  July
    2014.  In that letter, the respondent indicated  that  the  appellant's
    appeal had been allowed on 24 January 2013.  On  24  May  2012  the  UK
    Border Agency had revoked the licence of Stevens College of  Technology
    and Management, the appellant's previous Tier 4 sponsor. This  decision
    to revoke the licence meant the CAS submitted by the appellant  was  no
    longer valid.  The respondent stated that before a final  decision  was
    made, in line with the  respondent's  Rules,  the  appellant  would  be
    allowed a period of 60 calendar days to find a new Tier  4  sponsor  so
    that they may vary their initial Tier 4 application.  The 60 day period
    was set to end on 30 August 2014 and no extensions would be given.

 9. The letter goes on to indicate that enclosed was a  certified  copy  of
    the appellant's passport and that if the appellant decided to obtain  a
    new CAS then the sponsor would need to see and retain this  copy.   The
    letter provided, in bold, the steps that the appellant  would  need  to
    take including taking a copy of the letter of 1 July 2014 and a copy of
    their passport when they approached any potential new Tier  4  sponsor.
    Further advice was given.  I also note  that  the  respondent's  bundle
    before the First-tier Tribunal included a Royal Mail tracking proof  of
    delivery dated 4 July 2014 which I  am  satisfied  indicates  that  the
    letter, which included the certified copy of the appellant's  passport,
    was signed for on 4 July 2014 at 10:12am.

10. It was significant in  my  view  that  the  appellant  in  her  witness
    statement almost a year later on 4 June 2015 stated that the respondent
    had not given her 60 days. This  is  clearly  incorrect.   The  witness
    statement  referred  to  "The  definition  of  the  grant  as  per  the
    Immigration Rules, is to make the  immigration  status  document,  i.e.
    either the BRP or the visa stamp on the passport, so that I can get the
    admission in the new college" which Mr Lourdes  suggested  referred  to
    the lack of the appellant's certified copy passport.

11. I am not persuaded by this argument.  The appellant's witness statement
    of 4 June 2015 was difficult to follow.  However, she made no reference
    to not receiving her copy passport with the 4 June 2015 letter.  It  is
    not credible that she would not have set out this claimed  omission  at
    the earliest date. There is also no adequate explanation as to why  the
    appellant repeatedly stated in her witness statement that she  was  not
    granted 60 days to obtain a new sponsor  when  it  is  clear  from  the
    letter of 1 July 2014 that she was.

12. I am not satisfied therefore that  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Suffield-Thompson made any error.  The judge lamented  the  paucity  of
    information from both parties in this case but indicated that  she  was
    in a position to proceed and that the parties had ample time to provide
    any further documentation.  Although the judge did not have the benefit
    of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated  on  9  December
    2013 (and neither  has  the  Upper-tier  Tribunal  had  sight  of  that
    decision) the judge was quite properly satisfied  that  the  respondent
    had given the appellant a further 60 days to obtain a  certificate  and
    that these 60 days expired on 30 August 2014.

13. I can find no fault with  the  judge's  subsequent  findings  that  the
    respondent treats all appellants in this situation equally, allows them
    a further 60 days, that this policy is fair and consistent and that  it
    was for  the  appellant  to  meet  the  Rules.  The  appellant  had  an
    opportunity to obtain a new CAS or make a fresh application.

14. I indicated at the hearing that there was no material error of  law  in
    the judge's approach to the appellant's appeal  under  the  Rules.   Mr
    Lourdes indicated in any  event  that  his  submissions  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal rest primarily on the Article 8 issue in ground 2.

15. There is therefore no error of law in respect of ground 1.

Ground 2

16. However, in respect of ground 2 Mr Tarlow conceded,  that  although  he
    relied  on  the  respondent's  Rule  24  response,  he  was   in   some
    difficulties.  It is clear that the appellant in her grounds of  appeal
    to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  at  paragraph  5  submitted   that   the
    respondent's decision was contrary to the provisions  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.  Additionally, in her witness statement  of
    4 June 2015 the appellant at paragraph 9 asserted that  she  relied  on
    the case of CDS ("PBS available": Article 8) Brazil [2010]  UKUT  00305
    (IAC) in relation to private life. Although as  I  indicated  there  is
    more up-to-date case law in respect of private life in  the  UK,  I  am
    satisfied that the appellant clearly  raised  Article  8  human  rights
    grounds in her appeal and Judge Suffield-Thompson's decision is  silent
    on this issue.

17. Although the respondent argued that there is no prospect of success for
    the appellant's case under Article 8 and it is clear that the appellant
    will have an uphill struggle including in showing what  the  compelling
    circumstances  are  which  merit  a  grant  of  leave  outside  of  the
    immigration rules, it cannot be said, in the absence of any findings in
    relation to Article 8  that  such  an  outcome  is  inevitable.   I  am
    therefore satisfied  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    contains an error of law.  As I indicated at the  hearing,  I  preserve
    Judge Suffield-Thompson's findings of fact and the decision in relation
    to the immigration rules.

18. I was initially disposed to remaking the decision at the  hearing,  and
    Mr Lourdes confirmed that he was in a position to proceed.  However, it
    emerged during evidence that the appellant, although she confirmed that
    she was understanding the proceedings, appeared to be  struggling  with
    some of the questions. It was not clear to me  at  that  point  whether
    this was because of her difficulties with English  and/or  because  she
    simply did not have an  answer  for  the  questions.  However,  in  the
    interests of fairness I adjourned the hearing to obtain an interpreter.
    Unfortunately there was no Gujarati interpreter available on  the  day.
    The appellant is therefore to be given an opportunity to give  evidence
    with an interpreter.



Notice of Decision on Error of Law

19. The First-tier Tribunal's absence of consideration of Article 8  issues
    amounts to an error of law capable of  affecting  the  outcome  of  the
    appeal and that part of the decision is set aside. The  decision  under
    the Immigration Rules is preserved its entirety.

20. The decision on Article 8 issues will be remade by the Upper Tribunal.


    No anonymity direction was sought or is made.

Directions

      1) The appeal succeeds to the extent set out above and the decision of
         Judge Suffield-Thompson in relation to Article 8 only is set aside.

      2) The decision on Article 8 will be  remade  in  the  Upper  Tribunal
         before a single Judge.

      3) The appellant to file and serve an indexed  bundle  containing  the
         appellant's up-to-date witness statement addressing Article 8.  The
         indexed bundle must be filed and served no later than 7 days before
         the reconvened hearing date.  The bundle is to separately tabulate:

          i) The evidence relied upon before the First-tier Tribunal; and

         ii) The additional evidence is now sought to be relied upon before
             the Upper Tribunal.

      4) Any failure to comply with these directions may lead  the  Tribunal
         to exercise its powers to  decide  the  appeal  without  a  further
         hearing, or to  conclude  the  defaulting  party  has  no  relevant
         information, evidence or submissions to provide.


Signed                                  Date 30 September 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson


