

                                    [pic]



The Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal number: IA/37604/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated   |
|On October 28, 2014                  |On October 30, 2014         |
|                                     |                            |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                         MR MOHAMMAD AKHER UZ ZAMAN
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow (Home Office Presenting
      Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. The appellant, born June 3,  1988,  is  a  citizen  of  Bangladesh.  He
    entered the United Kingdom as a student with leave until June 30, 2010.
    He subsequently extended this leave as a Tier 4 student until April 23,
    2013. On September 25, 2012 he applied for leave to remain as a Tier  1
    (Entrepreneur) Migrant. The  respondent  refused  this  application  on
    September 10, 2013 under paragraph 245DD HC 395 and  issued  a  removal
    direction under section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum  and  Nationality
    Act 2006.

 2. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal under  Section  82(1)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  on  September  27,
    2013 and on July 21,  2014  Judge  of  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  Aziz
    (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ") heard his appeal and  dismissed
    it in determination promulgated on July 30, 2014.

 3. The appellant lodged grounds of  appeal  on  August  11,  2014  and  on
    September 19, 2014 Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  White  granted
    permission to appeal finding it arguable the  FtTJ  had  erred  in  his
    approach to Hadul Islam Pilot by identifying him as a sponsor  when  in
    fact he had been part of his entrepreneurial team and this may have led
    to the FtTJ making errors  in  relation  to  what  documents  had  been
    submitted. The respondent filed a Rule 24 response dated September  25,
    2014 disputing the ground.

 4. The matter came before me on the above date and I took submissions from
    both the appellant and Mr Tarlow.

    SUBMISSIONS


 5. The appellant submitted the FtTJ had erred as follows:

     a. He typed his name as "Us" whereas it is "Uz".
     b. He denied he had ever given oral or written evidence that Mr  Pilot
        was his sponsor. He and Mr Pilot had presented a joint  application
        and both predominantly on a third party sponsor and  limited  funds
        of their own.
     c. He maintained that when he attended his interview he  produced  the
        bank letter and disputed the FtTJ's findings at paragraph [42].
     d. His previous legal advisors were at fault  for  not  providing  him
        with the correct advice over what documents needed to be  submitted
        and he accepted the correct bank document was  not  submitted  with
        the application.

 6. Mr Tarlow submitted the FtTJ recorded in  his  determination  that  the
    appellant told him Mr Pilot  was  a  sponsor  and  this  was  noted  in
    paragraphs [20] and [34]. He  was  entitled  to  say  Mr  Pilot  was  a
    sponsor. In any event, the FtTJ rejected his account on the  submission
    of documents and made a clear finding on the bank letter  at  paragraph
    [43]. The appellant's submission was no more than  a  disagreement  and
    unless the finding was perverse there was no reason to  interfere  with
    the decision. The fact he may have been badly advised did not mean  the
    Tribunal should allow his appeal.

 7. The appellant re-iterated the points he had  made  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal and I informed the parties I would reserve my decision.

    MY FINDINGS ON ERROR IN LAW

 8. The appellant and Mr Pilot both submitted applications to extend  their
    stays as Tier 1 (Entrepreneurial) migrants and both were refused.

 9. In his own application  form  the  appellant  listed  funds  that  were
    available to him. In order to rely on those funds  the  appellant  must
    satisfy the requirements of  paragraph  41-SD  of  Appendix  A  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

10. The appellant was invited to an interview that was held  on  April  26,
    2013 and the interview record, as set out in the FtTJ's  determination,
    referred to him producing a  number  of  documents  including  a  "bank
    statement" and the FtTJ  found  at  paragraph  [42]  that  he  had  not
    produced the required bank letter but  had  in  fact  produced  a  bank
    statement.

11. This issue is the cornerstone of the appeal along with  his  submission
    that the FtTJ erred in mistakenly identifying Mr Pilot as a sponsor and
    to a lesser extent incorrectly recording his name.

12. With regard to the slight error in his name whilst this is  unfortunate
    I do not find this is or contributes to any possible error in  law.  He
    recorded part of his name as "Us" when it is in fact "Uz. This makes no
    difference to the decision.

13. There is an issue over whether the appellant referred to  Mr  Pilot  in
    oral evidence as his sponsor. The FtTJ's notes  are  not  VERY  legible
    although following careful consideration there is some evidence that he
    recorded that he was sponsored by Mr MA and Mr Pilot as he  records  in
    his notes "2 sponsors Mr MA and Mr Pilot".

14. The FtTJ was therefore entitled to refer to this in his  determination.
    Whilst Mr Pilot was originally his partner the application refers to Mr
    Pilot's funds so there is further evidence  that  some  of  Mr  Pilot's
    funds were being relied on and the respondent referred to  these  funds
    in the refusal letter.

15. I do not therefore find any error in the reference to  Mr  Pilot  as  a
    sponsor. What is clear is that at the date of hearing Mr Pilot  was  no
    longer a partner in the proposed enterprise as his application had been
    refused and he had not appealed that decision as he  had  no  right  of
    appeal. If his financial resources were needed  then  the  Rules  would
    also apply to him. As it happens the appellant told me he did not  seek
    to rely on his funds but merely Mr Ma's funds

16. The real issue centres on  the  document  that  can  be  found  in  the
    appellant's bundle at section 7.

17. The FtTJ had the papers before him  and  took  oral  evidence  and  had
    regard to the interview. He made a finding that was open  to  him.  The
    appellant disagrees with that finding and invited me to  find  that  he
    had produced the document. I am not re-hearing the evidence but  merely
    deciding if there was an error in law.

18. Whilst the appellant may have been poorly advised (I make no finding on
    this) I can find nothing amiss with the determination. The  finding  on
    Mr Pilot being referred to as a sponsor was open to him as he noted the
    appellant's evidence on this. The finding on the production of the bank
    letter was similarly open to him. He rejected the appellant's  evidence
    and the appellant's challenge on this point  amounts  to  nothing  more
    than a mere disagreement.

19. There is no error in law.

    DECISION


20. There is no material error of law. The original decision shall stand.

21. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended) the  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No
    order has been made and no request for an order was submitted to me.


Signed:                           Dated: October 30, 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



TO THE RESPONDENT

I do not make a fee award as the application did not succeed.

Signed:                           Dated: October 30, 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
