
IAC-AH-DN-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/37976/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 4 December 2014                   |On 23 December 2014                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON


                                   Between

                      Mr christophe kersley kevin ramen
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Mauritius who  was  born  on  24  October
    1992.  He is therefore now 22 years of age.  He,  his  sister  and  his
    parents applied in 2012 for variation of their leave to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom.  Their applications were refused  on  24  August  2013.
    Decisions were also  made  to  remove  them  from  the  UK  by  way  of
    directions.  The appellant and his family appealed  the  decisions  and
    the appeals were heard by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Seifert.   In  a
    decision promulgated on 19 September 2014 the judge allowed the appeals
    of the appellant's parents on human rights grounds, allowed the  appeal
    of the appellant's sister under the Immigration  Rules,  but  dismissed
    the appeal of this appellant under the Immigration Rules and  on  human
    rights grounds.

 2. The appellant sought permission to appeal the adverse decision  against
    him and permission was granted.  The judge doing so commented that  the
    grounds of the application asserted that the judge  committed  material
    errors of law because he had not made findings  consistent  with  those
    relating  to  the  other  members  of  the  family,  on  human  rights,
    dependency, and breach of the human rights of the family which would be
    caused by his removal and break up of the family unit.  The  judge  had
    not found compelling, compassionate, circumstances which  were  evident
    where the appellant was over 18 and would be separated from his parents
    and young sister with whom he had always had a family life.

 3. The judge granting permission went on to  say  that  the  determination
    showed that evidence was recited and analysed, findings were made about
    the appellant's family life which were not congruent with the  findings
    concerning the other members of the family, their family life  together
    and the consequences on each of  separation.   The  grounds  identified
    arguably confused findings and conclusions which  were  open  to  being
    interpreted as a material  error  of  law.   The  application  properly
    raises concerns that the evidence was not properly assessed or  weighed
    or appropriate findings made because of the irrational conclusions.

 4. The Secretary of State filed a Rule 24  response  submitting  that  the
    judge had directed himself appropriately.  The appellant did  not  meet
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules in  relation  to  his  family
    life under Appendix FM and this was a finding open to the judge on  the
    facts.  The judge then went on to find that there are no  good  reasons
    to allow the decision under Article 8 outside the Rules which was  also
    a finding open to him on the facts.  The further  submission  was  made
    that the grounds of appeal amounted to no more than a disagreement with
    a finding of the First-tier Tribunal.

 5. On the day of hearing there was no appearance by or on  behalf  of  the
    appellant.  I checked the file and noted that  notice  of  hearing  was
    sent to his representatives  on  11  November  2014  and  also  to  the
    appellant.  The notices were sent by first class  mail.   There  having
    been no appearance by 11.10am I caused a telephone call to be  made  to
    the representatives.  As reported to me there was  no  response  and  a
    message was left with the representatives.  I  decided  to  proceed  as
    there was no indication that the  appellant  or  representatives  would
    necessarily appear and there was no documentation filed in  support  of
    the application or any request made for an adjournment.

 6. In oral submissions Mr Duffy made the point that the judge did look  at
    the  whole  family  unit  in  what  was  a  long  determination.    The
    appellant's sister, Melissa, only succeeded  because  the  judge  found
    that  she  was  in  the  middle  of  her  GCSEs   and   it   would   be
    disproportionate for her to be removed at this time.   In  essence  her
    parents "piggy backed" on that decision because  they  are  responsible
    for her care.  The appellant himself is an adult and  the  family  life
    that he enjoys with his parents and sister is  not  the  same  as  that
    which he would have enjoyed when he was under 18.

 7. The judge found that insofar as the appellant's claim to family life is
    concerned he continues to live with his parents and sister but there is
    no evidence of any particular dependency beyond that normally  expected
    with an adult son or adult sibling.  He has relatives  and  friends  in
    the UK but there is no reason why his relationship should not  continue
    were he to return to Mauritius.  On any view  he  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules but to remove him now  would  not
    constitute a disproportionate interference with his Article  8  rights.
    Although he gave evidence that he does not speak Creole/French and that
    his university course of first choice is  not  available  in  Mauritius
    there was no documentary evidence to support this and in any  event  it
    was open to the appellant to apply from Mauritius to study in  the  UK.
    Additionally, I note, at paragraph 46,  for  reasons  given  there  the
    judge did not find the appellant's parents to be credible witnesses  in
    respect of their  ongoing  ties  with  Mauritius.   The  appellant  was
    brought up and educated in Mauritius until he left there in June 2005.

 8. In the grounds seeking permission to appeal it  was  stated  that  UKBA
    have always granted the family  visas  to  stay  as  a  family  so  the
    representatives are now confused why one of the  dependants  should  be
    asked to leave alone.  The point, which the judge was clearly aware  of
    is that the appellant is now over age, or put another  way,  he  is  no
    longer a child. That is the difference.  On the  judge's  findings  the
    family has ties still in Mauritius and in considering the life with his
    family in the UK and with his contact with and knowledge  of  Mauritius
    it would be proportionate to  expect  the  appellant  to  return  there
    despite the fact that he has lived as a family dependant in the UK  for
    a number of years.  He cannot meet the requirements of the  Immigration
    Rules.  The arguments with the judge's decision are just that  and  the
    judge was entitled to conclude as he did for the reasons given.

 9. In all the circumstances there are no errors in the determination  such
    as to display a material error of law and there is no other good reason
    for this appeal to be heard again.

10. In those circumstances the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is
    upheld.

11. I was not addressed on the matter of anonymity.  The  circumstances  do
    not appear to require that an anonymity direction be made and therefore
    I do not make one.



Signed        Date 4 December 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton
