
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/37733/2013
                                                               IA/37742/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 October 2015                    |On 8 October 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                      v

                         Mr Ricardo Jose Nuesa Miro
                             Mrs Eden Gapit Miro
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Shirley Vidyadharan, Home Office Presenting
                    Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Greg O'Ceallaigh, counsel instructed by Augustine
                    Clement Solicitors


                             DECISION & REASONS

1.    This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department,
against a decision by First Tier Tribunal Judge Telford  promulgated  on  20
April 2015, in which he allowed the appeal by the Respondents on  Article  8
grounds against the  decision  by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department dated 29 August 2013 to  remove  them  from  the  United  Kingdom
pursuant to a decision to refuse their human rights claims.

2.    The Respondents are both nationals of  the  Philippines,  born  on  20
February 1960 and 7 January 1962 respectively. They arrived  in  the  United
Kingdom on 13 April 2000 together with their son, Jose,  born  on  10  March
1988 with a visit visa valid for 6 months. The  Second  Respondent  made  an
application for leave to remain as a student in  November  2000,  which  was
refused and thereafter the family  remained  without  leave.  In  2006,  the
Respondents instructed LH Immigration Services to submit an application  for
leave  to  remain  on  their  behalf  but  it  does  not  appear  that  this
application ever received a response from the Secretary  of  State  for  the
Home Department. On 3 November 2010, the First  Respondent  was  apprehended
as an overstayer and served with an IS151A notice. An application  was  made
on 5 November 2010 for leave to remain on the basis of  human  rights.  This
application was refused  on  11  November  2010  and  certified  as  clearly
unfounded. Judicial review proceedings were then  commenced  which  resulted
in the withdrawal by the Secretary  of  State  of  her  previous  decisions.
Further representations were then made which resulted in  new  decisions  of
23 August 2013, refusing the two Respondents leave to  remain  but  granting
their son, Jose, discretionary leave to remain.

3.    The Respondents appealed and their  appeals  came  before  First  Tier
Tribunal Judge  Telford  for  hearing  on  25  March  2015.  In  a  decision
promulgated on 20 April 2015 the Judge allowed  the  appeals  on  the  basis
that there  were  exceptional  circumstances  that  justified  consideration
outside the Immigration Rules [17] and he found that the Secretary of  State
for the Home Department had failed to  establish  that  in  this  particular
case the decision was proportionate [24].

4.    The Secretary of State for the Home Department  sought  permission  to
appeal against his decision on 28 April 2015 on the grounds that  the  Judge
had erred materially in law in that: (i) he made a mistake  as  to  material
fact in findings  at  [20]  that  the  Respondents'  son  had  been  granted
Indefinite Leave to Remain, whereas he had, in fact, been granted 30  months
Discretionary Leave and (ii) he failed consider sections  117A-117D  of  the
Nationality, Immigration & Asylum  Act  2002  which  required  him  to  have
regard to the public interest considerations in the case. Reliance was  also
placed on Dube (s.117A-117D) [2015] UKUT 00090 (IAC). Permission  to  appeal
was granted by First Tier Tribunal Judge Cruthers on 24  June  2015  on  the
basis that the grounds were arguable.

5.    At the hearing before me, Ms Vidyadharan for the  Secretary  of  State
relied upon the grounds of  appeal  and  submitted  that  the  crux  of  her
argument is that the Judge failed to properly go through sections  117A-117D
and failed to give weight to  matters  that  the  Tribunal  was  statutorily
obliged to do. She submitted that the error of fact in  relation  to  Jose's
status permeated through the determination and the Judge further  failed  to
take the Respondents' unlawful residence into account.  She  submitted  that
the Judge at [18] stated that he bore in mind that the Respondents  did  not
come to the United Kingdom with anything but  a  short  visit  in  mind  and
remained illegally but he failed to factor the public interest into the  mix
and the fact that he was  not  prepared  to  accept  they  have  not  worked
illegally did not sit well with the public interest.

6.    In response, Mr O'Ceallaigh submitted that  this  was  an  exceptional
case in that the Respondents had been  providing  enormous  benefit  to  the
United Kingdom through their work for Couples for Christ. In respect of  the
assertion that the Judge  failed  to  take  into  account  the  Respondent's
unlawful presence, he drew my attention to [18] and  [19]  where  the  Judge
expressly stated that he needed  to  balance  the  appalling  and  deceptive
immigration history with the positive factors. He  submitted  that  at  [17]
the Judge gave clear reasons  as  to  the  exceptional  circumstances  which
justified consideration outside the Immigration Rules  and  that  the  Judge
had conducted a proper balancing exercise. In respect of the status  of  the
Respondents' son, Jose and the reference at [20] to the grant of  indefinite
leave to remain, this was obviously a mistake because reference was made  in
the witness statements, particularly that of Jose at [4]  and  the  skeleton
argument to the fact that Jose  had  been  granted  discretionary  leave  to
remain. He submitted that a misprint was the most obvious  explanation,  but
even if it was not a typo or a misprint ultimately the  Secretary  of  State
for the Home Department had granted  Jose  discretionary  leave  because  it
would be disproportionate to remove him. In respect of  the  second  ground,
Mr O'Ceallaigh submitted that the Judge took into  account  the  factors  he
was required to and following Dube it did not matter if section  117A-D  was
expressly referred to if it had been taken into account in  substance.  Dube
states in terms that it is not necessary for the Judge to  set  out  section
117. At [18] in his criticism of the behaviour  of  the  Respondents  he  is
clearly taking the public interest into account. At [19] he rightly  decided
that the immigration history was appalling. At [21]  he  took  into  account
that the Respondents  speak  English  and  contribute  economically  to  the
United Kingdom and it is clear he  had  the  public  interest  in  mind.  He
correctly  directed  himself  in  respect  of  caselaw  principles  cf.   UE
(Nigeria) [2010] EWCA Civ at [22] and did not accord weight to private  life
but rather reduced the weight to be  accorded  to  immigration  control.  He
submitted that there was no error of law in the decision of the  First  Tier
Tribunal Judge. There was no reply  by  Ms  Vidyadharan  on  behalf  of  the
Secretary of State for the Home Department.

7.    I find that there was no material error of  law  in  the  decision  of
First Tier Tribunal Judge Telford. In respect of the first ground of  appeal
viz material error of fact in respect of Jose's immigration  status  in  the
United Kingdom, I agree with Mr O'Ceallaigh that the reference to the  grant
of indefinite rather than  discretionary  leave  to  the  Respondents'  son,
Jose, is most likely to be a typographical error, given  that  the  evidence
before the Judge was that he had been granted discretionary leave.  Even  if
that is not the case, the error was not a material one given  the  evidence,
which the Judge accepted at [17] and was not challenged by the Secretary  of
State for the Home Department, that Jose has had the majority  of  his  life
in the UK and he is now effectively English and at [20] that he  was  aiming
to become a British citizen and  would  be  affected  by  the  loss  of  his
parents from his life.

8.    In respect of the second ground of appeal viz the failure to  consider
sections 117A-117D of the Nationality, Immigration & Asylum  Act  2002,  the
Judge at [3] made express reference to the public interest  elements  to  be
considered under sections 117A-D inclusive of the  Nationality,  Immigration
& Asylum Act 2002 which  apply  where  Article  8  is  considered  and  thus
properly directed himself. Whilst there is  no  specific  paragraph  in  the
decision where the Judge sets out those considerations,  Dube  (s.117A-117D)
[2015] UKUT 00090 (IAC) makes clear at [2] of the headnote that  it  is  not
an error of law to fail to refer  to  the  ss117A-D  considerations  if  the
Judge has applied the test he was supposed to apply according to  its  terms
and that what matters is substance  not  form.  First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge
Telford  clearly  had  regard  to  the  public  interest  and  made  express
reference to it not only at [3] but also at  [21].  The  Judge  was  clearly
aware of  the  precarious  nature  of  the  Respondents'  private  life  and
expressly found at [18] that their period  of  unlawful  presence  was  from
2000-2010,  but  he  properly  balanced  this   "appalling   and   deceptive
immigration history" [19] with the positive  factors  which  included  their
ability to speak English and support themselves financially [21] along  with
the absence of criminal convictions, the impact on Jose and their  work  for
the wider community [19]-[21].

9.    For the reasons set out above, I find that First Tier  Tribunal  Judge
Telford did not err materially in law in allowing the  Respondents'  appeal.
Consequently, the appeal by the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
is dismissed and the decision  of  First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Telford  is
upheld.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

7 October 2015
