
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/37804/2013
                                                               IA/37807/2013
                                                               IA/37808/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 6 June 2014                                |On 24 June 2014              |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                Qasim Mehmood
                                Farzana Qasim
                                 Umme Roman
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr S A Saeed, solicitors, Legal Solutions Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. These are appeals by a man and his dependent wife and child against the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing  their  appeals  against
    the decision of the respondent to refuse them leave to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) Student or dependant of a  student
    as the case may be.

 2. There were two points taken against the first appellant.  It  was  said
    that he did not produce the documents necessary to show that he had the
    required funds at the required time and it was said  that  he  did  not
    show progress in his studies.  The First-tier  Tribunal  found  against
    him on both points.

 3. I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal was wrong to say  that  the
    first appellant had not produced the right documents to show the  right
    funds at the right time.  It was his case that he had actually produced
    all the appropriate documents and they had been lost by  the  Secretary
    of State.  Copy documents were presented which clearly  show  that  the
    appellant had sufficient money to satisfy the requirements of the Rules
    by a very substantial margin. The First Appellant had no reason not  to
    disclose the documents.

 4. It has always been the First Appellant's case  that  the  Secretary  of
    State had lost the  document  or  documents  that  were  sent  and  the
    Secretary of State did not respond under the flexible evidence Rule  or
    do anything to try and  rectify  the  error  but  complained  that  the
    documents had not been served.

 5.  Ms  Isherwood  found  herself  in  delicious  difficulty  because  her
    enquiries to investigate the case in  an  effort  to  prepare  it  were
    frustrated  by  her  not  being  given  any  copies  of  the  necessary
    documents, and she told me in  her  characteristically  straightforward
    way that her own enquiries on the internal blogging system of the  Home
    Office were at least equivocal about what was actually served. She  had
    to agree with me that this was an exceedingly poor platform on which to
    mount a defence to the suggestion that the documents had been lost.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not really engaged  with  this  point
    and had no proper basis for concluding that the  documents  never  were
    produced. To that extent he was wrong.

 7. However, the real point of contention was the extent of progress in the
    first appellant's studies.  It is quite plain that he  had  produced  a
    form CAS indicating that he was seeking to progress in his  studies  in
    the sense that he last studied something at NVQ level 4 and now  wanted
    to move to NVQ level 5. This is a kind of progress. The problem is that
    it is not progress within the meaning of paragraph 120A of HC  395.  As
    was set out by the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  its  determination,  this
    requires that:

         "... the sponsor has  confirmed  that  the  course  for  which  the
         Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies has been assigned represents
         academic progress from previous  study  as  defined  in  (b)  below
         undertaken during the last period of leave as a  Tier  4  (General)
         Student or as a Student where the applicant has had such leave."

 8. It goes on:

         "(b) For a course to  represent  academic  progress  from  previous
             study, the course must:
         (i)  be above the level  of  the  previous  course  for  which  the
             applicant was granted leave as a Tier 4 (General)  Student  or
             as a Student, or
         (ii) [not applicable here]."

 9. The relevant point is that the applicant had to show  it  was  progress
    from the course for which he was previously granted leave as a  Tier  4
    (General) Student.  The first appellant was previously granted leave to
    study an ACCA course at NVQ level 7, and  the  intention  to  study  at
    level 5 does not represent progress from the course for  which  he  was
    granted leave.

10. This is precisely the point that was  considered  by  the  Tribunal  in
    Naeem (Para 120A of  Appendix  A)  [2013]  UKUT  465  (IAC)  where  the
    Tribunal (Mr C M G Ockelton, Vice President and  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Martin) made clear at paragraph 10 that the Rules allow no  flexibility
    and the relevant test was  the  level  of  the  course  for  which  the
    applicant had leave.

11. This applicant had changed his course of studies.  He may not have been
    entirely at liberty to do  that  but  he  did  it  for  the  apparently
    sensible reason that his college had closed or was closing  his  course
    of studies and, in his mind, he was making the  best  of  a  change  of
    circumstances.  This is not a case of his being criticised for behaving
    cynically or irresponsibly but of his attempting unsuccessfully to meet
    the requirements of the Rules.

12. It follows therefore that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not err  in
    law materially, and I uphold his decision.  For this reason  I  dismiss
    the appellants' appeals.

13. I am very grateful to Mr Saeed and Ms Isherwood for their measured  and
    careful presentation of this case but Mr Saeed's charm and care  cannot
    alter the fact that the Rules are against his client.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 24 June 2014                   |







