
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/37199/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination promulgated    |
|on 23 May 2014                                |On 28th May 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          CARLY JOHANNA MAKRIDAKIS
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:      Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:     Mr H Ndubuisi, of Drummond Miller, Solicitors

No anonymity order requested or made.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1) This determination refers to parties  as  they  were  in  the  First-tier
   Tribunal.

2) The appellant is a citizen of Australia, born on 2 June  1977.   She  was
   issued with a residence card on 29 January 2008 as a  spouse  of  an  EEA
   national.  Through her solicitors she applied on  26  April  2013  for  a
   permanent residence  card  as  confirmation  of  her  retained  right  of
   residence in the UK following her divorce, in terms  of  the  Immigration
   (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

3) The SSHD refused the application by letter dated 27 August 2013,  because
   her former spouse was not a qualified person in the UK at the time of the
   divorce and she was therefore not residing in the UK in  accordance  with
   the Regulations at the date of termination of the marriage  (as  required
   by Regulation 10(5)(b)).   The  application  was  considered  also  under
   Regulation 15 but there was no evidence that the appellant's spouse was a
   qualified person for a continuous 5 year period during the marriage.  The
   letter then  tells  the  appellant  that  as  she  appeared  to  have  no
   alternative basis of stay in the UK,  she  should  make  arrangements  to
   leave.  However, page 4 of the letter then refers her to "changes to  the
   Immigration Rules to unify consideration under the Rules and Article 8 of
   the ECHR" and advises that if she wishes to  be  considered  under  those
   provisions, she should make a separate application.  Since  she  had  not
   made such an application, the letter declines  to  consider  whether  her
   removal would breach Article 8.

4) The appellant appealed to the FtT on these grounds:

    Decision is not in accordance with Immigration (European Economic Area)
    Regulations 2006.
    Decision is contrary to law.
      Decision is inconsistent with Article 8 ECHR.

5) Judge Agnew heard the appellant's appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  on
   27 January 2014, and  allowed  it  by  determination  promulgated  on  28
   January 2014.  Mr Ndubuisi firstly sought to persuade the judge that  the
   marriage terminated when the parties decided to separate and not  at  the
   date of divorce, but that argument was rejected at paragraph 4.  Nor  was
   there a continuous period of 5 years so as to  qualify  under  Regulation
   15.  Mr Ndubuisi next relied on a letter  sent  to  the  Tribunal  on  15
   January 2014 requesting leave to amend the grounds on the basis that  the
   appellant was an unmarried partner of a British citizen and  so  met  the
   terms of Appendix FM  of  the  Rules  (paragraph  7).   The  respondent's
   Presenting Officer argued that the appellant could not rely on Article  8
   in absence of a removal decision, which the  judge  declined  to  accept.
   She went on to find that  the  appellant  met  the  requirements  of  the
   Immigration Rules (paragraph  14)  and  would  in  the  alternative  have
   allowed the appeal under Article 8 (paragraph  15).   Finally,  she  said
   that the appeal was "dismissed under the Immigration  (European  Economic
   Area) Regulations 2006, and allowed under the Immigration Rules".

6) These are the grounds on which the SSHD sought leave  to  appeal  to  the
   Upper Tribunal:

    The judge erred in law by failing to give  adequate  reasons  why  this
    appeal should be allowed under the Immigration Rules and Article 8.


    It is noted at paragraph 7 of the determination  that  the  appellant's
    representatives wrote to the Tribunal on 15 January 2014 to amend their
    grounds to reflect that the appellant is now an unmarried partner of  a
    British citizen.  This information has never been before the respondent
    and no decision has been made.  The judge erred in failing  to  provide
    reasons why when the appellant submitted an EEA application on 25 April
    2013 and following the refusal completely  changes  the  basis  of  the
    application in  January  2014  ...  the  determination  does  not  give
    adequate reasons why the appellant meets the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    findings are limited to paragraphs 14 and 15.  For example how does the
    judge reason why the appellant meets the requirements of S-LTR.1 or  R-
    LTRP.


    At paragraph 15 the judge continues to consider  Article  8  and  finds
    that there are compelling  features  and  unjustifiably  hard  for  the
    appellant to return to Australia ... the determination does not include
    the reasons and what evidence  was  before  the  judge  to  reach  that
    conclusion.


7) On 17 February 2014 Judge Pooler granted permission, saying:
      ...

        2. The [grounds] submit that the judge erred  by  failing  to  give
           adequate reasons for allowing the appeal; but in  substance  the
           grounds also appear to submit that the  judge  made  a  material
           misdirection of law.


        3. It is arguable that the judge failed to  give  adequate  reasons
           for finding at [14] that the requirements of App FM were met or,
           alternatively,  at  [15]  that  the  appeal  should  succeed  by
           reference to Article 8.

        4. It is also arguable that the judge erred by allowing  an  appeal
           against an EEA decision, made on EEA grounds, on the ground that
           the decision was not in accordance with the Immigration Rules.

8) Mr Mullen submitted as follows.  Jurisdiction  in  an  appeal  under  the
   Regulations excludes consideration under  the  Immigration  Rules.    The
   judge was technically entitled to consider Article 8 so far as  it  falls
   outside the Rules, but Article 8 now falls  almost  entirely  within  the
   Rules.  The point is somewhat circular, because a  consideration  of  the
   terms of the Rules would be essential to any Article 8 decision.  In  any
   event, the judge failed to  explain  how  the  appellant's  circumstances
   could meet the terms of the Rules, and on reference to the evidence, they
   plainly did not.  The appellant said that she  and  her  partner  started
   living together in April 2012. If the judge had gone through requirements
   of the Rules, as she claimed to have done, it  would  have  been  evident
   that she could not meet the 2 year period of cohabitation.  The appellant
   might now be in a position to apply under the  Immigration  Rules  as  an
   unmarried partner, which would be considered  by  the  respondent  on  an
   application made in the UK.  It was not unreasonable to expect her so  to
   apply.  The judge had said that in the alternative she would have allowed
   the appeal under  Article  8  outside  the  Rules,  but  again  that  was
   unreasoned.  The circumstances did not disclose any  undue  harshness  or
   exceptionality.  The appellant would not have to return to  Australia  to
   make  her  application.   There  were  no  sound  reasons  in   the   FtT
   determination for allowing the appeal.

9) Mr Ndubuisi said that  the  appellant  and  her  partner  started  living
   together in January 2012 and so by the date of the hearing  met  the  two
   year requirement.  In view of the differing statements by representatives
   of what the basic facts had been, I asked Mr Ndubuisi to refer me to  the
   evidence which was  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  appellant's
   statement was eventually located.  She says:

    13. ... I met my partner ... in January  2012,  while  we  were  working
        together with the Scottish under      16 rugby team ... our  initial
        meeting was on a professional level.   We  were  in  camp  with  the
        team at   the time.


    14. ... our friendship developed into a personal relationship  ...  some
        time  in  February  2012.   This     was  when  we  entered  into  a
        relationship.  We were together in  the  camp  until  the  camp  was
        disbanded in April 2012.


    15. When we left the camp, [my partner] moved in with me [in] April 2012
        ...

10) Mr Ndubuisi submitted that even if the appellant's  circumstances  could
   not properly have been found to meet the terms of the Immigration  Rules,
   her appeal would have succeeded under Article 8 outwith the Rules because
   of the exceptional and compassionate circumstances of  her  case.   These
   included the effect on the appellant's partner and business customers  if
   she had to leave the country.  He said that if she were to make a further
   application, she would have no right of appeal in the event  of  refusal.
   The Upper Tribunal should not put her in the position of having  to  make
   that  application,  but  should  substitute  a  decision  based  on   her
   circumstances now, on the basis  that  she  has  now  completed  2  years
   cohabitation and meets all other requirements  of  the  Rules  (although,
   once  again,  there  was  no  concrete  attempt   to   demonstrate   that
   proposition) and that there  is  no  public  interest  in  expecting  the
   appellant to make an application.

11) Mr Ndubuisi accepted my observations that  if  matters  proceeded  to  a
   removal decision the appellant would have a right of appeal, and that the
   respondent has  a  policy  of  making  removal  decisions  under  certain
   circumstances, if asked to do so.

12) I reserved my determination.


13) The case had to fail under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
   Regulations  2006.   The  facts  could  not  meet  the  requirements   of
   Regulation 10 or Regulation 15.

14) The submission by Mr Mullen on the jurisdiction of the FtT in an  appeal
   under the Regulations is well founded.  The right to appeal  arises  from
   Regulation 26.  Schedule 1, paragraph 1 of the Regulations provides  that
   certain provisions of the 2002 Act have effect in relation to  an  appeal
   under the Regulations as if it were  an  appeal  against  an  immigration
   decision under section 82(1) of that Act, but excepting section  84(1)(a)
   and (f).  Section 84(1)(a) is the ground "that the  decision  is  not  in
   accordance with Immigration Rules."

15) The judge  was  thus  unfortunately  misled  about  the  extent  of  her
   jurisdiction.

16) On the evidence,  the  appellant's  circumstances  could  not  meet  the
   substantive requirements of the Immigration Rules.  By  her  own  account
   she had not started living together with her partner until  a  date  less
   than 2 years before the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.

17) The respondent's Presenting Officer sought to argue in the FtT that  the
   appellant could not rely on  Article  8  in  the  absence  of  a  removal
   decision, which the judge declined to accept.  The judge did not have the
   assistance she should have had on this point either.  Article  8  of  the
   ECHR is not excluded  in  such  a  case  as  a  matter  of  jurisdiction.
   However, there is force in the argument as put  in  the  Upper  Tribunal,
   namely that there is no meaningful interference  where  an  appellant  is
   invited to submit any application  open  to  her  under  the  Immigration
   Rules.  There can be no right under Article 8 of the ECHR to  be  excused
   from making an application.  The result may be in her favour, and if  so,
   well and good.  If not, and if she is not simultaneously  served  with  a
   removal decision, she can request  one,  enabling  her  to  exercise  her
   statutory right of appeal.

18) The proposition that the  alternative  of  the  appellant  returning  to
   Australia carries  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  for  herself,  her
   partner and her clients is misconceived, when the respondent invites  the
   appellant to make an application without returning to Australia.

19) The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  The  appeal,
   as originally brought to the First-tier Tribunal,  is  dismissed  on  all
   available grounds.



                               [pic]
                                27 May 2014
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
