
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/37311/2014
                                                               IA/37313/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly       |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 15 July 2015                      |On 28 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between

                               TITILAYO BELLO
                             KOREDE SAMUEL BELLO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Nicholson counsel instructed by GMIAU
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnson Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this  appeal  but
    in order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in
    the First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the  Secretary  of  State
    against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Bruce promulgated on 16
    December 2014 which allowed the Appellants appeal and held that it  was
    disproportionate  and  unlawful  under  Article  8  of   the   European
    Convention on Human Rights to remove them to Nigeria.

Background

 3. The Appellants are a mother and son born on 5 June 1964 and 5  February
    2007 respectively.  They  are  nationals  of  Nigeria  but  the  second
    Appellant was born in the UK and had at the date of the Judges decision
    lived in the United Kingdom for 7 years and 10 months.

 4. The first Appellant came to the UK in October  2003  with  a  two  year
    multiple entry visa but never returned to Nigeria.

 5. On 4 July 2012 the Appellants made applications to be  given  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom on the grounds that they  had  established
    private lives in the United Kingdom.

 6. On 24 January 2013 the Respondent refused the decisions but refused  to
    make appealable  decisions.  The  Appellant  launched  judicial  review
    proceedings which were settled by consent on 15  April  2014  with  the
    Respondent agreeing to make a removal decision  which  gave  rights  of
    appeal before the First-tier Tribunal and that decision was made  on  4
    September 2014..

 7. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons for the refusal:

      a) The first Appellant did not meet the  requirements  of  the  parent
         route.

      b) The first Appellant did not meet the private life  requirements  of
         paragraph 276ADE in view of the length of time she had lived in the
         United Kingdom and the fact that it was not accepted that  she  had
         lost all ties to Nigeria.

      c) The second Appellant could not meet the requirements of  the  child
         route because his mother had not been granted leave under FM.

      d) He could not meet the private life requirements because at the time
         of the application he had not lived in the United  Kingdom  for  at
         least 7 years.

      e) There were no  exceptional  circumstances  in  relation  to  either
         Appellant.

      f) S 55 of the Borders Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 was  taken
         into account.

      g) Paragraph 353B was also considered.

The Judge's Decision

 8. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Bruce ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against the Respondent's
    decision. The Judge found :

      a) The new Rules introduced in July 2012 codified where the government
         considered that the balance should  be  struck  when  weighing  the
         rights of the individual against the rights of the state.

      b) The refusal letter was wrong to apply a test of exceptionality to a
         grant of leave outside the Rules the question  was  simply  whether
         the  decision  is  a  disproportionate   and   therefore   unlawful
         interference with the applicants' Article 8 rights.

      c) The applications were made before Article 8 was codified  into  the
         Immigration  Rules  and  the  Rules  were  not  therefore  directly
         applicable however while viewing it as a hypothetical  exercise  it
         was  a  reminder  of  where  the  balance  is  to  be  struck  when
         considering claims in respect of private life.

      d) She determined that the correct approach to the applications was to
         consider Samuels best interests  as  a  primary  consideration  and
         therefore she considered his position before that of his mother.

      e) Samuel could not succeed under Appendix FM because his  mother  did
         not have leave under Appendix FM.

      f) The Judge considered 276ADE on the basis the application being made
         as of the date of hearing.

      g) The Judge asserted that she was obliged to consider whether  Samuel
         had lived in the United Kingdom for 7 years and  whether  it  would
         not be reasonable for him to leave the United Kingdom.

      h) The Judge then considered how the  development  of  the  qualifying
         period of residence of 7 years.

      i)  She  referred  to   the   Respondent's   Immigration   Directorate
         Instructions guidance in determining whether removal is  reasonable
         which referes to teh requirement for  'strong  reasons'  and  those
         factors identified as possible strong reasons.

      j) She then examined Samuel's situation in relation to his education.

      k) She then examined the social  and  economic  circumstances  of  the
         first Appellant in the United Kingdom  and  Nigeria.  She  did  not
         accept that the frist Appellant had been truthful in her  assertion
         that she lived a hand to mouth existence in Nigeria or that she and
         the first Appellant would be destitute if they returned.

      l)  The  Judge  did  not  accept  that  she  was  truthful  about  her
         circumstances in the United Kingdom and found her evidence that she
         had not worked in the United Kingdom was unreliable.

      m) She concluded that those who had helped the Appellant in the United
         Kingdom could help her on her return to Nigeria.

      n) She took into account in relation  to  the  public  interest  those
         factors set out in s117B of the Nationality Immigration and  Asylum
         Act 2002 as amended and in relation to s117B (1)-(5) she found that
         none weighed heavily in the Appellant's favour.

      o) However she then considered  s117B(6)  and  found  that  the  first
         Appellant had a relationship with a qualifying child and  it  would
         not be reasonable to expect that child to leave the United Kingdom.

      p) She found that given the second Appellant would at the date of  the
         decision have met the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1) (iv)  the
         Respondent could not show that removal was proportionate.

      q) She then considered the position of the adult Appellant  and  found
         that she met the requirements of EX.1 if she  had  applied  at  the
         date of hearing and therefore the Respondent could  not  show  that
         her removal was proportionate.

      r) She allowed the appeals under Article 8.

 9. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing :

      a) The Judge misdirected herself as to the appropriate test  to  apply
         under Article 8 outside the Rules.

      b) The Judge was wrong to find  that  Appendix  FM  was  not  directly
         applicable.

      c) The Judge misdirected herself on the  law  as  it  applied  to  the
         removal of children and should have  applied  the  guidance  in  EV
         (Philippines) and Others [2014] EWCA Civ 874

      d) The Judge misdirected herself in relation to s 117B(vi) in that  it
         did  not  say  that  the  public  interest  was  defeated  in   the
         circumstances proscribed but  that  the  public  interest  did  not
         require removal. S11B(vi) was not determinative  of  the  issue  of
         proportionality.

10.  On  9  February  2015  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hollingworth  gave
    permission to appeal.

11. At the hearing I heard submissions from Ms Johnson  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant that :

    (a)    She conceded that any error made in relation to ground 1 or 2 of
         the grounds of appeal was not material to the outcome and she  only
         intended to pursue ground 3.

    (b)    The Judge had not made clear findings as to what would await the
         Appellants on return to  Nigeria  and  this  was  material  to  the
         outcome of her decision.

    (c)    She reiterated that the Judge had apparently treated s  117B(vi)
         as determinative of the outcome of the case and  was  in  error  in
         that.

12. On behalf of the Respondent  Mr Nicholson submitted that :

      a) The Respondent was merely trying to re  argue  the  merits  of  the
         case.

      b)  The  Grounds  of  Appeal  sought  to  rely  on  EV  but  that  was
         distinguishable from this case in that the child in that  case  had
         lived in the United Kingdom for less than 5 years. In this case the
         best interest of the child was to remain in the United Kingdom.

      c) The Judge did not in relation to paragraph 117B(vi)  say  that  the
         public  interest  was  defeated  by  the  applicability   of   this
         provision. She used that provision together with what was  said  in
         the IDIs to assist in determining what was reasonable  in  relation
         to the removal of the child.

      d) The Judge had considered every  positive  and  negative  factor  in
         determining the position of the child and reached a conclusion that
         was open to her.

Finding on Material Error

13. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made no errors of law of law that were material to the outcome
    of the decision.

14.  The  approach  adopted  in  the  refusal  letter  was,  although   the
    applications were made prior to the change in the Immigration Rules  on
    9 July 2012, to consider the applications by reference to  Appendix  FM
    and paragraph  276ADE.  This  approach  has  since  been  confirmed  in
    paragraph 56 of Singh and Khaled [2015]  EWCA  Civ  7  as  the  correct
    approach which confirmed at paragraph 56

         "(1) When HC 194  first  came  into  force  on  9  July  2012,  the
         Secretary of State was  not  entitled  to  take  into  account  the
         provisions of the new Rules (either directly or by treating them as
         a statement of her current policy) when making decisions on private
         or family life applications made prior to that  date  but  not  yet
         decided.   That  is  because,  as   decided   in   Edgehill,   "the
         implementation provision" set out at para. 7  above  displaces  the
         usual Odelola principle.

         (2) But that position was altered by HC 565 - specifically  by  the
         introduction of the new  paragraph  A277C  -  with  effect  from  6
         September 2012.  As from that  date  the  Secretary  of  State  was
         entitled to take into account the provisions  of  Appendix  FM  and
         paragraphs  276ADE-276DH  in  deciding  private  or   family   life
         applications even if they were made prior  to  9  July  2012.   The
         result is that the law as it  was  held  to  be  in  Edgehill  only
         obtained as regards decisions taken in the two-month window between
         9 July and 6 September 2012."

15. Thus the Judge was in error in suggesting that the new Rules  were  not
    directly applicable in this case as the decision  was  made  after  the
    narrow window of 9 July -6 September 2012 identified in Singh.

16. However Ms Johnson rightly conceded that this error was not material to
    the outcome of the decision given that the Appellant could not have met
    paragraph 276ADE(1) (iv) or  EX.1 as both required the  calculation  of
    the period of residence to be made by reference to a period of 7  years
    prior to the date of application which the child in this case  did  not
    meet at that time.

17. The Judge allowed this appeal under Article 8 outside the Rules and was
    obliged to assess the Appellants circumstances as at the  date  of  the
    decision. The grounds do not appear to me to  identify  any  factor  in
    relation to the circumstances of either  of  the  Appellants  that  the
    Judge failed to take into account in her lengthy and detailed  analysis
    of their circumstances but appears to disagree with the weight that the
    Judge has attached to those factors. Weight is of course a  matter  for
    the Judge.

18. I am satisfied that in determining whether the decision to  remove  the
    child was proportionate at the date of the hearing the Judge  used  the
    new Rules to assist her in assessing proportionality given  that  those
    Rules were a  codification  of  where  the  Government  considered  the
    balance should be struck when weighing the  rights  of  the  individual
    against the rights of the state  (paragraph  6).  She  also  took  into
    account at paragraph 9 the Respondent's own Guidance in the Immigration
    Directorate Instructions that 'strong reasons will be required in order
    to refuse a case with continuous United Kingdom residence of more  than
    7 years'. As Mr Nicholson rightly pointed out in this case, unlike  EV,
    the child Appellant had at the time of the hearing accrued in excess of
    7 years residence.

19. The Judge herself examined  in  detail  the  child's  circumstances  in
    paragraphs 11-14. She examined the circumstances of the mother and  the
    child in the UK and Nigeria in 15-17. She then took  into  account  the
    provisions of s117B of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act  2002
    in paragraph  19  identifying  that  the  question  of  whether  it  is
    reasonable to remove a child must be determined  without  reference  to
    the public interest factors set  out  at  117B(1)-(5).Nowhere  did  she
    suggest that s 117B(1) (vi) was determinative of the issue it  was  one
    of the factors that she took into account when the decision is read  as
    a whole. At paragraph 20 she concluded that in the light of her factual
    findings and the history of the rule, the jurisprudence  and  the  IDIs
    that none of the facts  underpinning  the  case  amounted  to  "serious
    reasons"  (given  the  inverted  commas  I  am  satisfied  this  was  a
    typographical error in that she was referring to the  IDIs)  to  remove
    him from the United Kingdom. Nowhere in the refusal letter  or  in  the
    decision can I identify what factors or circumstances were advanced  by
    the Respondent in this case as a strong  reason  to  remove  the  child
    given his length of residence. The Judge was entitled to conclude  that
    the first Appellant's  poor  immigration  history  could  not  be  held
    against him and to conclude that had an application been  made  at  the
    date of  hearing  the  second  Appellant  would  have  succeeded  under
    paragraph 276ADE9iv) and therefore ask herself could  the  decision  to
    remove be proportionate.

20. I remind myself of what was said in Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set
    aside) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT  85  (IAC)  about  the  requirement  for
    sufficient reasons to be given in a decision in headnote (1): "Although
    there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of the conclusions on
    the central issue on which an appeal is determined, those reasons  need
    not be extensive if the decision as a whole makes sense, having  regard
    to the material accepted by the judge."

21. I was therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination in relation to
    Article 8 when read as a whole set out findings that  were  sustainable
    and sufficiently detailed and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

22. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established and  that
    the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

23. The appeal is dismissed.



Signed      Date 27.7.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
