
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/37555/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 January 2016                   |On 28 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        MD. SHAKIL HUSSAIN TARAFDHAR
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. D. Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. S. Muquit of Counsel, instructed by Taj
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge A W Khan promulgated on 30 December  2014  in
    which he allowed  Mr.  Tarafdhar's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision to refuse  to  leave  to  remain  as  a  spouse  under
    Appendix FM of the immigration rules.

 2. For the purposes of this decision I refer to the Secretary of State  as
    the Respondent and to Mr. Tarafdhar as the Appellant, reflecting  their
    positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:

         "The judge recognised that the Appellant could  not  meet  Appendix
         FM.  However the judge went on to allow the appeal under Article  8
         ECHR.  It is not clear what factors weighed  in  the  judge's  mind
         when he  decided  that  there  were  exceptional  features  of  the
         Appellant's case that justified allowing the appeal.  This lack  of
         reasoning is an arguable error of law."

 4. At the hearing it  was  submitted  by  Mr.  Muquit  that  there  was  a
    misapprehension in the grant of appeal.  First it referred to the  fact
    that the Appellant appealed against refusal of leave  to  remain  as  a
    student [1], when he had applied for  leave  to  remain  as  a  spouse.
    Secondly it stated that the judge had allowed the appeal under  Article
    8 ECHR  having  recognised  that  the  Appellant  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of Appendix FM [3].  However the  judge  had  allowed  the
    appeal under Appendix FM with reference to paragraph EX.1.   Mr.  Mills
    accepted that there were differences between the grounds and the  grant
    of permission,  but  submitted  that  permission  to  appeal  had  been
    granted, which was accepted by Mr. Muquit, who agreed that the  hearing
    should proceed.

 5. I heard  submissions  from  both  representatives,  following  which  I
    reserved my decision.

Submissions

 6.  Mr.  Mills  submitted  that  the  error  was  in   the   approach   to
    "insurmountable obstacles".  None of  the  factors  considered  by  the
    judge could be considered to be insurmountable.  Following the case  of
    VW (Uganda) [2008] UKAIT 00021, there had to  be  far  more  than  mere
    hardship.  I was referred to paragraph [21] of Agyarko [2015] EWCA  Civ
    440.  This states:

         "The phrase "insurmountable obstacles" as used in this paragraph of
         the Rules clearly imposes a  high  hurdle  to  be  overcome  by  an
         applicant for  leave  to  remain  under  the  Rules.  The  test  is
         significantly more demanding than a mere test of whether  it  would
         be reasonable to expect a couple  to  continue  their  family  life
         outside the United Kingdom."

 7. He submitted that the judge had equated insurmountable  obstacles  with
    what was reasonable, which was a misdirection in  law.   The  threshold
    was higher than reasonableness.  I was referred to  paragraph  [25]  of
    Agyarko - "The mere facts that Mr Benette is  a  British  citizen,  has
    lived all his life in the United Kingdom and has a job here - and hence
    might find it difficult and might be reluctant to re-locate to Ghana to
    continue their family life there - could not constitute  insurmountable
    obstacles to his doing so."  It was submitted that the factors referred
    to in the  decision  related  to  hardship  and  choice  and  were  not
    insurmountable obstacles.

 8. I was referred to paragraph [13] of the decision.   It  was  of  little
    relevance that the Appellant's sponsor was born and had a  job  in  the
    United Kingdom.  She had been to Bangladesh twice.  The fact  that  she
    had no family there was not an insurmountable obstacle.  The fact  that
    she could not speak Bengali was not an  insurmountable  obstacle.   The
    only factor  which  could  point  to  an  insurmountable  obstacle  was
    connected to the  care  of  her  mother.   He  conceded  that,  if  the
    sponsor's mother would become reliant on  the  state  were  she  to  be
    parted from the sponsor, that could lead to a finding that  it  was  an
    insurmountable obstacle.  However there were  two  other  siblings  who
    lived in the same area of Birmingham.  The judge had  discounted  their
    ability to care for their  mother  as  they  were  her  sons.   It  was
    submitted that frequently the opposite argument was made, that  it  was
    culturally a son's responsibility to look after  his  mother.   It  was
    submitted that the  responsibility  for  a  mother  fell  on  sons  and
    daughters-in-law.  The sponsor's mother had  two  married  sons  living
    nearby.  The judge had made a mistake in the way he had dealt with  the
    ability of the sons to care for  their  mother.   Paragraph  276ADE(vi)
    stood or fell with the insurmountable obstacles point.

 9. Mr. Mills submitted that, if I agreed with  his  submissions  regarding
    paragraph EX.1, he could see the  merit  in  the  submission  that  the
    Appellant had a case  under  Article  8  given  the  findings.   I  was
    referred to paragraph [30] of Agyarko.  It was possible to  fail  under
    paragraph EX.1 but to succeed under  Article  8,  in  the  presence  of
    compelling circumstances.

10. Mr. Muquit submitted that Mr. Mills had conceded  that,  in  principle,
    looking after a disabled  mother  could  constitute  an  insurmountable
    obstacle.  He submitted that the judge  was  correct  in  allowing  the
    appeal under paragraph EX.1  as  the  sponsor  was  looking  after  her
    disabled mother.  I was referred to the findings in paragraph [13],  in
    particular that the sponsor played the "major part"  in  looking  after
    her mother.  I was referred to paragraphs [3], [5] and [9] for evidence
    of the type of physical care which the sponsor gave to her  mother,  in
    particular regarding personal hygiene.

11. He submitted that the findings in  paragraph  [13]  were  open  to  the
    judge.  The grounds of appeal were little more than a disagreement with
    the judge's conclusion.  Other people could not take over the  care  of
    the sponsor's mother.  The judge had  preferred  the  evidence  of  the
    sponsor and her family that other family members were not able to  take
    over from the sponsor in caring for their  mother.   The  reference  to
    cultural matters was that it would be inappropriate for a  male  family
    member to wash a female.   The  Respondent  had  misread  the  comments
    regarding culture.

12. In summary he submitted that the concession that, in principle,  living
    with someone who needed daily care could be an insurmountable  obstacle
    pointed to the fact that there was no error of law and the grounds were
    mere disagreement.

13. In relation to Article 8, it was unreasonable and  disproportionate  to
    expect the sponsor to relocate  to  Bangladesh.   It  would  sever  the
    special dependency between the sponsor and her  mother.   He  submitted
    that the appeal should be allowed either under paragraph EX.1 or  under
    Article 8.  If it were to be reconsidered under Article 8, it should be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal as there would be  further  updates
    on the position.  As had been accepted by Mr. Mills, some of the family
    circumstances may not have been explored by the judge in the First-tier
    Tribunal.

14. Mr. Mills submitted that the concession he  had  made  was  that  there
    could be insurmountable obstacles if a sponsor cared for  her  disabled
    mother and there was nobody else who could reasonably care for her.  He
    did not make the concession that the fact that the  sponsor  cared  for
    her disabled mother was in and of itself  an  insurmountable  obstacle.
    He submitted that inadequate reasoning had been given by the judge  who
    had rejected the argument that the sponsor's brothers and  their  wives
    could care for their mother.  In paragraph [9]  the  judge  found  that
    they had their own homes, and in paragraph [13] that they had their own
    families and lived  separately,  but  he  questioned  why  this  was  a
    rational explanation for why the sons were not able to care  for  their
    mother.  He submitted that more reasons should have been  given  as  to
    why the alternative care with her sons  and  daughters-in-law  was  not
    reasonable.  No reason had been given as to why the  care  required  by
    the sponsor's mother amounted to an insurmountable obstacle.

15. In relation to Article 8 I was referred to the case of SS Congo  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 387.  He submitted that remittal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for consideration of Article 8 would be just to the Appellant.

Error of law

16. The relevant part of paragraph 13 of the decision states as follows:

         "I am entirely satisfied that insurmountables (sic) do indeed exist
         preventing such family life continuing outside the UK  because  Mrs
         Tarafder was born in the  UK.   She  has  only  visited  Bangladesh
         twice, firstly in 2006 and lastly in 2010.  I accept that  she  has
         no family in Bangladesh and that she cannot read or  write  Bengali
         though she does speak some of the language.  I accept that she  has
         a job in the UK but most importantly, I accept that in reality  she
         plays the major part in looking after her mother.  There  is  clear
         evidence that the Appellant's mother is in  receipt  of  disability
         living allowance and  I  find  that  the  evidence  from  both  the
         Appellant and his wife is  entirely  credible  in  respect  of  her
         physical ailments.  It is only entirely  natural  that  it  is  the
         Appellant's wife who is the proper person who is expected  to  look
         after her mother and indeed it would not be  appropriate  for  male
         members of the family to assist in certain tasks that  need  to  be
         carried out which must be obvious.   I  also  accept  that  if  Mrs
         Tarafder were  to  go  to  Bangladesh,  two  of  her  brothers  are
         estranged from their mother and the remaining  sons  would  not  in
         reality be in a position to look after her because they have  their
         own family and live separately.  It was suggested on behalf of  the
         Respondent that carers could be appointed but this would not really
         be a fair and reasonable solution as Mrs Tarafder is the main carer
         and  of  course  she  is  female  and  looks  after   her   mother,
         particularly in relation to personal matters which it would not  be
         appropriate, culturally speaking, for male members of the family to
         perform."

17. Paragraph EX.2. defines "insurmountable obstacles" for the purposes  of
    paragraph EX.1. as "the very significant difficulties  which  would  be
    faced by the applicant or their partner in continuing their family life
    together outside the UK and which could not be overcome or would entail
    very serious hardship for the applicant or their partner."

18. Following the case of  Agyarko,  paragraph  [25],  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant's wife was born in the United Kingdom and has a  job  in  the
    United Kingdom is not an insurmountable obstacle.  Neither is the  fact
    that she has only visited Bangladesh twice and  has  no  family  there.
    She speaks some Bengali and the fact that she cannot now read or  write
    Bengali is not an insurmountable obstacle.  The only one of the factors
    set out in paragraph [13] which was accepted  by  Mr.  Mills  as  being
    capable, in principle, of amounting to an insurmountable obstacle,  was
    the care provided by the sponsor to her mother.   However  he  conceded
    only that this would amount to  an  insurmountable  obstacle  were  the
    sponsor's mother to need to depend on the state for  her  care  in  the
    absence of receiving care from the sponsor herself.

19. I find that the fact of  depriving  someone  of  the  care  which  they
    receive from another person is not in and of itself  an  insurmountable
    obstacle unless it can be shown that there is no  one  else  who  could
    provide that care.  It could be argued that unless it  could  be  shown
    that such care would not be provided by the state, it would not  amount
    to an insurmountable obstacle, but  Mr.  Mills  conceded  that  if  the
    absence of the sponsor meant reliance  on  the  state,  this  could  be
    capable of amounting to an insurmountable obstacle.

20. In relation to whether or not the sponsor's mother  would  be  able  to
    receive care from another family member in the absence of the  sponsor,
    the judge found that the sponsor's two brothers "would not  in  reality
    be in a position to look after" their mother.  The reasons he gave  for
    this were that "they have their own family and  live  separately."   In
    paragraph [9] he refers to  the  evidence  of  the  sponsor  that  "her
    brothers could not support their mother  because  they  had  their  own
    homes".  I find that this, in and of itself, is not an adequate reason.
     There is no evidence that the brothers' family circumstances are  such
    that they would not be able either to accommodate their mother,  or  to
    provide the necessary care to her  in  her  own  home.   There  are  no
    reasons given as to why the  fact  that  the  sponsor's  brothers  live
    separately and have their own families means that they cannot care  for
    their mother.

21. The judge also states that  "it  would  not  be  appropriate  for  male
    members of the family to assist  in  certain  tasks  that  need  to  be
    carried out which must be obvious", and later, when responding  to  the
    Respondent's suggestion that carers be appointed, states that "it would
    not be appropriate, culturally speaking, for male members of the family
    to perform" personal matters.  However there does not  appear  to  have
    been any suggestion that male members  of  the  family  attend  to  the
    personal hygiene needs of the sponsor's mother.   Indeed  the  decision
    records that the Respondent suggested that carers be  appointed  rather
    than care being received from male  members  of  the  family.   Further
    there is no  reason  given  as  to  why  the  daughters-in-law  of  the
    sponsor's mother could not assist in relation to personal care tasks.

22. I find that inadequate reasons have been given as to why the fact  that
    the sponsor's mother would have  to  receive  care  from  someone  else
    amounts to an insurmountable obstacle.  I find that inadequate  reasons
    have been given as to why the sponsor's  brothers  and  their  families
    cannot care for the sponsor's mother in the absence of the sponsor.   I
    find this is especially the case given that the definition in paragraph
    EX.2. refers to "the very significant difficulties which would be faced
    by the applicant or their  partner  in  continuing  their  family  life
    together outside the UK and which could not be overcome or would entail
    very  serious  hardship  for  the  applicant  or  their  partner"   (my
    emphasis).   Inadequate  reasons  have  been  given  as  to   why   the
    difficulties which may be faced in providing alternative care  for  the
    sponsor's mother could not be overcome.

Notice of decision

    The decision involves the making of an error on a point of  law  and  I
    set it aside.

    The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed   Date 28 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
