

                                             [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/37484/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester             |Determination Promulgated|
|On August 21, 2014              |On August 22, 2014       |
|                                |                         |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                        Miss omoyemi kudirat bankole

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Atuegbe (Legal Representative)
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety (Home Office Presenting
      Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, born March 3, 1976, is a citizen of Nigeria. On  January
    11, 2013 she  applied  for  a  residence  card  based  on  her  durable
    relationship with her partner, Charles Whyte.

 2. The respondent refused her application on August 23, 2013  because  she
    was not satisfied the parties were in a durable relationship.

 3. On September 11, 2013 the appellant appealed under Section 82(1) of the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and Regulation 26  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

 4. The matter was listed before Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Hillis
    (hereinafter referred to as "the FtTJ") on March  12,  2014  and  in  a
    determination promulgated on March 25, 2013  he  dismissed  the  appeal
    finding the appellant had failed to satisfy Regulation 8(5) of the 2006
    Regulations. He also dismissed the appeal under the  Immigration  Rules
    and article 8 ECHR.

 5. The appellant appealed that decision on April 2,  2014.  Permission  to
    appeal was refused by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Robertson on May
    7, 2014. Permission to appeal was renewed to the Upper Tribunal and  on
    June 9, 2014 Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein found it was  arguable  the
    FtTJ may have erred  by  failing  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  his
    findings on material matters.

    PRELIMINARY ISSUES

 6. I reviewed the FtTJ's notes of the proceedings and  I  also  considered
    the notes submitted with the grounds of appeal as  well  as  asking  Mr
    McVeety to check his notes. The  record  of  proceedings  kept  by  all
    parties  indicated  there  had  been  no  cross  examination   by   the
    respondent's representative about the matters raised in paragraphs [14]
    to [16] of the determination and there was no  evidence  the  FtTJ  had
    raised these issues during the hearing.

 7. I invited Mr McVeety's views on the application  and  he  accepted  the
    FtTJ appeared to have made findings on matters that neither he nor  the
    respondent had raised as issues in the hearing.

 8. Mr Atuegbe relied on his grounds of appeal and submitted  the  negative
    findings made were not issues either raised in the refusal letter or at
    the hearing. In the interests of fairness the FtTJ should  have  raised
    these issues if they were matters that concerned him and  would  affect
    his decision. His failure to do so undermined his decision and amounted
    to an error in law.







    ERROR OF LAW ASSESSMENT


 9. The record of proceedings confirmed that the  matters  referred  to  in
    paragraphs [14] to [16] of the determination were not issues relied  on
    by the respondent and the FtTJ had not raised them at the  hearing.  As
    these were important issues for the FtTJ I am satisfied he should  have
    raised these points with the appellant and sponsor at the  hearing.  By
    failing to do so he acted unfairly and his findings are tainted.

10. I therefore set aside the decision.

11. Mr McVeety had no further representations to make. I  raised  with  him
    whether he wished to pursue the matters identified  in  the  paragraphs
    referred to above and he stated he did not wish to do so.

12. I was therefore left with the appellant's and sponsor's  accounts  that
    they had been living together  since  January  2012  along  with  their
    explanation for living apart prior to that date.

13. I accept the submission that the  state  of  the  appellant's  previous
    marriage is irrelevant because this is not a spouse application. It  is
    an  application  to  remain  as  an  unmarried  partner  and  the  only
    requirement is to show the relationship was  durable.  Over  two  years
    living together satisfied this test especially in light  of  the  other
    evidence about financial support.

    DECISION


14. There is a material error of law and I set aside the original decision.
    I allow the appeal under the 2006 Regulations and direct the  appellant
    be issued with a residence card.

15. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended) the  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No
    order has been made and no request for an order was submitted to me.

Signed:                           Dated:



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
TO THE RESPONDENT

I do not make a fee award as the application only succeeded after further
evidence was submitted.

Signed:                           Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
