
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/37278/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 January 2016                   |On 29 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             OYINLADE ALADEGBEMI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Staunton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr I Komusanac, Solicitor, Igor & Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. For ease of reference, I shall refer to the parties as they were before
    the First-tier Tribunal. Thus, the Secretary of State is the Respondent
    and Ms Aladegbemi is the Appellant.

 2. This is an appeal by the Respondent against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Kelly (the judge), promulgated on 29 June 2015, in which
    he allowed the Appellant's appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules  (the
    Rules) pertaining to Article 8, specifically Paragraph 276ADE.

 3. The Appellant's appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  had  in  turn  been
    against the decision of the Respondent,  dated  4  September  2014,  to
    remove her from the United Kingdom by way of directions  under  Section
    10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.  This decision had  followed
    a somewhat protracted (but not entirely  uncommon)  procedural  history
    involving decisions without a right of appeal and  subsequent  judicial
    review claims.

Proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The Appellant, a citizen of Nigeria born on 25 November 1995,  came  to
    this country in January 2006 with her mother and elder sister.   Before
    the judge the argument was put that the  Appellant's  Article  8  claim
    should  succeed  first  of  all  under   the   Rules   themselves,   or
    alternatively outwith them.

 5. In respect of the Rules, Paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) and (vi)  were  relied
    on by the Appellant's representative.  In reaching  his  decision,  the
    judge made reference to the well-known decision of the  European  Court
    of Human Rights in Maslov [2008] ECHR  546  and  also  referred  to  an
    unreported decision of the Upper  Tribunal  entitled  RMJA  (no  appeal
    reference number being provided).  In relying  on  these  decisions  in
    paragraph 27 of his decision, the judge stated  that  he  would  expect
    "very weighty reasons" to justify a decision to  remove  the  Appellant
    from the United Kingdom.  He went on to criticise the reasons  provided
    by the Respondent in support of removal and concluded that it would not
    be reasonable for the Appellant to leave this country.  The appeal  was
    therefore allowed, in the first instance, on  the  basis  of  Paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv).

 6. The judge then proceeded to make an alternative finding in  respect  of
    Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).  He directed  himself  to  the  relevant  test
    within that provision, namely whether "very significant  obstacles"  to
    the Respondent's integration into Nigerian society would exist  if  she
    were forced to return to that country.  In  paragraphs  30  to  31  the
    judge considered a  number  of  factors  relating  to  the  Appellant's
    particular circumstances and once again criticised the reasoning of the
    Respondent  in  support  of  removal.   The  judge  found   that   very
    significant obstacles to reintegrating did in fact exist and  therefore
    allowed the appeal on this alternative basis.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 7. The Respondent sought permission to appeal on two grounds.  In  respect
    of Paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) it is said  that  the  judge  had  erred  in
    relying  on  the  unreported  Upper  Tribunal  decision  and  had  also
    misdirected himself to Maslov.

 8. Ground 2 relates to Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi). Paragraphs (b) and (c)  of
    this ground reads as follows:

         "...these factors [those stated in  paragraph  30  of  the  judge's
         decision] do not establish that the  [Appellant]  would  experience
         very significant obstacles to integrating  into  Nigerian  society.
         The First-tier Judge has failed to consider  that  the  [Appellant]
         has grown up within a Nigerian family exposed to the  cultural  and
         social norms of the country, the official language  of  Nigeria  is
         English and there is a possibility that the  [Appellant]  would  be
         returning with her mother and sister pending the outcome  of  their
         appeals.

         The Secretary of State asserts that the First-tier Tribunal Judge's
         assessment  of  what  constitutes  very  significant  obstacles  is
         superficial and fails to  properly  establish  why  the  respondent
         would  be  incapable  of  integrating  into  the  country  of   her
         nationality."

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Heynes in
    a brief decision dated 17 September 2015.

The hearing before me

10. Both representatives confirmed that the  Appellant's  last  application
    was in fact made to the Respondent in December 2012, and  in  terms  of
    her decision the Respondent had accepted throughout that the  Appellant
    had been under eighteen and in the United Kingdom for seven  years  for
    the purposes of Paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) (see also page 2 of the reasons
    for refusal letter, dated 4 September 2014).

11. Mr Staunton relied on the grounds of appeal. In  respect  of  Paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv),  he submitted that there were errors in the reliance  on
    the unreported case and a misdirection as to the effect of  the  Maslov
    decision.  If these errors had not been committed,  he  submitted  that
    the judge may have  decided  the  issue  differently,  as  there  is  a
    material difference  between  the  reasonableness  test  and  the  very
    weighty reasons test.

12. In respect of Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), Mr Staunton submitted  that  the
    judge had not taken certain factors into account and  that  these  were
    material.  He did however accept that this ground  of  appeal  and  his
    submissions thereon gave rise to the danger of  appearing  to  re-argue
    points already made before and rejected by the First-tier Tribunal.

13. Nothing was said about the Appellant's mother and sister whatsoever.

14. Mr Komusanac submitted that the Maslov decision had been  given  effect
    to in the Immigration Rules and that in any event the judge's  findings
    at paragraphs 30 and 31 could apply equally  to  his  assessment  under
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).  He noted that the reasons for refusal  letter
    had referred to family life but had not in  effect  considered  private
    life.

15. In respect of Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), it was submitted that the  judge
    had in fact taken everything relevant into account  and  had  not  left
    anything out of  account:  there  was  no  error  in  relation  to  the
    alternative finding.



Decision on Error of Law

16. I find that the judge did err in respect of his  consideration  of  the
    Maslov decision and his reliance upon the unreported  decision  of  the
    Upper Tribunal.  It is clear that the very weighty reasons test, if  it
    can be described as such, applies where the  individual  concerned  has
    been lawfully present in the host country.  That is not the  case  with
    the Appellant in this appeal.  The judge failed to have regard to  this
    important factor and thus misdirected himself.

17. In terms of the unreported Upper Tribunal decision, there had  been  no
    compliance with paragraph 11 of the Practice Direction. In addition, no
    proposition of law has been identified in  respect  of  the  unreported
    decision. In any event, I note from the quotation at  paragraph  13  of
    the judge's decision that there was a distinguishing factor in the RMJA
    case, namely that the individual there had been born in  this  country,
    unlike the Appellant in the appeal before me.

18. The question is whether these errors are material to the outcome of the
    appeal. In my view they are not.  My reasons for this conclusion are as
    follows.

19. First, in relation to Paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) and having considered the
    judge's decision as a whole and in particular the unchallenged  factual
    matters in paragraphs 30 and 31, I conclude  that  if  the  errors  are
    stripped out of paragraph 27 and the general guiding principles to  the
    issue of reasonableness and lengthy residence  are  applied  (see,  for
    example Azimi-Moayed [2013] UKUT 419 and EV (Philippines)  [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 874), the result would have been the same: return to Nigeria  would
    have been deemed unreasonable.

20. Second, and in any event, I find that  the  alternative  conclusion  on
    Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) was one that was open to the judge in  all  the
    circumstances.  He directed himself correctly to the relevant  test  to
    be applied, namely whether very significant obstacles to  reintegration
    existed in this case.  He  took  a  number  of  relevant  factors  into
    account including: the time the Appellant had spent  in  this  country;
    the well-established  links  in  education,  friends  and  family;  the
    limited ties with Nigeria; and  the  fact  that  her  understanding  of
    Nigeria and of Nigerian culture were "weak" and  had  "dissipated  over
    the course of time". The  judge  had  clearly  been  impressed  by  the
    "straightforward" and "wholly persuasive" manner in which the Appellant
    gave her evidence. There is no suggestion that he was not  entitled  to
    reach any of these findings.

21. Third, contrary to the suggestion in the grounds of appeal,  the  judge
    did in fact consider matters put forward by the Respondent; however, he
    deemed them to carry relatively little weight.  In particular he  found
    that the reasons set out in the reasons for refusal letter  were  vague
    and generalised in their nature. He took the view that  the  assertions
    that the Appellant had knowledge of Nigeria and/or Nigerian society  as
    part of the diaspora in the United Kingdom were wholly unspecified  and
    lacking in substance. Having examined  the  relevant  passages  of  the
    letter for myself, the judge's conclusions were open to him.

22. Fourth, having regard to the grounds, in particular paragraphs 2(b) and
    (c), it is apparent to  me  that  the  challenge  to  this  alternative
    conclusion by the judge was in reality  what  may  be  described  as  a
    thinly veiled irrationality  challenge,  something  the  President  has
    recently highlighted with disapproval (Greenwood No. 2 [2015] UKUT  629
    (IAC)).  The contents  of  paragraphs  2(b)  and  (c)  of  the  grounds
    strongly indicate that Respondent's  position  is  in  truth  simply  a
    disagreement with the conclusions of the judge without identifying  any
    misdirection in law or a failure to take material issues into  account.
    I also note that there have been no challenges to the  actual  findings
    of fact reached by the judge.

23. I do take on board the fact that English is  an  official  language  in
    Nigeria. But that was only one factor considered by the judge and  even
    if the judge had been wrong to take cognisance of this point,  it  does
    not undermine the totality of his conclusion on  the  particular  issue
    with which  I  am  concerned.   Although  there  is  reference  to  the
    Appellant's mother and sister, there is no evidence before me from  the
    Respondent that these two individuals are facing  imminent  removal  or
    indeed what their position in this country currently is.

24. In light of the above, the Respondent's appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    fails. There being no material errors of law in  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, that decision shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal,  allowing  the  appeal  under  the
Immigration Rules, stands.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 28 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date: 28 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
