

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/37794/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at  Field House                     |    Decision and reasons          |
|On: 31 October 2014                       |Promulgated             On: 19    |
|                                          |January 2015                      |
|                                          |                                  |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA


                                   Between

                       MR NANTHA KUMAR AL SUPRAMANIAN
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Bayati, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1.      The appellant is a citizen of Malaysia born on 6 February 1983.
        His application for further leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom
       and to give directions under  section  10  of  the  immigration  and
       Asylum act  1999  to  remove  him  from  the  United  Kingdom.   The
       appellant appealed against the respondent's decision and  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Swanker dismissed the appellant's appeal.  Permission
       to appeal to the upper Tribunal was granted by  first-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Osborne on 2 October 2014 who stated that it is arguable  that
       the Judge failed to consider section 117 of the 2014 Immigration Act
       which  came  into  effect  on  28  July  2014.  He  noted  that  the
       determination is promulgated on 19 August 2014 so  it  is  at  least
       arguable that the Judge should have considered section  117  of  the
       2014 Act.


    2.      The First-tier Tribunal's findings  were  as  follows  which  I
       summarise. The appellant has had no leave to remain  in  the  United
       Kingdom since he withdrew, on 24 February 2006, his  appeal  against
       the respondent's decision of 8 December 2004 to refuse to grant  him
       further leave to remain in the United Kingdom. The appellant  claims
       that he sought to regularise his stay by instructing a Mr  Aaron  to
       make an application on his behalf in 2007. He is however not able to
       recall the basis of that application, a  position  which  the  Judge
       found find lacking in plausibility. There is no credible evidence to
       indicate that the appellant made any attempt to regularise his  stay
       prior to Linga and Company submitting his application on his  behalf
       on 6 July 2012. It is not credible that the appellant would  make  a
       formal claim against Mr Aaron one month before  his  appeal  hearing
       given that he instructed  them  in  2007.  The  appellant's  overall
       credibility is undermined as  he  failed  to  make  any  attempt  to
       contact the Home Office directly when Mr Aaron failed  to  give  any
       concrete information as  to  the  progress  of  his  application  or
       otherwise. The Judge found that the  appellant's  application  on  6
       July 2012 was the time that the appellant  attempted  to  regularise
       his status and said and  that  it  is  within  this  background  his
       instant appeal is considered.


    3.      The appellant contends that he has established  a  family  life
       with his wife in the United  Kingdom  and  that  his  removal  would
       occasion a disproportionate interference with this family life under
       Article 8 of the ECHR. It is noted that the appellant does not  meet
       the requirements of the Immigration Rules for leave to remain on the
       bases of his family life is a spouse. There is  no  evidence  before
       the Judge relating to the appellant being  a  parent  of  a  British
       citizen child. While the Judge accepted that the appellant  and  his
       wife are likely living together as spouses and  have  established  a
       family life here, there is no credible evidence to indicate that  it
       would be unreasonable for them to return to Malaysia  and  conducted
       their family life there.



    4.      Both the appellant and the sponsor confirmed that  the  sponsor
       was aware of the appellant's  immigration  position  from  an  early
       stage of their relationship. Therefore both parties  were  aware  of
       the precariousness of  the  appellant's  immigration  situation  and
       underlying risk on being removed or  being  required  to  leave  the
       United Kingdom. As per the established  jurisprudence,  a  State  is
       under no general obligation to respect the choice of residence of  a
       couple. The appellant and his spouse  entered  into  and  progressed
       their relationship in full knowledge of the risk  of  the  appellant
       being removed or required to leave the United Kingdom  as  a  person
       without leave. The appellant's spouse is partly of Malay dissent her
       mother having been born in that country.  Her  evidence  is  to  the
       effect that she had regularly visited Malaysia in the past and  last
       visited in 2012. She also attested to having extended family  there.
       While the evidence before the Judge was that she does not speak  the
       language she is nevertheless likely to have a good knowledge of life
       and culture in Malaysia given her mother's background  and  her  own
       regular trips to the country and that the  environment  in  Malaysia
       would in no way be alien to her. She would be able  to  settle  into
       life in that country with the appellant who himself  lived  most  of
       his life in  Malaysia  and  continues  to  have  close  family  ties
       including his mother.


    5.      The Judge attached no weight to the appellant's  evidence  that
       he presently does not speak the language in  Malaysia  fluently.  He
       came to the United Kingdom at some 18 years of  age  and  spent  his
       formative years in Malaysia.  Therefore  the  appellant  would  have
       spoken the  local  language  fluently  and  the  Judge  rejected  as
       implausible that the appellant would have lost his  ability  in  the
       language during his time in the United Kingdom given he came here as
       an adult. The appellant would be able to assimilate  into  life  and
       the culture of Malaysia with  the  assistance  and  support  of  her
       husband and his family as indeed the sponsor's own  extended  family
       is in Malaysia, her aunt at her uncle.



    6.      The appellant's wife is in employment in the United Kingdom and
       in a position likely to be able  to  find  some  employment  in  the
       Malaysia. While the  couple  may  well  experience  a  drop  in  the
       standard of living upon relocating to Malaysia they would however be
       able to re-establish themselves and it would not be unreasonable  to
       expect them to set up their lives in the appellant's  home  country.
       The appellant's evidence was that his father-in-law wanted  to  help
       him to start a business in this country. There is no credible reason
       for why this offer should not extend to assisting the  appellant  to
       do the same in Malaysia. The appellant and his wife would likely  to
       have family support if they were to relocate to Malaysia.


    7.      It was claimed that the appellant would not be able to  sponsor
       his wife  to  join  him  in  Malaysia  because  of  the  immigration
       requirements for sponsorship in that country. There is no  objective
       evidence provided regarding the claimed immigration requirements  in
       Malaysia which the appellant would  not  be  able  to  satisfy.  The
       absence of such evidence undermines the appellant's evidence in this
       regard.



    8.      Weight was also  attached  by  the  Judge  to  the  appellant's
       spouse's claim regarding her mother's failure to  register  her  own
       marriage in Malaysia so that she, the appellant's spouse,  would  be
       regarded as  illegitimate  there.  Apart  from  the  fact  that  the
       appellant provided no evidence of this the Judge failed to  see  why
       her alleged legitimacy would prevent her from living a  normal  life
       with her husband in Malaysia. There is no credible evidence pointing
       to any negative consequences for the appellant's wife  in  Malaysia,
       even if she were to be regarded in that country as illegitimate. The
       appellant spouse is an adult living with her  husband  independently
       even though she has family here. She and her family can continue  to
       communicate through modern means  of  communications.  It  would  be
       therefore reasonable and proportionate  to  expect  the  appellant's
       wife to join him in Malaysia where they can enjoy  family  life  and
       therefore  the  respondent's  decision  to  remove  him  would   not
       constitute an interference with the appellant and his wife's  family
       life.



    9.      The appellant's private life  is  considered  by  reference  to
       paragraph 276 ADE of the  Immigration  Rules.  The  Judge  found  no
       reason to depart from the respondent's conclusion  in  this  regard,
       which he found to be in accordance  with  the  requirements  of  the
       Immigration Rules. The appellant has not lived continuously  in  the
       United Kingdom for 20 years but has lived the majority of  his  life
       in Malaysia and has not severed all ties to Malaysia. The Judge took
       into account the case of Gulshan and found no arguably good  grounds
       for granting the appellant leave to remain outside  the  Immigration
       Rules and to  proceed  to  consider  whether  there  are  compelling
       circumstances not  sufficiently  recognised  under  the  Immigration
       Rules.

          Grounds of appeal



   10. The appellant's grounds of appeal in summary are the following.  The
       appeal was heard on 1 July 2014 and the decision is dated 19  August
       2014 which was promulgated on the same day. The commencement date of
       the Immigration Act 2014 is 28 July 2014  without  any  transitional
       provisions. The judge had a statutory obligation to consider Section
       117 of the 2014 Act.


   11. The appellant's wife is a British national and the appellant asserts
       that his removal would be in breach of their private and family life
       as protected by Article 8 of ECHR.  The  Judge  in  determining  the
       appellant's appeal made no reference at all to  the  fact  that  the
       appellant gave evidence in English. The Judge was under a  statutory
       obligation pursuant to article 117B (2) to have regard to  this  and
       the failure to demonstrate that she had regard amounted to an  error
       of law. This must be a material given the importance that Parliament
       has placed upon this factor.



   12. The appellant is economically independent and  neither  he  nor  his
       wife have any recourse to public funds. The Judge failed to have any
       or any adequate regard to this factor when  determining  the  appeal
       despite the statutory obligation pursuant to section 117B (3).  This
       was an error of law.


   13. It was not reasonable for the Judge to  find  that  the  appellant's
       spouse who is a British national to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  in
       order to remain with her husband. In the case of Senade and others v
       SSHD [2012] UKUT it was stated that where the child  or  indeed  the
       remaining spouse is a British citizen and therefore a citizen of the
       European Union, it is not  possible  to  require  them  to  relocate
       outside the European Union or to submit that it would be  reasonable
       for them to do so. The case serves to emphasise  the  importance  of
       nationality in the decision of the Supreme Court in ZH Tanzania.  If
       interference with the family life is to be justified, it can only be
       in the basis that the conduct of the person to be removed gives rise
       to considerations of such weight as to justify separation.



   14. The Judge failed to have any regard to the fact that the appellant's
       wife is a British national and therefore a citizen of  the  European
       Union when determining whether it would be reasonable to expect  her
       to leave the United Kingdom. Failure by the Judge to do so  amounted
       to a material error of law.





       The Hearing


   15. At the hearing I heard submissions from both parties as  to  whether
       there is an    error of law in the determination of  the  first-tier
       Tribunal Judge.


   16. Mr Melvin in his submissions said that  there  were  no  submissions
       made after the hearing to the judge to take into  account  the  2004
       Act. It is not the  position  of  the  2004  Act  that  English  and
       financial  independence  is  enough.  The  Judge  has  assessed  the
       Immigration  Rules  and  found  the   precarious   nature   of   the
       relationship and the appellant's lack of leave in this country since
       2004. The appellant's spouse in her  evidence  said  that  she  will
       return to Mauritius if  the  appellant  returns.  The  appellant  is
       trying to circumvent the Immigration Rules  of  the  United  Kingdom
       because the appellant's wife is not able to sponsor him from outside
       the country.



   17. It was submitted by Miss Bayati that in paragraph 117 (b) the public
       interest has two factors. One is that the appellant  speaks  English
       the second is that he  is  financially  independent.  The  appellant
       speaks English because he gave evidence in English before the  Judge
       of the first-tier Tribunal. These factors  should  have  been  taken
       into account. He argued that there are statutory obligations for the
       Judge to  fulfil  whether  counsel  pointed  it  out  are  not.  She
       submitted precariousness of the appellant's  immigration  status  in
       this country was not taken as an issue by the respondent.


       Discussion and findings as to whether there is an error of law


   18. The Judge found in his determination that the appellant has  had  no
       leave to remain in the United Kingdom since he was last refused  his
       leave to remain application  in  2006.  The  Judge  found  that  the
       appellant had made no attempts to regularise his immigration  status
       in this country. He correctly  found  that  the  appellant  made  no
       attempts to regularise his immigration status in this country.


   19. The Judge was right to find that the appellant's immigration  status
       was precarious in this country. He was also entitled  to  point  out
       that the appellant and his wife  were  aware  that  the  appellant's
       immigration status was precarious but they  still  progressed  their
       relationship knowing that  the  appellant  has  no  status  in  this
       country and maybe removed when detected as an over stayer. The Judge
       was also  entitled  to  find  that  the  precarious  nature  of  the
       appellant's leave to remain in this country is  highly  relevant  to
       the appellant's claim under Article 8.


   20. The complaint against the Judge is that the appellant spouse of  the
       British citizen should not be required to  leave  the  country.  The
       Judge did not require her to leave the country but said  that  given
       her profile and the fact that  she  was  of  Malaysia  heritage  who
       visited their often could return with the appellant to Malaysia. The
       Judge also made this finding in light of  the  evidence  before  him
       which was that the appellant's wife said that she  would  return  to
       Malaysia with her husband if he had to go. I  do  not  consider  the
       Judge stating that the appellant's wife must leave this country  and
       live in Malaysia with the appellant. The Judge was entitled to  find
       that the appellant has no right to live in this country and he  must
       be removed notwithstanding that he has a wife and that  it  will  be
       her choice whether she follows him to Malaysia or decides to live in
       this country.

   21. It is also argued on behalf of the appellant that the  Judge  failed
       to consider section 117 of the 2014 Immigration Act which came  into
       effect on 28 July 2014. The appellant's appeal was heard before  the
       Act came into effect and the decision was made after  the  Act  came
       into force. There are  no  transitional  provisions.  Therefore  the
       question to decide is whether the Judge materially erred in  law  in
       not taking into account the 2014 Act in his decision.



   22. The answer is yes the Judge ought to have considered  the  2014  Act
       but in his determination he covered all the criteria relevant of the
       public interest consideration I do  not  accept  the  reasoning  put
       forward by the appellant that had  the  Judge  considered  that  the
       appellant speaks English and is not a burden on the  taxpayer,  this
       would have entitled him leave to  remain.  This  argument  would  be
       cancelled out by paragraph 117B (5) of the 2014 Act which states  at
       that little weight should be given to a private life established  by
       a person at  the  time  with  the  person's  immigration  status  is
       precarious. The Judge found that the appellant's immigration  status
       was precarious and was entitled to come to the conclusions  that  he
       did.



   23. I do not accept that all the appellant has to do is to prove that he
       speaks English and is not a  burden  on  the  taxpayer  for  him  to
       succeed which is essentially what is being argued.



   24. Therefore I find that failure by the Judge to specifically  consider
       the 2014 immigration act is an error of law but it is not a material
       error in the context in the circumstances  of  this  appeal  because
       even if he had considered it, on the facts of the case, the decision
       would remain the same.


   25. The Judge has given cogent and proper reasons for why the  appellant
       should not be granted further leave to remain pursuant to Article 8.
       It is implicit in his determination that  he  found  there  were  no
       exceptional circumstances in this case that the appellant should  be
       granted leave to remain pursuant to Article 8 when he cannot  fulfil
       the requirements of the Immigration Rules. I therefore maintain  the
       first-tier Tribunal's decision.



      DECISION

       Appeal dismissed pursuant to the Immigration Rules


       Appeal Dismissed pursuant to article 8 of the European Convention on
       Human Rights






Signed by

A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                               This 14th day of January 2015
Mrs S Chana







