
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/37752/2014
                                                               IA/37753/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|and decision given orally            |                                     |
|on 6 January 2016                    |On 1 February 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey
                       Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam


                                   Between

                            Mr GHEHZAD GUL FARUKI
                             MISS FATIMA SHEHZAD
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellants:   Not represented
Respondent:   Ms A Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal in  which  the  outcome  is  entirely  uncomplicated.
    Without rehearsing the background in undue detail the basic  facts  are
    that both Appellants made  applications  under  the  Tier  4  (General)
    Student provisions of the Rules. The Appellants are married.  They  are
    the parents of two young children.  They are nationals of Pakistan.  In
    refusing the application of both  Appellants  the  Secretary  of  State
    provided the same reason, namely that there was no government sponsored
    student undertaking a course of study with a sponsor who  is  either  a
    recognised body or a higher education institution.  As a result it  was
    concluded the applications were non-compliant with paragraph 319H(i) of
    the Rules.

 2. In the decision of the First-tier Tribunal the Appellants'  cases  were
    formulated in the following terms.  The judge said:

         "It  is  clear  that  the  Appellants  cannot  succeed  under   the
         Immigration Rules and  their  representative  put  his  case  under
         Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention".

    The judge also noted that the course being pursued by  the  mother  ran
    from September 2014 to September 2015 and that it  was  represented  or
    had the intention of returning  to  Pakistan  upon  completion  of  the
    course.

 3. In dismissing the appeals the judge said the following:

         "If she, that is the mother, is unable due to  financial  pressures
         to stay in the  United  Kingdom  without  her  husband  working  to
         support her, I do not find that a sufficient reason for him  to  be
         allowed to remain.  Her course is not at an institution  recognised
         by the Home Office and it is at a lower level than her degree  from
         the University of Pakistan."

    The judge also made reference to Section 117B(1)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 4. The appeal was heard on 7 April 2014.  In the ensuing grounds of appeal
    the first Appellant states:

         "My appeal was on 7 April 2014 and at that time the judge gave  his
         decision that 'Your appeal is allowed' but now I  get  the  written
         decision after three months in which my appeal is dismissed."

    From the grounds of appeal we learn a little bit  more  of  the  family
    unit consisting of mother and father and two children, one  aged  three
    years and eight months and the other aged 6 months and breast  feeding.
    The cri de coeur is made "They cannot live without their  mother".   It
    was claimed that all were intending  to  return  to  their  country  of
    origin upon completion of the mother's course  of  study  in  September
    2015.

 5. At this stage we draw attention to the record of  proceedings.   It  is
    clear beyond peradventure from the  note  made  by  the  judge  at  the
    conclusion of the hearing  that  he  stated  that  the  decision  under
    challenge appeared to unlawful under the Rules and he was allowing  the
    appeal under the Rules.  The judge in his notes attributes to himself a
    statement in open court to this effect.  Applying the provisions of the
    First-tier Tribunal Rules as construed recently by the Court of  Appeal
    in the case of R (Patel) v SSHD [2015] EWCA  Civ  1175the  irresistible
    conclusion which we are driven to make is  that  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal is unsustainable in law.

 6. We have canvassed with Miss Holmes the question of whether there is any
    argument that this error is immaterial.  There is no submission to  the
    effect that it is of this variety and we have no  reason  independently
    for thus concluding.

 7. Accordingly on  this  ground  alone  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal must be set aside.

 8. The second ground of appeal  also  has  some  prime  facie  merit.  The
    complaint in substance raised by this ground is that the  judge  failed
    to engage with the Article 8 case which was to the  effect  that  these
    two very young children could not be  expected  to  survive  adequately
    without their mother in  the  event  of  the  scenario  of  the  mother
    remaining in the United Kingdom to complete her studies and the  father
    and the two children returning to their country of origin.

 9. The judge has failed to engage with this case in the decision. There is
    a bare conclusion in the statement in [26] that there are no compelling
    Article 8 reasons as required by the ruling in Gulshan.  This, to begin
    with, does not apply the test formulated in MF (Nigeria) and  secondly,
    and in any event, is an unreasoned, unvarnished conclusion.  It  cannot
    be sustained in the absence of elementary reasons and, accordingly,  we
    conclude that the second ground of appeal is also made out.

10. This brings us to the question of what course should  now  be  adopted.
    In view of the nature of the first error of law which  we  have  found,
    the application of the Upper Tribunal.  Practice Directions  points  to
    remittal to a different constitution of the First-tier Tribunal and  we
    so order.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed to the extent of setting aside the  FtT  decision  and
remittal for rehearing and fresh decision on human rights grounds and  under
the Immigration Rules.

No anonymity direction is made.


                                                                       [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                       Date: 25 January 2016
