

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                               Appeal
Number IA/37916/2013
                                                 IA37919/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Sheldon
                      Determination Promulgated
On 13th August 2014                                        On 20th August
2014
Prepared 13th August 2014

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

                           LUTUF UR REHMAN QURESHI
                                                             First Appellant
                                     And

                                NAZIA KHATOON
                                                            Second Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Anonymity directions not made
For the Appellant: Mr M Hassan (Solicitor, M Q Hassan Solicitors)
For the Respondent: Mr N Smart (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The First Appellant applied to remain in the UK under Tier 1 of the PBS
   as an entrepreneur, the application was made on the 6th of September
   2012, the Second Appellant applied as his dependent. The applications
   were refused for the reasons given in the Refusal Letters of the 3rd of
   September 2013. The Appellants appealed by Notice and Grounds of Appeal
   of the 13th of September 2013.

2. The appeals were heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Chohan at Sheldon on
   the 10th of March 2014. In a determination promulgated on the 21st of
   March 2014 the appeals were remitted to the Secretary of State on the
   basis that there had been procedural unfairness, the Appellant not having
   been given the opportunity to supply evidence that would support
   information he had given in an interview.

3. By grounds of the 25th of March 2014 the Secretary of State sought
   permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal. It was argued that the Judge
   had not engaged with the terms of the Refusal Letters and could only have
   remitted the decision if it had been found that it was not in accordance
   with the law. It was submitted that the Appellant had not allayed the
   concerns raised over the origin of the funds relied on. Permission was
   granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Brunnen on the 24th of April 2014.

4. At the hearing there was agreement between the parties that the Judge
   had erred in the approach that he had taken to the issues. There is
   recent authority that unless the approach taken by the Secretary of State
   is such that no reasonable decision maker could have made the decision
   then the appeal must be decided on its merits and it was accepted that
   the Refusal Letter was not unreasonable in the Wednesbury sense.

5. Accordingly it was agreed that the correct approach to be taken is to
   find that the determination of Judge Chohan did contain an error of law,
   to set aside the determination and to remit to the First-tier Tribunal
   for a fresh hearing with no findings preserved.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of an error on a point of law and I set aside the decision.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing. .

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I make no
order.

Fee Award

In remitting the matter to the First-tier Tribunal I make no fee award.

Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 19th August 2014
