
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
IA/37543/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |         Decision & Reasons         |
|                                       |Promulgated                         |
|On 22 February 2016                    |         On 29 February 2016        |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before


                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between


                 Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                                 ABDUL RAQIB
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. S. Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. D. Sellwood of Counsel, instructed by Malik and
Malik

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Malley promulgated on  25  August  2015  in
    which she allowed Mr. Raqib's appeal against the Secretary  of  State's
    decision to curtail his leave to remain.




 2. For the purposes of this decision I refer to the Secretary of State  as
    the Respondent and to Mr. Raqib  as  the  Appellant,  reflecting  their
    positions as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


    "It is arguable that the judge has not placed the correct  construction
    upon the evidence  submitted  by  the  Respondent  in  respect  of  the
    circumstances whereby the Appellant obtained his TOEIC.  It is arguable
    the categorisation of "invalid" has not been  given  sufficient  weight
    and that insufficient analysis has been furnished by the  Judge  as  to
    the foundations for the Respondent's claims as to invalidity."


 4. The Appellant attended the hearing.   I  heard  submissions  from  both
    representatives, following which I reserved my decision,  which  I  set
    out below with reasons.


Error of law


 5. In paragraph [8] the  judge  refers  to  the  evidence  which  she  has
    considered, which includes the Respondent's bundle.  In paragraph  [13]
    she sets out the Respondent's representative's submissions.  She states
    that he relied on the witness evidence in the Respondent's bundle,  and
    refers specifically to the evidence of Matthew Howard "dealing with how
    ETS considers the irregularities in tests".


 6. In paragraph [20] the judge sets out the law,  and  in  paragraph  [22]
    sets out where the burden of proof lies.  In paragraph [21] she  refers
    to having considered the case of R (Gazi)  v  SSHD  [2015]  UKUT  00327
    (IAC).


 7. In paragraph [23] she states that she has considered the  "totality  of
    the evidence before me" including the witness statements on  behalf  of
    the Respondent.  In paragraph [25] she sets this out  in  more  detail,
    referring to the statements of Rebecca Collings and  Peter  Millington,
    and the  statement  from  Matthew  Harrold,  together  with  the  annex
    identifying the Appellant's result.


 8. In paragraph [26] she finds that she is satisfied that it is reasonable
    for the Respondent "to rely on the information from ETS  in  the  first
    instance".   In paragraph [28] she reiterates that  she  has  concluded
    that the Respondent has met her initial burden.


 9. Although the judge does not set out the Respondent's evidence in  full,
    nor does she go through the witness statements in detail, it  is  clear
    from the decision that she has taken the  evidence  of  the  Respondent
    into account in its entirety, which has led her to  find  that  she  is
    satisfied that the Respondent has  discharged  the  initial  burden  of
    proof.  It is not  necessary  for  her  to  repeat  and  rehearse  this
    evidence.  It is clear from the decision that she  has  taken  it  into
    account.


10. In paragraphs [28] to [30] the judge  turns  to  the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant  and  gives  reasons  for  why  she  considers  that  he  has
    discharged the burden on him.  Paragraph [28] states:


    "Having concluded that the respondent has met the initial burden I need
    to consider whether the appellant has discharged the burden on him.   I
    have considered his statement, which provides specific evidence of  the
    place he  attended,  the  process  for  completing  the  test  and  his
    recollections which I found compelling.  I also note the  documents  in
    the bundle including letters from the college he was attending in  2012
    which specifies his results, his attendance and which state "this was a
    full time course and was taught and assessed in English", "Mr Raqib has
    successfully completed the BA (Hons)  in  Business  Studies  Programme.
    The course was studied and assessed in  English.   His  attendance  was
    94%."


11. The judge finds the Appellant's statement "compelling".  She notes that
    he has provided specific details of taking the test.  She takes account
    of the letter from his college.  In paragraph 29 she  states  that  she
    has taken account of his ability to give evidence in English, but  then
    goes on to say that she notes that the hearing is some time  after  the
    date on which he took the test.  She does not place any weight  on  his
    English language ability at the hearing as indicated by the  fact  that
    she states "Similarly, I did not place any  weight  on  the  letter  of
    support from his current college....".  She has not placed  any  weight
    on the fact that he was able to speak English at the  hearing,  nor  on
    the letter of support from his  current  college,  as  opposed  to  the
    letter from the college which he had been attending at the time of  the
    test.


12. In paragraph [30] the judge  gives  her  reasons  for  finding  in  the
    Appellant's favour.


    "The appellant has satisfied me that he obtained his TOEIC without  any
    deception.  I find the analysis in Gazi helpful and I note there is  no
    evidence of the expertise of the person  checking  the  recordings.   I
    considered the recommendations in paragraphs 46-48  of  Gazi.   I  have
    given significant weight to the appellant's  ability  to  give  cogent,
    specific evidence about the tests  he  undertook,  particularly  as  my
    conclusion is that  this  is  consistent  with  the  remainder  of  the
    evidence including the evidence given in the  interview  on  22  August
    2014."


13. She refers to the case of Gazi.  She states that she has considered the
    recommendations in that case.  She  then  states  that  she  has  given
    significant weight to the Appellant's evidence,  and  finds  it  to  be
    consistent.


14. I was referred by Mr. Sellwood to the case of VV  (grounds  of  appeal)
    Lithuania [2016] UKUT 00053 (IAC).  The headnote states:


    "(1) An  application  for  permission  to  appeal  on  the  grounds  of
    inadequacy of reasoning in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal must
    generally demonstrate by reference to the material and arguments placed
    before that Tribunal that (a) the matter involved a  substantial  issue
    between the parties at first instance and (b) that the Tribunal  either
    failed to deal with that matter at all, or gave reasons on  that  point
    which are so unclear that they may well conceal an error of law."


15. Mr. Sellwood submitted that the decision came  nowhere  near  the  high
    threshold set out in (b).  I agree with  this  submission.   The  judge
    dealt with the issue before her.  Her  reasons  for  finding  that  the
    Appellant did not use deception are set out.   It  is  clear  from  the
    decision that she considered all of the evidence before her,  including
    the  Respondent's  witness  evidence.   She  was  satisfied  that   the
    Respondent had discharged the burden  placed  on  her,  but  then  gave
    reasons for finding that she found the Appellant's evidence compelling.




16. I find that the judge gave adequate reasons.  She gave consideration to
    the Respondent's evidence.  It was not necessary for her  to  set  this
    evidence out in full.  She gave reasons  for  finding  the  Appellant's
    evidence compelling, and her reasoning is clear.

Notice of decision

The decision does not involve the making of an error on a point of  law  and
I do set it aside.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.



Signed                                  Date 24 February 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

