
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number IA/37548/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination promulgated            |
|On 20 November 2014                  |On 24 April 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis


                                   Between

                             Gordon Yungsub Synn
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr P Richardson of Counsel instructed by Gulbenkian
Andonian.
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                     DECISION AND REASONS: ERROR OF LAW

      1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
         Wright promulgated on 15 August  2014  dismissing  the  Appellant's
         appeal against the decision of the Respondent dated 2  August  2013
         to refuse to issue a  permanent  residence  card  pursuant  to  the
         Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

    Background

      2. The Appellant is a national of the USA born on 8 June 1963.  On  26
         April 2002 he married Ms Tracey Jean Shields,  an  Irish  national.
         The couple subsequently had two children, Marlon (d.o.b. 28  August
         2002) and Ancelle  (d.o.b.  7  October  2006),  both  of  whom  are
         American citizens and who have been included as dependents in their
         father's application and appeal.

      3. The family entered the UK on 24 April 2007. On 25 October 2007  the
         Appellant and his children were each  issued  with  an  EEA  Family
         Permit as the family members of an EEA national.  Applications  for
         EEA Residence cards were granted and five year EEA Residence  cards
         issued on 6 August 2008 valid until 6 August  2013.  On  4  January
         2013 the Appellant applied for  a  permanent  residence  card.  His
         application was refused for reasons  set  out  in  a  'reasons  for
         refusal' letter ('RFRL') dated  2  August  2013  and  a  Notice  of
         Immigration Decision was issued in consequence. In the meantime, in
         or about March 2014, the Appellant and his wife separated.

      4. The Appellant appealed to the IAC (as noted  above,  including  his
         children as dependents).

      5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal  for
         reasons set out in his determination.

      6. The Appellant sought permission to  appeal  which  was  granted  by
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Cruthers on  1  October  2014,  who  also
         extended time.

      7. The Respondent has filed a Rule 24 response dated 15  October  2014
         resisting the challenge to the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

    Consideration: Error of Law

      8.  The  Appellant's  application  was  refused  with   reference   to
         regulations 6(1)(a) and 15(1)(b) of the 2006 Regulations. It was  a
         feature of the Appellant's application that his  wife  had  been  a
         jobseeker throughout the relevant five year period. In  support  of
         this he had submitted a single letter from a  job  agency  dated  3
         October 2007. The Respondent was not satisfied  that  it  had  been
         shown that Ms Shields was indeed  a  qualified  person  within  the
         meaning of regulation 6, and accordingly in turn was not  satisfied
         that the Appellant had been residing in the UK in  accordance  with
         the Regulations for the requisite period.

      9. At the appeal hearing the Appellant gave evidence  -  supported  by
         his (by now estranged) wife - to the effect  that  Ms  Shields  had
         been  self-employed  whilst  in  the  UK  and  in  particular   had
         undertaken photographic work promoting her photography through  her
         website and contacts. It was also Ms Shields evidence that she  had
         actively pursued photographic work whilst in the UK. Although there
         was no further supporting documentary evidence  before  the  First-
         tier Tribunal to this effect, Ms Shields claimed to  have  provided
         her husband's representatives  with  "a  suitcase  of  information"
         (decision at paragraph 14), but have been  told  that  it  was  not
         necessary to submit such evidence. She  had  been  registered  with
         HMRC approximately one year before the hearing.

     10. The First-tier Tribunal Judge made the  following  observation  (at
         paragraph 24) in respect of the testimonies of  the  Appellant  and
         his wife:

        "I have seen and heard the appellant and his  (now  estranged)  wife
             give evidence and  be  cross-examined  in  person  before  me,
             finding their evidence to be inconsistent and  unreliable  and
             also lacking sufficient detail (besides coming rather late  in
             the day)."

     11. The Judge otherwise  went  on  to  conclude  that  the  documentary
         evidence produced to show  that  Ms  Shields  had  been  exercising
         'Treaty Rights was "woefully inadequate", and "the oral evidence is
         simply insufficient to fill the void/bridge  the  gaps"  (paragraph
         26).

     12. At paragraph 27 the  Judge  addressed  the  alternative  categories
         under Regulation 6(1), observing in part that "it  is  not  claimed
         that [Ms Shields] exercised Treaty  Rights  as  "a  self-sufficient
         person"  under  Regulation  6(1)(d)",  and  in  this  context  also
         commented upon  the  limited  cover  shown  in  respect  of  health
         insurance.

     13. The Judge declined to address Article 8 of the ECHR (paragraphs  29
         and 30), notwithstanding that he recognised that it had been raised
         in the Grounds of Appeal, and  that,  albeit  limited,  submissions
         were  made  (paragraph  19).  In  such  circumstances  no   express
         consideration was given to the best interests of the children  with
         reference to section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration
         Act 2009 or otherwise.

     14. The Grounds in support of the application for permission to  appeal
         - which were criticised in the grant of  permission  to  appeal  as
         being "ridiculously long" at  16  pages,  may  be  distilled  to  4
         points:

        (i) The Judge erred in his approach to the evidence said to  confirm
             the exercise of Treaty Rights by Ms Shields;

        (ii) The Judge erred in his approach  to  the  issue  of  regulation
             6(1)(d) - "self-sufficient person";

        (iii) The Judge failed properly to consider  the  situation  of  the
             children under EEA law;

        (iv) The  Judge  erred  in  declining  to  undertake  an  Article  8
             assessment.

     15. At  the  commencement  of  the  hearing  before  me  Mr  Richardson
         indicated that the ground summarised at paragraph  14(ii)  was  not
         pursued.

     16. In respect of the Appellant's case under the EEA, in  my  judgement
         the submissions advanced by Mr Richardson essentially amount  to  a
         disagreement with the Judge's findings and do not as such  identify
         an error of law. Mr Richardson sought to argue that  the  Judge  in
         effect elevated the value that might  be  derived  from  supporting
         evidence to a requirement  that  there  be  independent  supporting
         documentary evidence. Further,  he  argued  that  the  analysis  at
         paragraph 26 amounted to an implicit rejection of  the  credibility
         of the witnesses,  without  the  Judge  otherwise  making  a  clear
         finding on credibility.

     17. Whilst I am prepared to accept that supporting documentary evidence
         is not an explicit requirement in order to establish  the  exercise
         of Treaty Rights, in my judgement a decision-maker is  entitled  to
         have regard to the quality of any  supporting  evidence  submitted,
         and is  also  entitled  to  have  regard  to  the  absence  of  any
         supporting evidence that it might be reasonable  to  expect  to  be
         produced,  in  an  overall  assessment  of  whether   or   not   an
         applicant/appellant has discharged the burden of proof.  The  Judge
         appropriately and sustainably identified discrepancies in  the  way
         in which the Appellant's case was  advanced  and  discrepancies  as
         between the evidence of the witnesses.  In  the  circumstances  the
         absence  of  clarifying  supporting  documentary  evidence  was   a
         relevant matter for consideration. I do not accept that  the  Judge
         approached the case on the basis that it was a prerequisite that an
         applicant provide supporting documentary evidence of  the  exercise
         of Treaty Rights. The Judge evaluated the  available  evidence  and
         reach sustainable findings.

     18. I note that it was said that there was a body - indeed a suitcase -
         of  further  evidence  that  had  been  given  to  the  Appellant's
         representatives, but  in  the  absence  of  that  evidence  it  was
         entirely open to the Judge to conclude that the Appellant  had  not
         discharge the burden of proof in demonstrating that his (estranged)
         wife had been exercising Treaty Rights.

     19.  In  the  event,  however,  because  I  have  reached  the  overall
         conclusion that the appeal should be reheard  with  all  issues  at
         large, it will now be open - as indeed it has been all along  -  to
         the Appellant and his advisers to submit any such further  evidence
         as is available to them  that  would  support  the  claim  that  Ms
         Shields has been exercising Treaty Rights in the UK. Necessarily if
         such evidence is now not forthcoming it may be  open  to  a  future
         decision-maker to draw adverse inferences.

     20. I accept that there is more substance to the challenge  in  respect
         of the approach to the position  of  the  Appellant's  children.  I
         remind myself that the children were parties to the appeal  by  way
         of being dependents of the Appellant in the appeal.

     21. I accept that the Judge was presented with a difficult circumstance
         in that the fact of the separation of the Appellant from Ms Shields
         only came to light at the appeal hearing - and that necessarily the
         evidence in respect of the family situation was  "less  than  clear
         from the evidence (or lack of) presented" (paragraph  30).  Further
         is not apparent that the case law to which reference is made in the
         grounds of challenge was raised during the course  of  submissions.
         Nonetheless, pursuant to section 84(1)(d)  of  the  2002  Act,  the
         children being family members of an EEA national, it was  incumbent
         upon the  Judge  to  consider  whether  the  Respondent's  decision
         breached their rights under the Community Treaties  in  respect  of
         residence in the UK. The Judge has failed to reach  any  conclusion
         in respect of the children's rights under the  EEA  Regulations  or
         otherwise. In particular Mr Richardson highlights a failure to have
         regard to the principles outlined in Baumbast (C-413/99).

     22. I am also persuaded that the Judge was in  error  in  declining  to
         give consideration to Article 8 of the ECHR. Whilst I recognise and
         understand the position adopted by  Respondent  in  the  RFRL,  and
         repeated in submissions before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  to  the
         effect that the Appellant had not made an  Article  8  application,
         and that it was always open to him to make such an  application,  I
         am satisfied that the approach taken in JM (Liberia) to the  effect
         that the ground of  appeal  under  section  84(1)(g)  is  available
         notwithstanding the absence of an actual removal decision, applies.

     23. Accordingly, in all of the circumstances I find that the First-tier
         Tribunal Judge materially erred, and that the decision of the First-
         tier Tribunal must be set aside.

     24. There has been no relevant fact-finding in respect of the situation
         of the children or otherwise  in  respect  of  Article  8.  Further
         evidence will require  to  be  heard.  In  the  circumstances,  and
         bearing in mind the indication given in respect of the availability
         of further documentary evidence in respect of  Treaty  Rights,  and
         also having regard to the fact that any decision in respect of  any
         EEA rights is essentially declaratory, I see  no  sound  basis  for
         limiting the scope of the rehearing. Accordingly the appeal  is  to
         be reheard with all issues at large, including both in  respect  of
         the EEA Regulations and the ECHR.

    Future Conduct of the Appeal

     25. No specific directions are required for the future conduct  of  the
         appeal: standard directions will suffice. The parties are  to  file
         and serve any further materials upon which they  wish  to  rely  at
         least 7 days prior to the rehearing date.

     26. The Appellant is reminded  of  the  observations  at  paragraph  19
         above: it is incumbent upon him to  put  before  the  Tribunal  all
         relevant materials that assist him in  proving  his  case,  and  he
         should be aware that the failure to produce  materials  that  might
         reasonably be expected to be available may  result  in  an  adverse
         inference being drawn. Notwithstanding the  timetable  adverted  to
         above, as was discussed at the hearing,  it  is  possible  for  the
         Appellant  to  send  such  further  materials  as  he  has  to  the
         Respondent at any time, and it is open to the Respondent to  review
         the decision in the Appellant's case in light of such materials.

    Notice of Decision

     27. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained  material  errors
         of law and is set aside.

     28. The decision in the appeal is to be remade  before  the  First-tier
         Tribunal, before any judge other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Wright, with all issues at large.



Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     24 April 2015

