

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
                                               Appeal Numbers: IA/37850/2013
                                                               IA/37859/2013
                                                               IA/37865/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7 November 2014                            |On 28 November 2014          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                           DEPUTY JUDGE DRABU CBE



                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   Appellant

                                   And

                            RAMIRO MEJIA DELGADO
                      LISVIC MAIGUALIDA BOVES MARTINEX
                         JASON ALEXANDER MEJIA BOVES
                                                                  Respondent

                       ANONYMITY DIRECTION IS NOT MADE



Representation:

For the Appellant:         Mr S Whitwell, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Michael Murphy of Farani Javid Taylor Solicitors




                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This appeal has been brought by the Secretary of State against  the
         decision of Judge Colvin, a Judge of the First  Tier  Tribunal  who
         following a hearing at Taylor House on 17  July  2014  allowed  the
         appeals of those now named as respondents  in  this  determination.
         The Secretary of State had refused their applications to be allowed
         to remain in the United Kingdom, on the basis of their rights under
         human rights law.


      2. In  the  consideration  of  these  appeals  Judge  Colvin  said  at
         Paragraph 20 of the determination that "It is accepted that the new
         Immigration Rules are not applicable as the applications were  made
         in December 2011 before the new rules came in to force. This appeal
         is therefore determined under  the  Article  8  general  principles
         relating to family and private life."


      3. The appellant in this appeal ie. Judge Heynes granted the Secretary
         of State, a Judge of the First Tier on 2 September 2014. In a  very
         brief decision the Judge said, "the grounds of appeal complain that
         the Judge failed to apply Appendix FM, paragraph 276  ADE  and  the
         guidance in Gulshan (Article 8 -  new  rules  -  correct  approach)
         [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC)".


      4. At the hearing before me Mr Whitwell asked for permission to  amend
         his grounds upon which he had been granted permission. I denied him
         the permission because  the  application  was  made  so  late  that
         allowing it to be pursued would have been unfair and unjust to  the
         respondents.  No plausible or reasonable explanation  was  provided
         or the delay except that the Senior  Presenting  Officer  had  only
         been given the file the day before.  I noted that the appellant had
         done nothing since 2 September  2014  in  respect  of  the  grounds
         tendered in support of her application and which formed  the  basis
         upon which this appeal before  me  was  proceeding.  In  any  event
         having looked at the application  I  concluded  that  none  of  the
         matters raised in this hugely delayed application amounted  to  any
         materially arguable error of law. I announced my decision  in  open
         court and invited Mr Whitwell to address me on the  grounds,  which
         formed the basis of the appeal before me. Mr Whitwell said that  he
         had no arguments to put before me. Mr Murphy took  me  through  the
         determination of Judge Colvin as well as the appellant's grounds of
         her application and argued that the  application  be  dismissed  as
         having no merit.


      5. I agree with Mr Murphy. The application, which led to the grant  of
         permission, had little merit. On the  one  hand  it  was  suggested
         therein that the respondent's applications to remain had been  made
         before the new rules came into being and yet it was argued that the
         decision in Gulshan should have been applied.  The  principles  set
         out in Gulshan did not have much relevance to  the  facts  of  this
         case as it was agreed by the parties before Judge Colvin  that  the
         appeal had to be decided in the context of Rules as existed "before
         the new rules came into force".


      6. I have looked at the determination of Judge  Colvin  with  care,  I
         have, with respect found it to be very impressive in its  reasoning
         as well as correct application of relevant case law principles. She
         has referred to all the relevant cases  including  the  cases  upon
         which the Secretary of State had placed  reliance  such  as  Azimi-
         Moayed and others (decisions affecting children:  onwards  appeals)
         [2013] UKUT] 00197. Her decision has no flaws in it and there is no
         reason whatsoever to interfere with it. Her findings are clear  and
         evidence based and well reasoned. She says in paragraph 23  of  her
         determination, "Of the 9 years that the third appellant has been in
         the UK, the significant have been since sg of 4 to 11  as  referred
         to in the above case decision (Azimi-Moayed and others).  From  the
         evidence including the school reports it is very clear hat  he  has
         developed strong cultural and educational ties during these  years.
         Not only are his parents very concerned that the  disruption  would
         be caused by removing him from the UK particularly in psychological
         terms but the third appellant himself has made  an  articulate  and
         strong plea to be allowed to stay in the only country he  considers
         his home."


      7. In the next paragraph of her determination, Judge Colvin states  "I
         accept it can be argued that the bad  immigration  history  of  his
         parents gives rise to significant public interest reasons that this
         family should be removed, so as  to  ensure  effective  immigration
         controls. However as the decision above states (Azimi-Moayed), such
         reasons need to  be  compelling  in  order  to  outweigh  the  best
         interests of the third appellant who has been  in  the  UK  for  at
         least 7 years at a critical age  development  and  in  circumstance
         where his parent's bad  immigration  control  should  not  be  held
         against him."


      8. On the evidence adduced before  her,  Judge  Colvin  was  perfectly
         entitled to come to that conclusion.


      9. Judge Colvin's decision to allow the appeals must  therefore  stand
         as must her decision on fee award






    K Drabu CBE
    Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal.


    24 November 2014
