
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
ia/37198/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |     Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 29 June 2016                        |     On 6 July 2016                 |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN

                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MISS JIELING LU
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E Ikiriko, Solicitor instructed by Melrose
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal brought by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department.  For the sake of clarity I shall refers to the  parties  as
    they were before the First  tier.  A  decision  was  made  against  the
    Appellant on 16 September 2014 to refuse her leave to enter the  United
    Kingdom.  The Appellant is a national of China  whose  last  period  of
    leave to remain, as a Tier 1 Highly Skilled (Entrepreneur), was granted
    to her in September 2012, valid until 6 September  2015.   Following  a
    trip out of the United Kingdom and upon her arrival back in the  UK  on
    16 September 2014  the  Appellant  was  challenged  by  an  Immigration
    Officer in relation to the reliability of certain English language test
    results that she had relied upon in support of her earlier  application
    for leave to remain.
2.   In an interview with the Appellant  at  the  airport  on  16  September
    2014,  interviewing officer Kuljit Birdi asked the Appellant  questions
    about how she had acquired her English language certificates.  This was
    no doubt because the Respondent's systems had alerted the port that the
    Appellant was one of very many whose English language test certificates
    were disputed as a result of the  now  well-known  inquiry  into  proxy
    testing in an attempt to obtain a false English  language  certificate.
    The Appellant denied that she had ever used  a  proxy  in  any  English
    language tests and insisted that her results were  genuine.   Following
    Mr Birdi's  interview  with  the  Appellant,  he  recorded  in  certain
    standard questions contained on the interview form that  the  Appellant
    was able to answer questions in basic English, that she had answered in
    a fluent manner suggestive of the fact that she had not been coached in
    providing specific answers by person, and there were no points  in  the
    interview  where  the   Appellant   appeared   to   lack   credibility.
    Nonetheless he refused leave to enter.  The specific  reason  given  in
    the notice is as follows:

         "You were given notice of leave to remain in the United Kingdom  as
         a Tier 1 highly skilled  entrepreneur  on  15/09/2012  valid  until
         06/09/2015 but I  am  satisfied  that  false  representations  were
         employed or material facts were not disclosed for  the  purpose  of
         obtaining  the  leave,  or  there  has  been  such  a   change   of
         circumstances in your case since the  leave  was  granted  that  it
         should  be  cancelled.   This  is  because  information  from   ETS
         indicates that a false English language  certificate  was  obtained
         which you have used as part of your application for a Tier 1 highly
         skilled entrepreneur visa on 15/09/2012.  I  consider  this  to  be
         employment of false representations for the  purpose  of  obtaining
         leave to remain and I therefore cancel your continuing  leave.   If
         your leave was conferred by an entry clearance, this will also have
         the effect of cancelling your entry clearance."


3.   The Appellant appealed against that decision, the appeal coming  before
    the judge on 23 October 2015.

4.   The Appellant's evidence about the circumstances in which she  sat  her
    English language tests is set  out  at  paragraph  14  of  the  judge's
    decision.

5.   In support of the Respondent's case  the  Respondent  relied  upon  now
    familiar standard witness statements from Rebecca  Collings  and  Peter
    Millington dated 23  June  2014.   There  was  in  addition  a  witness
    statement from Hilary  Rackstraw,  Presenting  Officer,  to  which  was
    attached details of  the  tests  taken  by  the  Appellant  at  Premier
    Language Training Centre on 18 April 2012 and 15 May 2012.   The  judge
    heard evidence from the Appellant.

6.   In a detailed decision the judge found that he was not  satisfied  that
    the Appellant had engaged in the services of a proxy test taker to take
    either or both of the tests of 18 April or 15 May 2012 on her behalf or
    otherwise  cheated.   He  was  not  satisfied  that  she   gave   false
    information in order  to  procure  the  certificates  relating  to  her
    speaking and  writing  ability  in  either  April  or  May  2012.   The
    requirements of paragraph 321A(2) were therefore  not  fulfilled.   The
    judge was not satisfied that the decision to cancel her entry clearance
    and to refuse her leave to enter was either correct  or  in  accordance
    with the law or  the  Immigration  Rules  and  he  allowed  her  appeal
    (paragraph 20).

7.   The Respondent sought permission to appeal  against  that  decision  in
    grounds dated 23 December 2015.   Reference  is  made  to  the  witness
    statements of Peter Millington and Rebecca Collings.   It  was  pointed
    out that the spreadsheet of results provided by ETS declared  that  the
    Appellant's test results  had  been  categorised  as  invalid  and  the
    grounds asserted that it was clear that in order  for  the  Appellant's
    results to be categorised as invalid the  case  had  to  go  through  a
    computer programme analysing speech  and  then  two  independent  voice
    analysts.  If all three were in agreement that a proxy  test  had  been
    used then the test would be categorised as invalid.  In  the  light  of
    that evidence it was said to be 'clear' that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    had erred in its finding on the appeal.  It was said that it was  clear
    from the evidence that where ETS invalidates the test  result  this  is
    because there is evidence of proxy test taking  or  impersonation.   It
    was said that the FtT had failed entirely to provide  adequate  reasons
    for its findings to the contrary.

8.   A second ground at paragraphs 10 to 12  asserted  that  the  judge  had
    made a material misdirection in law in applying an  impermissibly  high
    standard of proof in determining the deception issue.  When considering
    the evidence the FtT applied a standard far more onerous than a balance
    of probabilities at paragraphs 19(b), (d) and (g).

9.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Parkes
    on 20 May 2016, observing that the issues raised a vexed issue but  the
    judge gave considerable attention to the history of this issue and  the
    case law in addition to the evidence that was and  was  not  presented.
    Judge Parkes noted that the Appellant attended  the  hearing  and  gave
    evidence.  The Record of Proceedings shows that a Mandarin  interpreter
    was used by the Appellant.  Judge Parkes held that it was arguable that
    the judge had allied the present case with the Upper Tribunal  decision
    in Gazi when there were differences, such as the Appellant's not giving
    evidence in English to demonstrate her ability, which may make  such  a
    course of action inappropriate.  Permission to appeal was granted.

10.  It is appropriate before I consider  the  parties'  submissions  to  go
    into the reasoning of the judge in some more detail.   At  paragraph  2
    the judge summarised the interview between the Appellant and  Mr  Birdi
    on 16 September 2014.  He directed himself in law that it was  for  the
    Immigration Officer to establish on  a  balance  of  probabilities  the
    factual basis for the  contention  that  the  grounds  in  subparagraph
    321A(2) had been made out i.e. that false representations were made  or
    false documents or information submitted in support of the  Appellant's
    application or material facts not disclosed.

11.  The judge referred to the history of this matter commencing with a  BBC
    documentary on Panorama about the concerns about proxy test  taking  in
    ETS colleges.  The judge refers at paragraph 9 onwards to  the  witness
    evidence of Ms Collings and Mr Millington.  The  judge  refers  to  the
    recent case of R (Gazi) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2015] UKUT 00327.  The judge quoted the extract from Gazi wherein  the
    President had stated, "it is far from clear whether this  exercise  (of
    invalidating  results)   entailed   an   examination   of   each   case
    individually. The averment is opaque".    At  paragraph  10  the  judge
    observed that the statements of Ms Collings and of Mr  Millington  were
    entirely generic.  He observed at paragraph 11 that the Respondent  had
    provided a printout from a spreadsheet which  declared  that  the  test
    results  taken  by  the  Appellant  were   considered   invalid.    The
    Appellant's evidence was that she had taken a speaking and writing test
    on 18 April 2012 and scored 190 for speaking and 140 in  writing.   She
    had wished to obtain a better result and on 15  May  had  re-taken  the
    test scoring 200 in speaking and 190 in writing.  Both of these results
    were said in the ETS spreadsheet to be invalid although of course there
    is no positive assertion within any of  the  Respondent's  evidence  to
    establish why, specifically, the Appellant's results  are  said  to  be
    invalid.

12.  As noted above the Appellant gave evidence before  the  judge  and  her
    evidence is summarised at paragraph 14 of the decision.  She  described
    the circumstances in which the tests had been booked, and described the
    location and the process of the tests.  She denied that she had used  a
    proxy test taker.  At paragraph 17 onwards the judge refers to  further
    extracts from the judgment in Gazi.  At paragraph 19 the judge held  as
    follows:

         "Although I have no reason to doubt, and  accept,  that  there  has
         been widespread cheating and dishonesty involving the employment of
         proxy candidates and other abuse as identified  in  Miss  Collings'
         statement, I am not satisfied that the  evidence  adduced  in  this
         appeal is sufficient to justify the conclusion that  the  Appellant
         either engaged a proxy test-taker in either  of  the  speaking  and
         writing tests which she took in April and May 2012 or that a  false
         English language certificate was obtained and submitted in  support
         of her application  for  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  1  Skilled
         Entrepreneur.   I  reach  those  conclusions  for   the   following
         reasons".

      Those  reasons  are  many  and  include  the   suggestion   that   the
    Respondent's evidence did not deal specifically with  the  reasons  for
    questioning the validity of the Appellant's own test results,  did  not
    explain precisely how the conclusion that she had engaged a proxy test-
    taker had been arrived at, what the factual basis for  that  conclusion
    was or what anomalies had been detected  and  which  had  led  to  that
    conclusion.

13.  At paragraph 19(d) it was  stated  that  no  evidence  was  adduced  to
    support the proposition that the speech and/or speech patterns  of  the
    individual who took the tests on 18 April and 15 May 2012 were  similar
    to the speech patterns of any other individual or individuals  who  had
    or were believed to have taken the test on behalf of any  other  person
    or persons seeking  leave  to  remain,  still  less  to  those  of  any
    individual who had been positively identified as and/or  who  had  been
    convicted of and/or who had confessed to  having  taken  the  tests  on
    behalf of any such person or persons.

14.  At 19(f) the judge stated that:

         "What was stated by McCloskey J in R (Gazi) above in paragraphs 13-
         15 of his judgement is apposite.  I respectfully  agree  with,  and
         adopt what McCloskey J wrote in the parts of his judgement which  I
         have set out above.  No evidence  was  adduced  to  deal  with  his
         criticisms or with those made by Dr Harrison set out  in  McCloskey
         J's judgement."


15.  At paragraph 19(h)(3) the judge stated that:

         "In the absence of other evidence indicating that the Appellant had
         engaged the  services  of  a  proxy  test-taker  or  had  otherwise
         cheated, the reasoning is in effect, that:


             'because we believe that large numbers of others who undertook
             the test the centre (Barking) at or about the  time  that  you
             took your tests engaged the services of a proxy test-taker  or
             cheated in some other way, you too did so.


         I do not consider that that is a legitimate, satisfactory  or  fair
         basis for reaching a decision in any particular  case  -  at  least
         without there being other evidence of anomalies in  the  recordings
         of the speech and/or speech patterns submitted as  being  those  of
         the individual concerned (in this case of the Appellant) suggestive
         of fraud.  I  am  in  no  doubt  but  that  the  above  is  not  an
         appropriate or legitimate form of reasoning.  It is not one which I
         consider it appropriate to apply."


    Further, at paragraph 19(j) the judge says as follows:


         "In reaching my above conclusions, I have  taken  into  account  Mr
         Birdi's conclusion, both as to the Appellant's  ability  to  answer
         the questions put to her and as to  her  general  credibility  (see
         above paragraph 3).  I have no reason to doubt and accept  what  he
         wrote.  I draw no adverse inference from the fact that while giving
         her evidence, the Appellant at times made use of  the  interpreter.
         I have very much in mind that it is now over three years since  the
         tests were undertaken and because the  Appellant's  first  language
         is, I am satisfied, not English, it is not surprising and I draw no
         adverse inference from, the fact that she wished at the hearing  to
         have the assistance of an interpreter to avoid  any  risks  arising
         from misunderstanding of the questions which were, or  were  likely
         to be, put to her in the course of the hearing and of her answers."


    He then came to the conclusion at paragraph 20 which I have already set
    out above.


16.  Mr Avery submitted that the judge had failed to give  adequate  reasons
    for his findings and had become bogged down in unnecessary detail.  The
    judge appeared to misapprehend the  purpose  of  Ms  Collings'  and  Mr
    Millington's evidence which was not to provide specific evidence as  to
    the manner in which the Appellant had cheated, but rather  to  describe
    the process by which the speech samples had been analysed.   The  judge
    appeared to expect greater detail of how it had been  proven  that  the
    Appellant specifically had falsified her tests but this was a misplaced
    expectation.  The  description  of  the  process  in  the  Respondent's
    witness evidence together with the spreadsheet confirming that ETS  had
    declared the Appellant's results as invalid was sufficient to discharge
    to a balance of probabilities that the Appellant had relied on a  false
    document.  Similarly the paragraphs identified in ground 2  represented
    a misapplication of the  burden  and  standard  of  proof.   The  judge
    appears to have required an unreasonable degree of  evidence  from  the
    Respondent in order to prove dishonesty on the Appellant's part.

     Discussion

17.  Following Mr Avery's  submissions  I  indicated  my  preliminary  view,
    which I now confirm, which is that the judge's decision  was  detailed,
    that he had had regard to  the  shortcomings  in  the  evidence  of  Ms
    Collings and Mr Millington that had been identified by the President in
    the case of Gazi, and had agreed with the President's analysis in  that
    regard.  In the light of what the  judge  held  to  be  a  satisfactory
    explanation as to how the Appellant had gone about  taking  her  tests,
    and making a very careful note that the Appellant  had  only  at  times
    made use of an interpreter during the appeal proceedings before him, he
    was satisfied that the Respondent had  not  made  out  its  case  to  a
    balance of probabilities that the Appellant had cheated.  It  seems  to
    me that the grounds of appeal are essentially a  perversity  challenge;
    ie ultimately that no judge could  have  allowed  an  appeal  in  those
    circumstances, merely on the basis of the evidence of Ms  Collings  and
    Mr Millington and the ETS spreadsheet result.

18.  I find that the judge provided adequate reasons to support his  finding
    that the Respondent had not met the burden upon her to demonstrate that
    the Appellant had engaged in deception.

19.  If it had been necessary for me to re-make the decision  I  would  have
    had regard to the more recent reported case of SM & Qadir (ETS evidence
    - burden of proof) [2016] UKUT.  The head note of that  case  reads  as
    follows:

         "(1) The Secretary of State's generic evidence  combined  with  her
             evidence  particular  to  these  two  Appellants  sufficed  to
             discharge the evidential burden of proving  that  their  TOEIC
             certificates had been procured by dishonesty.


         (2)  However, given the multiple frailties from which this  generic
             evidence was considered to suffer and  in  the  light  of  the
             evidence adduced by the Appellants,  the  Secretary  of  State
             failed to discharge the legal burden of proving dishonesty  on
             their part."


20.  The President had in that case heard oral  evidence  from  Ms  Collings
    and Mr Millington.  At paragraph  63  of  the  decision  the  President
    identified the shortcomings in their testimony as follows:

         "1.   Neither  witness  has  any   qualifications   or   expertise,
             vocational or otherwise, in the scientific subject  matter  of
             these  appeals,  namely  voice  recognition   technology   and
             techniques.


         2.   In making its decisions in individual cases, the  Home  Office
             was entirely dependent on the information provided by ETS.  At
             a later stage  viz  from  around  June  2014  this  dependency
             extended to what was reported by its delegation which went  to
             the United States.


         3.   ETS was the sole arbiter  of  the  information  disclosed  and
             assertions  made  to  the  delegation.  For  its   part,   the
             delegation - unsurprisingly, given its lack of expertise - and
             indeed, the entirety of the Secretary of State's officials and
             decision makers accepted uncritically everything  reported  by
             ETS.


         4.   The Home Office has at no time had  advice  or  input  from  a
             suitable expert.


         5.    There  was  no  evidence  from  any  ETS   witness   -   this
             notwithstanding the elaborate critique of Dr Harrison compiled
             over one year ago.


         6.   The test results of the 33,000 suspect TOEIC  scores,  coupled
             with the information disclosed  and  assertions  made  to  the
             Secretary of State's delegation  during  a  one  day  meeting,
             constitute the totality of the material provided by ETS.


         7.   Almost remarkably,  ETS  provided  no  evidence,  directly  or
             indirectly, to this Tribunal.   Its  refusal  to  provide  the
             voice recordings of these  two  Appellants  in  particular  is
             mildly astonishing.


         8.   While the judgment of this Tribunal in  Gazi,  promulgated  in
             May 2015,  raised  significant  questions  about  the  witness
             statements of Ms Collings and Mr Millington,  these  were  not
             addressed, much  less  answered,  in  their  evidence  at  the
             hearing.  See in particular Gazi at [9]-[15].


         9.   Once certain documentary evidence, highlighted in [15]  above,
             might have fortified the Secretary of State's case,  none  was
             produced.


         10.  Similarly, although requested, none  of  the  voice  recording
             files pertaining to the Appellants was provided  for  analysis
             and consideration by Dr Harrison."


21.  I also note that at one point of his evidence before the  President  Mr
    Millington had been obliged to accept and did not challenge or  dissent
    from any aspect of Dr Harrison's detailed critique.  He agreed that the
    automatic testing system employed by ETS could generate false  positive
    results in up to 22.5% of cases.  He further agreed that this could  be
    as high as 30% in human verification analysis process.

22.  Dr  Harrison,  an  expert  relied  upon  by  the  Appellants  in  those
    proceedings, gave evidence recorded at paragraph 30 of the  President's
    decision that in respect of language analysis systems he suggested that
    if a system of this kind is performing well  the  generally  recognised
    range of error will be two to ten per cent.  For the best  systems  the
    error rate is typically between one and three per cent.  In  non  ideal
    conditions error rates could be as high as 30%.  Dr Harrison's evidence
    recorded at the end of paragraph 33 of the decision  in  SM  states  as
    follows:

         "In this context Dr Harrison also  referred  to  the  international
         workshop evidence noted in [11] above which contains,  inter  alia,
         the results of the analysis of human voice files by seven different
         systems.  Of these, the best performing system had some  24%  false
         negative results and 28% false positive results. The average  false
         negative rate was 36%.  Dr Harrison testified that this data  amply
         supported the opinion expressed in his report."

23.  I make no further reference to the findings in SW & Qadir but  conclude
    the presentr decision by  recognising  that  the  Appellant  gave  oral
    evidence before the judge which was only at times with the  use  of  an
    interpreter, gave an explanation as to her circumstances  and  how  she
    took the tests.  The judge recognised the limitations of  the  evidence
    relied upon by the Respondent, those limitations  being  recognised  in
    the earlier case of Gazi.  Again, if it were necessary for  me  to  re-
    decide this case I would take into account the case of SM  &  Qadir  in
    which those limitations are further investigated and are recognised  as
    being even more significant than had been suggested in the Gazi case.

24.  I am satisfied that there is no material error of law  in  the  judge's
    decision in this case.

    Notice of Decision

     The Respondent's appeal is dismissed.
     The First-tier decision is upheld.


    No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                     Date 6.7.16
[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan
