
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/37768/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham ET               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 February 2016                   |On 10 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MISS DAPHNE ZAKEO
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Tapfumaneyi, PT Law & Associates


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Frankish  promulgated  on  3  June  2015,  in  which  he  allowed   the
    respondent's appeal against a decision to refuse her application for an
    EEA Residence Card, on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Nicholson
    on 17 August 2015.

Anonymity

 3. No direction has been made previously, and there is no reason  for  one
    now

Background

 4. The respondent is a national of Zimbabwe born on 21 September 1977. She
    last entered the United Kingdom in 2007  and  has  made  a  variety  of
    applications to extend her stay including under Tier 4 of  the  Points-
    Based Scheme and asylum. Removal directions  were  made  on  23  August
    2010.

 5. On 6 June 2014, the respondent applied for an EEA Residence Card on the
    basis of derivative rights, as the carer of a  British  citizen  child.
    Her application was refused, as she had not provided evidence as to why
    the child's father, with whom she appeared to  reside,  was  not  in  a
    position to provide care for the child.

 6. The respondent appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 7. The FTTJ heard no submissions on the respondent's behalf which  related
    to the claim under the Regulation  18A  of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006. Instead,  the  respondent's  case  was
    argued on the basis of Article 8 alone, that it fell  both  within  the
    Immigration Rules and outside of them. The FTTJ  concluded  that  there
    were insurmountable obstacles to family life taking place  outside  the
    United Kingdom, as per EX.1 of Appendix FM.

The grounds of appeal

 8. In essence, the first ground argues  that  the  FTTJ  made  a  material
    misdirection in law in, firstly, treating the  best  interests  of  the
    appellant's child as  "the  primary  or  paramount  consideration."  In
    addition, the FTTJ had misdirected himself  by  failing  to  weigh  the
    respondent's "very poor" immigration  history  against  the  ostensible
    best interests of the child and purported to  apply  the  principle  in
    Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40 without further enquiry as  to  whether
    this was appropriate on  the  particular  facts.  Furthermore,  it  was
    argued that the FTTJ had no jurisdiction to consider Article 8 ECHR  as
    no removal decision had been taken. It remained open for the respondent
    to make a human rights application. The second ground argued  that  the
    FTTJ failed to give adequate reasons in support of a material  finding.
    That finding was that any separation of the family would  be  permanent
    on the basis that the financial requirements for a partner could not be
    met. The FTTJ did not consider whether the respondent might succeed  on
    Article 8 outside of the Rules or under the ECO's residual discretion.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it was arguable that
    the FTTJ had no jurisdiction to consider Article 8 in  an  EEA  appeal.
    Permission was not expressly refused on the remaining grounds.

10. Since  permission  was  sought,  there  have  been  relevant  case  law
    developments. The following was said in the headnote of Amirteymour and
    others (EEA appeals; human rights) [2015] UKUT 00466;

         "Where no notice under section 120 of the 2002 Act has been  served
         and where no EEA decision to remove has  been  made,  an  appellant
         cannot bring a Human Rights challenge to removal in an appeal under
         the EEA Regulations. Neither the factual matrix nor  the  reasoning
         in JM (Liberia) [2006] EWCA Civ 1402 has any application to appeals
         of this nature. "

11. In  TY  (Sri  Lanka)  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  1233  the  Court  agreed  with
    Amirteymour in finding that an American father/carer of  an  EEA  child
    who was refused under EEA Regulations could not rely on Article 8.   At
    [35] the Court said; "It is impossible to say  that  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision to withhold a residence  card  (a  decision  which  is
    correct under the EEA Regulations) will or could cause the UK to be  in
    breach of the Refugee Convention or ECHR. The UK will only be in breach
    of those Conventions if in the future the appellant makes an asylum  or
    human rights claim, which the Secretary of State and/or  the  tribunals
    incorrectly reject".  At  [26]  and  [27]  the  CA  said  that  "...The
    appellant would only have such a right (to proceed under Article 8)  if
    the Secretary of State had served a one stop notice pursuant to section
    120 of the 2002 Act and paragraph 4  (8)  of  Schedule  2  to  the  EEA
    Regulations....Since there is no  section  120  one  stop  notice,  the
    appellant is confined to the subject matter of the original decision".

12. In this instance, no decision was made to remove the respondent; on the
    contrary the reasons for refusal letter invites her to  either  make  a
    charged human rights application or to submit a further application for
    a Derivative Residence Card should she consider that she has a right to
    reside in the  United  Kingdom.   The  said  letter  also  invites  the
    respondent to make arrangements to leave, failing which  her  departure
    may be enforced, however the letter stressed that she will be contacted
    and given a separate opportunity to make  representations  against  the
    proposed removal. Furthermore, the respondent does not claim  that  she
    has been served a section 120 notice.  Accordingly,  the  FTTJ  had  no
    jurisdiction to  consider  and  decide  the  appellant's  human  rights
    arguments.

13. As indicated above, the FTTJ recorded at [20]  of  his  decision,  that
    counsel for the respondent "contended that  the  appellant  falls  both
    with the foregoing Rules as well (as) case law outside of  the  Rules."
    There was, rightly,  no  attempt  to  argue  that  the  respondent  was
    entitled to a Derivative Residence Card owing to the fact that the  EEA
    child's father lives with that child and the  respondent  in  a  family
    unit. Consequently, she is not the primary carer of the child and there
    is  at  least  one  other  person  (the  father)   who   shares   equal
    responsibility for that child's care.





The hearing

14. Mr Diwnycz promptly advised me that the Secretary of  State  wished  to
    withdraw the appeal. It transpired, from a file note that he showed me,
    that Ms Zakeo had been granted leave to remain.

15. I accordingly considered  the  following  provisions  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008;

         17.-(1)  Subject to paragraph (2), a party may give notice  of  the
         withdrawal of its case, or any part of it-

                  (a)  [ ] by sending or delivering to the Upper Tribunal  a
                  written notice of withdrawal; or

                  (b)  orally at a hearing.

             (2) Notice of withdrawal will not take effect unless the Upper
             Tribunal consents to the withdrawal except in relation  to  an
             application for permission to appeal.

16. In view of the fact that the  respondent  had  been  granted  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom, I was prepared to consent to Mr Diwnycz's
    oral notice of withdrawal. I therefore had no  need  to  hear  from  Mr
    Tapfumaneyi or make a decision on what appeared to be a clear error  of
    law on the basis of a want of jurisdiction.

Decision

I consent to the Secretary of State's application to withdraw the appeal.


Signed      Date: 7 February 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara
