
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/37748/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 October 2015                   |On 12 May 2016                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                    Appellant
                                     and

                              OLAKUNBI AKINDURO
                        (ANONMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss P Solanki, of Counsel, instructed by Wilsons
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity

1.    No anonymity direction was made by the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I  have
    considered whether any parties require the protection of  an  anonymity
    direction. Having considered all the circumstances and  evidence  I  do
    not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.



Background

2.    This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    (hereafter "the Secretary of State") against the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge J Macdonald. On 14 May 2015 the Judge allowed the appeal
    of Mrs Akinduro (hereafter "the claimant") against  a  decision  of  20
    June 2012 and 29 August 2013 refusing  to  vary  leave  to  remain  and
    giving directions for her removal under section 47 of the  Immigration,
    Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

3.    The  claimant  is  a  citizen  of  Nigeria  born  6  April  1949.  The
    claimant's immigration history is somewhat convoluted. In summary,  she
    last entered the UK on 8 October 2011 with entry  clearance  conferring
    leave to enter as a visitor until 22 February 2012. On 2 December  2011
    she lodged an application  for  discretionary  leave  to  remain.  That
    application was refused on 20 June 2012. The claimant appealed and  the
    appeal was subsequently dismissed by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  As  a
    consequence of an onward appeal the Upper Tribunal found  an  error  of
    law in the decision and remitted the appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal
    for rehearing. This resulted in a  further  decision  to  refuse  being
    issued by the Secretary of State on 29 August 2013. The claimant lodged
    an appeal against that decision.  On  27  August  2014  the  First-tier
    Tribunal allowed the appeal to the extent that the decision was not  in
    accordance with the law. The Secretary of State was successful  in  her
    appeal against that decision and the Upper Tribunal remitted the appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing. Thus the appeal  came  before
    Judge Macdonald.

The Judge's Decision

4.    Essentially the claimant's case was that she lived with  and  was  the
    primary carer of her mother who had a history of a  number  of  chronic
    ailments and, in particular, suffered from dementia and Alzheimer's. If
    care was not provided the mother would need to be admitted into a  care
    home. With the claimant's care there had been a slight  improvement  in
    the mother's health. The claimant had family in the  UK  comprising  of
    two brothers and their respective families.

5.    The Judge heard evidence from the claimant and her two  brothers.  The
    witnesses confirmed the role undertaken by the claimant in  respect  of
    their mother's care, and the burden that would be placed upon  them  if
    the claimant was no longer here to fulfil that role. Whilst there is no
    explicit reference  to  credibility  it  is  apparent  that  the  Judge
    accepted that evidence as true in view of his findings of fact at  [44]
    to [51]. Therein, the Judge found that  the  claimant  lived  with  her
    mother and provided her with "very substantial care and attention".  In
    the absence of that care the mother would have to seek significant help
    either from Social Services or a care home.  He  noted  that  with  the
    claimant's assistance there  had  been  a  slight  improvement  to  the
    mother's health. Whilst the Judge observed  that  the  care  previously
    provided to the mother could be  made  available  at  expense,  he  was
    unable to find that such care would be better or significantly the same
    as that provided by the claimant. The Judge found that the claimant had
    visited the UK lawfully as  a  visitor  since  1973  and  accepted  the
    claimant had family in the UK.



6.    It was against these findings of fact  that  the  Judge  proceeded  to
    decide the appeal in accordance  with  the  two-stage  process  he  was
    required to adopt. The Judge  noted  that  the  applicable  Immigration
    Rules were those in force on  20  June  2012  and  thus  prior  to  the
    implementation of HC 194 that took effect on 9 July 2012. In respect of
    the decision taken on 29 August 2013 the Judge found that the  claimant
    failed to  meet  the  requirements  of  Appendix  FM.  The  Judge  made
    reference to the Secretary of State's Carers Policy and noted  some  of
    the relevant particulars of that policy. In so doing the Judge observed
    the Secretary of State's failure to consider that  policy  when  making
    her decision and thus found that the decision  was  not  in  accordance
    with the law [57]. The Judge went on to  reject  the  claimant's  claim
    that she was entitled to a Derivative Residence Card in accordance with
    EU law.

7.    As for Article 8 outside of  the  Rules,  the  Judge  found  that  the
    claimant had an established family life with her  mother  and  siblings
    and found the mother was  "heavily  dependent  upon  her  daughter  who
    provides all aspects of intimate daily care" [65]. The Judge also found
    that the mother's health would deteriorate in  the  claimant's  absence
    thus having a detrimental impact on the mother's private life [65]. The
    Judge was satisfied that the decision would seriously interference with
    family  and  private  life.  The  Judge  concluded  that   there   were
    exceptional  and  compelling  circumstances  that  indicated  that  the
    interference was not in accordance with the law. He made  reference  to
    the fact that intimate care could not be appropriately provided by  the
    claimant's brothers and there were doubts  as  to  whether  they  could
    provide the level of care required. Whilst the Judge acknowledged  that
    care could be provided in a home, he concluded that such care would not
    be as good or appropriate in light of the  mother's  advanced  age  and
    deteriorating mental health, and that care provided by the claimant was
    most appropriate. The Judge noted in particular that the  claimant  had
    been the primary carer for the last 3 years and 7 months and that  such
    care should continue in the interests of continuity.

8.    The Judge had regard to section 117B of the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 (hereafter "the 2002 Act") and found  that  it  was
    not in the public interest to remove  the  claimant  who  was  of  good
    character. He made reference to the claimant's immigration history  and
    to the fact that she spoke  English,  and  that,  she  was  financially
    independent through the resources of her family in the UK. Accordingly,
    the Judge found that the decision of 20 June 2012 was not in accordance
    with the law and further allowed the appeal on human rights grounds.

9.    The Secretary of State lodged grounds of appeal on 15  May  2015.  The
    grounds argue, first, that the Judge made a  material  misdirection  in
    law in his analysis of the Article 8 argument; second, that  the  Judge
    misapplied the test in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 and  conflated  issues  of
    proportionality with matters of law; and thirdly, failed to address the
    public interest considerations contrary to section 117B(1) and  (5)  of
    the 2002 Act. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Reid  granted  permission  to
    appeal on 15 July 2015.



Consideration and Conclusions

10.   It is  pertinent  to  commence  with  the  Judge's  finding  that  the
    Secretary of State's decision was not in accordance  with  the  law  on
    account of her failure to apply the Carers Policy to her  consideration
    of the application. That failure the Judge found rendered the  decision
    "not in accordance with law".  The  Secretary  of  State  surmounts  no
    challenge to that finding in  her  grounds  and  the  Judge's  decision
    allowing the appeal to this extent thus stands.

11.   There is also no challenge to  the  Judge's  factual  findings.  Those
    findings were clearly open to him on the evidence.

12.   The Secretary of State's  pleaded  case  is  limited  to  the  Judge's
    approach to his assessment  of  Article  8  of  the  ECHR.  The  Judge,
    rightly, sought to engage with the step-by-step process  enunciated  in
    the well known case of Razgar. He set  out  the  five  questions  posed
    therein and considered each question in turn. In  so  doing,  whilst  I
    accept the criticism that some of the Judge's reasoning is muddled, for
    instance, first, at [80]  in  his  omnibus  conclusion  in  respect  of
    proportionality he refers to the case of Kugathas and his  reasons  for
    finding dependency between the claimant and mother, which  were  better
    placed for consideration under the first question posed in Razgar;  and
    second, the issue of compelling circumstances  and  the  continuity  of
    care were better placed for  consideration  under  the  proportionality
    assessment rather than under the question  of  the  lawfulness  of  the
    decision [see 69-70], I am not  satisfied  that  the  Judge  fell  into
    material error. Upon a holistic reading of the decision  it  cannot  be
    said that the Judge's analysis is irrational or perverse. The Judge did
    not take into  account  irrelevant  factors  and  the  weight  that  he
    attached to these factors either individually  or  cumulatively  was  a
    matter for him. The factors considered  were  of  significance  to  the
    decision of which the Judge was clearly aware. I am satisfied that  the
    Judge's decision is a sufficiently reasoned decision that was  open  to
    him on the evidence.

13.   As for the public interest the Judge clearly had in  mind  the  public
    interest in assessing the proportionality of  the  decision.  He  first
    turned his mind to that interest in his deliberations [74].  The  Judge
    went onto identify that he must have regard to section 117B of the 2002
    Act and this was followed by a finding that it was not  in  the  public
    interest to remove the claimant [75]. He made  reference  to  the  fact
    that the claimant speaks English and was financially  assisted  by  her
    family. Whilst the Judge did not explicitly acknowledge  the  terms  of
    117B (5) in that: "Little weight should be  given  to  a  private  life
    established by a person at a time when the person's immigration  status
    is precarious", I am not satisfied that this error  is  material  given
    that it is apparent that the Judge allowed the appeal on the  basis  of
    family life and the substantial dependency upon  the  claimant  by  her
    mother [81].

14.   In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside)  [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)
    the Tribunal held that "(i) Although there is a legal duty  to  give  a
    brief explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on  which  an
    appeal is determined, those  reasons  need  not  be  extensive  if  the
    decision as a whole makes sense, having regard to the material accepted
    by the judge; (ii) Although a decision may  contain  an  error  of  law
    where the requirements to give adequate reasons are not met, the  Upper
    Tribunal would not normally set aside  a  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal where there has been no misdirection of law, the  fact-finding
    process cannot be criticised and the relevant Country Guidance has been
    taken into account, unless the conclusions the  judge  draws  from  the
    primary data were not reasonably open to him or her".

15.   In this case, the Judge  could  have,  perhaps,  expressed  himself  a
    little more clearly, however, when the decision is read as a whole, the
    Judge's findings are sustainable, sufficiently detailed and reasoned.

16.   At the hearing Mr Duffy in amplifying the grounds introduced  a  point
    that was not argued in the grounds and upon which permission to  appeal
    had not been granted. There was no application to vary the  grounds  of
    appeal. In essence he submitted  that  as  the  Judge  found  that  the
    decision was not in accordance with the law that he erred in proceeding
    to consider the fourth and fifth questions in  Razgar.  As  this  is  a
    fundamentally different ground of appeal for which permission to appeal
    has not been granted the Tribunal has no jurisdiction to  consider  it.
    Nevertheless, I see no unfairness and thus any  error  in  the  Judge's
    consideration of the factors relevant to intended removal.

17.   For the reasons elaborated above, I affirm the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal and dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.



DECISION

18.   The appeal is dismissed.



Signed      Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral

