
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/37266/2014
                                                               IA/37271/2014
                                                               IA/37274/2014
                                                               IA/37277/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 October 2015                    |On 9 October 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      MRS gladys mercedes tapiA herrera
                      Mr cesar guillermo mendoza lagos
                      MASTER jayden ariel mendoza tapia
                     MASTER nathanael asaf mendoza tapia
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr. T Bobb, Solicitor, Aylish Alexander Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against  the  decisions
         of First-tier Tribunal Judge Quinn promulgated on  7  May  2015  in
         which he allowed the appeals of Mrs. Herrera, Mr. Lagos  and  their
         two sons against the decisions of the Secretary of State to  refuse
         leave to remain.

      2. For the purposes of this decision I refer to the Secretary of State
         as the Respondent and to Mrs.  Gladys  Herrera,  Mr.  Cesar  Lagos,
         Master Jayden Tapia and Master Nathanael Tapia as  the  Appellants,
         reflecting their positions  as  they  were  before  the  First-tier
         Tribunal.

      3. Permission was granted  by  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Zucker.  He states:

             "The grounds  focus  on  the  Decisions  in  relation  to  the
             children but submit that the errors contended for affect  each
             of the Decisions.  The grounds  include  the  submission  that
             there has been insufficient weight given  to  the  immigration
             rules and therefore to the public interest  criteria;  in  the
             case of the Fourth Appellant it is submitted  that  the  judge
             erred in conflating what was in his best  interests  with  the
             question of whether it was reasonable for him  to  leave  with
             his parents; further it is submitted that in the case  of  the
             Fourth Appellant that the judge has considered  the  issue  of
             insurmountable  obstacles  in   the   context   of   paragraph
             276ADE(iv) when such forms no part of that rule."

      4. At the hearing I heard submissions from  both  representatives.   I
         announced that I considered that the decision involved  the  making
         of a material error of law.  I set out my reasons below.

Error of law decision

      5. The judge produced a separate decision for each  Appellant.   There
         are therefore four separate decisions relating to the same  family.
         This is an  unfortunate  and  unsatisfactory  approach,  given  the
         nature of the appeals.   Although  the  judge  has  stated  in  the
         decision relating to Mrs. Herrera that her case is  the  lead  case
         and that much of what is said in her statement is relevant  to  the
         decisions relating to  the  other  Appellants,  [7],  none  of  the
         decisions contains a full set of findings in relation to the family
         as a whole.  None of the decisions treat the family  as  one  unit,
         which has led to the result  that  there  are  incomplete  findings
         across the board in respect of all four Appellants.

      6.  Jayden  is  the  only  Appellant  who  could  have  satisfied  the
         requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the immigration rules given his
         age and the amount of time that he has spent in the United Kingdom.
          It was accepted that neither  Jayden's  parents  nor  his  younger
         brother could satisfy the requirements of paragraph  276ADE,  given
         their ages and the amount of time  that  they  have  spent  in  the
         United Kingdom.  However, as the judge decided that Mrs.  Herrera's
         decision should be the lead decision,  Jayden's  circumstances  are
         not the judge's starting point.

      7. In paragraph [17] of Jayden's decision the judge states:

             "I accepted that Jayden  satisfied  paragraph  276ADE(iv)  and
             that there were insurmountable obstacles to him  returning  to
             Ecuador."

      8. As submitted by the Respondent, I find that the judge  has  applied
         the wrong test.   There is no test in paragraph 276ADE(iv) relating
         to "insurmountable  obstacles".   The  test  to  be  applied  under
         paragraph 276ADE(iv) for someone in Jayden's position who is  under
         the age of 18 and has spent seven years in the  United  Kingdom  is
         whether or not it is reasonable to expect that person to leave  the
         United Kingdom.

      9. Further, having stated the wrong legal test, there is no assessment
         of whether or not it is reasonable  to  expect  him  to  leave  the
         United Kingdom and return to Ecuador.  In paragraph [12] the  judge
         refers to the very significant obstacles to his reintegration  into
         Ecuador, but this is not the test.  At  paragraph  [13]  the  judge
         considers whether Jayden could easily integrate back  into  society
         in Ecuador, but this is not the same as a consideration of  whether
         it is reasonable to expect him to return.

     10. I find that the judge has made an error of law in failing to  apply
         the correct test under the immigration rules to  Jayden,  and  that
         this error is capable of affecting the outcome of the decisions  in
         respect of all of the Appellants.

     11. Further, I find that the best interests of Jayden and Nathanael are
         not considered in any detail in any of the decisions.  In  Jayden's
         decision at paragraph [22] the judge states:

             "In short,  the  best  interests  of  Jayden  were  served  by
             allowing him to remain with his  parents  and  I  had  already
             decided both of his mother and father  should  be  allowed  to
             remain in the UK as to remove them would breach their  Article
             8 rights."

     12. The judge finds that it is in Jayden's best interests to allow  him
         to remain in the United Kingdom with his parents  by  reference  to
         the fact that their appeals have already been allowed under Article
         8.  It was accepted by Mr. Bobb  that  it  was  "unfortunate"  that
         Jayden's decision hinged upon that of  his  mother.   In  paragraph
         [35] of Mrs. Herrera's decision the judge states:

             "Rather than look at whether parents were at fault  I  had  to
             look at whether removal of the children would be in their best
             interests.  If it was not,  my  view  was  that  the  children
             should remain with their mother.  The  family  should  not  be
             split up as  that  was  not  in  the  best  interests  of  the
             children."

     13. However there is  no  assessment  of  the  best  interests  of  the
         children without reference to their removal.   There  has  been  no
         separate assessment of what is in the best interests of  Jayden  or
         Nathanael prior to an assessment of whether it  is  reasonable  for
         them to return to Ecuador.

     14. I was referred by Mr. Wilding  to  paragraph  [29]  of  Nathanael's
         decision.  This states:

             "Having given Jayden right to remain in the UK I decided  that
             it would not  be  proportionate  or  appropriate  to  separate
             Nathanael from his brother."

     15. I find that it is not a question of whether Jayden has  the  "right
         to remain", but whether or not he satisfies the requirements of the
         immigration rules, and the incorrect test has been applied  to  the
         consideration of Jayden's appeal under the immigration  rules.   At
         paragraph [30] the judge states that he refers to the  findings  in
         the appeal concerning Jayden, but this decision  does  not  contain
         any assessment of what is in the best interests  of  either  child.
         Nowhere in the decisions has the judge given any  reasons  why  the
         children could not return to Ecuador with their parents.

     16. The eldest daughter of Mrs.  Herrera  and  Mr.  Lagos  was  granted
         limited leave to remain by the Respondent but  there  has  been  no
         holistic assessment of the effect  of  this  on  the  decisions  in
         respect of the rest of the family.

Notice of Decision

The decisions of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of  a  material
error of law.  All four decisions in respect of all four Appellants are  set
aside.

The appeals are remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 8 October 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
