
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/37507/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 18th June 2014                               |On 27th June 2014          |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE

                                   Between

                        MR Olalekan Olumide Aroyehun
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No attendance
For the Respondent:    Mr Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, Mr Olalekan Olumide Aroyehun, date of  birth  6th  April
    1982 is a citizen of Nigeria.

 2. I have considered whether any of the parties to the present proceedings
    requires the protection of an anonymity direction.  Taking  account  of
    all the circumstances I  do  not  consider  it  necessary  to  make  an
    anonymity direction.

 3. There was no attendance by  the  Appellant  or  anyone  acting  on  his
    behalf.  The notice of hearing had been sent to the  Appellant  and  to
    his solicitors, Chancery CS Solicitors, on 25th May 2014.   The  notice
    of hearing had been sent to the Appellant at the address he had  given.
    No notification had been of any change of address.  No contact had been
    received from the solicitors  to  explain  the  non-attendance  of  the
    parties.  I am satisfied that the notice of hearing  has  gone  out  in
    accordance with the requirements of the Procedure Rules.

 4. There was no explanation for the non-attendance of the Appellant or his
    legal  representatives.   I  considered  the   papers   carefully   and
    determined that the appeal could be justly determined on the  basis  of
    the papers  and  submissions  lodged  as  the  Grounds  of  Appeal.   I
    therefore determined that it was in accordance with the Procedure Rules
    to proceed with the hearing in the absence  of  the  Appellant  or  his
    legal representatives.

 5. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the determination of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Agnew  promulgated  on  17th  December  2013.   The
    Appellant had applied for a residence card as evidence of  a  right  to
    reside in the United Kingdom as a family member of a Dutch national who
    was exercising treaty rights.  The Appellant was claiming that  he  and
    the Dutch national were married.

 6. The Grounds of Appeal allege that the judge,  in  making  the  decision
    that he did and in failing to accept the evidence as a whole, has acted
    unfairly, irrationally and unreasonably.  It is alleged that the  judge
    in finding that the Nigerian  customary  marriage  was  not  valid  had
    failed to take account of the evidence and  as  a  result  fallen  into
    legal error.  It  was  alleged  that  as  per  the  Country  of  Origin
    Information Report customary marriages are recognised in Nigeria and as
    such the judge should have on the basis of the  background  information
    recognised the marriage between the Appellant and the  Dutch  national.
    The marriage therefore between the Appellant and his Sponsor,  a  Dutch
    national, is therefore valid and the appeal should have been  allowed..



 7. As an alternative it is  suggested  that  the  evidence  submitted  was
    sufficient to show that there was a durable  relationship  between  the
    Appellant and the Sponsor.  The judge has failed  to  take  account  of
    such evidence and by reason there of there is an error  of  law  as  to
    whether there was a durable relationship..

 8. Consideration is given to proxy marriages and  their  validity  in  the
    case of Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law) [2014]  UKUT  24.   The  case
    points out that in order for a marriage to be valid it has not only  to
    be validly performed according to the law of the place  of  performance
    but also in an EU context to be valid according to the national law  of
    the EU Sponsor.

 9. This matter was determined on the basis of the papers submitted by  the
    Appellant.  The judge found on the basis of the papers lodged that  the
    EEA national was exercising treaty rights in the  United  Kingdom.   It
    was accepted that the EEA national was a qualified person.

10. The Appellant and Ms Withley  Xaviera  Wijnstein,  a  national  of  the
    Netherlands, married by proxy in Nigeria on 10th  November  2012.   The
    issue for the judge was whether or not that had been  proved  to  be  a
    valid marriage.

11. There were documents in the form of affidavits from the High  Court  in
    Nigeria and other documents to attest to the validity of the  marriage.



12. The background reports confirm that a proxy marriage can  by  customary
    law be recognised in Nigeria.  However it was necessary  to  prove  how
    the marriage was carried out, what the requirements  of  the  customary
    law were; and whether those requirements were met. There was a lack  of
    evidence as to whether or not the requirements  of  customary  law  had
    been met.  The affidavit evidence merely stated that the Nigerian  High
    Court considered the marriage to be valid. The judge  was  entitled  to
    consider whether the requirements of customary law had been proved. The
    evidence did not satisfy the judge that the requirements  of  customary
    law had been met. The judge has given reasons for finding that that did
    not satisfy him as to the validity of the marriage.

13. Further there was no evidence as to how the Netherlands law would treat
    this marriage.  To an extent the matter may have been capable of  being
    determined because  of  the  decision  in  Kareem  but  there  were  no
    documents or evidence presented to the Tribunal on the issue.

14. It was necessary to prove that the marriage would be recognised in  the
    law of the Netherlands.  The  judge  concluded  on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence that he was not  satisfied  that  they  had  proved  that  the
    marriage would be recognised in the Netherlands.

15. The obligation was on the Appellant with regard to Dutch  law  to  show
    that the  marriage  would  be  valid  according  to  the  laws  of  the
    Netherlands.  There was no evidence with regard to that.  The  evidence
    as to the validity of the marriage in Nigeria was also  problematic  in
    the sense that there was no evidence that the customary requirements of
    the law had been carried out.  Whilst otherwise there was evidence that
    it was according to affidavits from the High  Court,  it  was  still  a
    matter for the judge to look at the evidence to  determine  whether  or
    not the same was valid.  The judge having looked at  all  the  evidence
    came to a conclusion based on the facts.

16. With regard to  there  being  a  durable  relationship  the  judge  has
    considered the evidence presented  and  has  given  valid  reasons  for
    finding that the Appellant had not proved  that  there  was  a  durable
    relationship. The relationship at the time of the  hearing  before  the
    judge was only of some 12 months duration or 18 months  at  most  since
    the date the parties  met.  The  judge  has  carefully  looked  at  the
    evidence presented including the documentation and give reasons for not
    accepting the documentary evidence. The judge  has  considered  whether
    there was a durable relationship and on  the  evidence  concluded  that
    there was not. That was a finding of fact that the judge  was  entitled
    to make on the evidence.

17. The conclusions by the judge are extremely brief.   However  the  judge
    has given reasons as to why he is not satisfied that  the  marriage  is
    valid and that the appellant had not proved that there  was  a  durable
    relationship.  Those were findings of fact that were available  to  the
    judge to make on the basis of the evidence presented.

18. There is no error of law within the determination and that the decision
    to dismiss this matter on all grounds stands.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure

