
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/37383/2014
                                                               IA/37384/2014
                                                               IA/37387/2014
                                                               IA/37389/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 December 2015                  |On 06 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

                MR MUHAMMAD MAIMOON WAHEED (first appellant)
                 MRS GUL-E-RAANA KALSOOM (second appellant)
                 MR MUHAMMAD MAHAD MAIMOON (third appellant)
                  MR ABDUL AAHAD MAIMOON (fourth appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 Secretary of State FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Dogra of counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Introduction

    1. This is an appeal by the appellants against a decision of the  First-
       tier Tribunal dismissing their appeals against a decision taken on  3
       September 2014 to refuse their applications for leave  to  remain  in
       the UK based on their private and family life.

  Background Facts

    2. The appellants are citizens of Pakistan. The first appellant was born
       on 22 February 1982, the second appellant (his spouse) was born on 22
       September 1981, and the third and fourth appellants (their  children)
       were born on 25 April 2002 and 9  February  2012  respectively.  They
       applied for leave to remain in the UK  under  the  Immigration  Rules
       HC395 (as amended) (the 'Immigration Rules') based on  their  private
       and family life.  These applications were refused by  the  respondent
       on the basis that the appellants  could  not  meet  the  requirements
       under the Immigration  Rules  and  that  there  were  no  exceptional
       circumstances justifying leave outside of the Immigration Rules.

  The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

    3.  The  appellants  appealed  to  the  First-tier   Tribunal.    In   a
       determination promulgated on 2 April 2015, Judge Sweet dismissed  the
       appellants' appeals.  The First-tier Tribunal found that none of  the
       appellants could meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules under
       appendix FM in respect of family life. In respect  of  the  claim  to
       private life under paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules the only
       relevant sub-section was (vi) but the judge was  not  satisfied  that
       there would be very significant obstacles  to  their  integration  in
       Pakistan. In respect of exceptional circumstances the judge  did  not
       consider  that  there  were  any  particular  circumstances   to   be
       considered.  The   judge   took   into   account   the   respondent's
       responsibility under section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
       Immigration Act 2009 ('s55') to consider the best  interests  of  the
       children finding that no exceptional circumstances arose to  consider
       their claims outside of the  Immigration  Rules.  The  judge  further
       found that even if Article 8 were considered outside the  Immigration
       Rules it would not be disproportionate to remove the appellants.

  The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

    4. The appellants sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  On
       2 June 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Frankish refused permission  to
       appeal. On 5 August 2015 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Archer  granted
       the appellants permission to appeal on the basis that it was arguable
       that the First-tier Tribunal judge had failed  to  properly  consider
       the best interests of the children. Thus, the appeal came before  me.



  Summary of the Submissions

    5. The grounds of appeal focus  on  Muhammad  Mahad  Maimoon  (hereafter
       'Mahad'). It is asserted that the judge failed to  consider  that  it
       would be in the best interests of the child  to  return  to  Pakistan
       with his family and that the judge failed to take  into  account  the
       relevant authorities. It is submitted that the judge made no  adverse
       credibility findings  which  means  that  the  judge  found  all  the
       witnesses to be wholly credible. It is asserted that  the  judge  did
       not refer to the respondent's policy on assessing children  who  have
       been continuously resident in the UK for 7  years.  It  is  submitted
       that there is one material provision of the Immigration Rules in  the
       present  context,  namely   paragraph   EX.1(i)(cc).    The   central
       submission  is  that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  whether   the
       respondent had  discharged  the  duties  imposed  under  s55.  It  is
       submitted that there is no reference to the statutory  guidance.  The
       material error is found at paragraph 35 of the decision  where  there
       is no assessment of the best interests of the child.

    6. In the alternative the grounds assert that the judge made  errors  in
       assessing the Article 8 appeal. The judge has failed to consider  the
       impact on removal of  the  child.  His  private  life  deserved  more
       anxious scrutiny in the circumstances.

    7. Ms Dogra submitted that there were 2 grounds - the best interests  of
       the children has not been considered properly. Paragraph  35  of  the
       decision contains the only reference to s55.  The  second  ground  is
       that the judge failed to consider Article 8  considering  that  there
       were no exceptional circumstances. The judge needed to consider s117B
       (6).

    8. The judge failed to apply Singh v SSHD: Khalid v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ
       74 ('Singh and Khalid') which was authority for the proposition  that
       the concept of exceptional circumstances is not a threshold by  which
       individual Article 8 considerations need to be carried out. The judge
       should have considered the appellants' rights outside the Immigration
       Rules. There was a limited consideration under the Immigration Rules.
       At the date of the application the child was not  in  the  UK  for  7
       years so there is no assessment under the  Immigration  Rules  as  to
       whether or not it would  be  in  his  best  interests  to  return  to
       Pakistan so factors in his best interests were never considered.  She
       submitted that it is clear from the  case  law  of  Azimi-Moayed  and
       others (decisions affecting children;  onward  appeals)  [2013]  UKUT
       197(IAC) ('Azimi Moayed') and EV  (Philippines)  and  Others  v  SSHD
       [2014] EWCA Civ 874 ('EV (Philippines') that once a child is  in  the
       UK for 7 years it is possible that it may not be appropriate for them
       to return. The best interests always have to be considered. They have
       not been considered under the Immigration Rules because the child did
       not have 7 years  residence.  In  this  case  there  were  additional
       considerations that would have led to an  independent  assessment  of
       Article 8. The risks  and  concerns  were  set  out  in  the  witness
       statement of the first appellant. Mahad came to the UK when he was  5
       and started his education in the UK in which he has now  been  for  7
       years. He has no ties with Pakistan which is a distant memory. He  is
       doing very well at school. His formative years have been spent in the
       UK and if he is returned to Pakistan he  would  suffer  serious  set-
       backs. Mahad stated why he wished to remain in the UK. He  says  that
       his schooling is important and all his friends are  in  the  UK.  The
       letter shows he has reached an age where he has his  own  independent
       private life distinct and separate from his parents.

    9. Ms Dogra submitted that there must be some form of weighing exercise.
       The judge has failed to  undertake  a  proportionality  exercise.  No
       consideration has been given to the guidelines in EV Philippines.  If
       it is disproportionate to return Mahad to  Pakistan  then  there  are
       exceptional circumstances  for  the  whole  family  as  it  would  be
       disproportionate to separate a young child from his parents.

   10. Mr Clarke submitted that the reasons for refusal letter explained why
       the first and second appellants could not  rely  on  Paragraph  EX.1.
       Singh and Khalid was authority that the circumstances must render the
       Immigration Rules a disproportionate interference. He submitted  that
       at paragraph 32 of the decision the judge dealt with paragraph 276ADE
       and at paragraph 35 dealt with the best interests  of  the  children.
       S55 is a proportionality test and it was open to the  judge  to  find
       that there were no circumstances meriting consideration  outside  the
       Immigration Rules. The judge at paragraphs 9-26 set out the evidence.
       It is clear that the judge was mindful of all the  issues  identified
       at paragraph 35 of EV Philippines. At paragraph 9 the judge  set  out
       the oral evidence of the first appellant. The judge set out in detail
       the education, friends, his age, the effect of  a  change  in  school
       etc. The  judge  took  issue  with  the  witness  statements  of  the
       appellants. The judge disputed that there were no ties  to  Pakistan,
       the second appellant has family in Pakistan. She stayed  with  family
       in Pakistan for 22 days 2 months before  the  hearing.  Mahad  speaks
       Urdu contrary to the oral evidence. At paragraph 16 the  judge  finds
       that the family previously lived with the first  appellant's  family.
       The judge sets out inconsistencies  in  relation  to  the  first  and
       second appellants working in the UK. The second  appellant  confirmed
       in oral evidence matters that were contrary to what was said  in  the
       witness statements. The appellants returned to Pakistan in 2008, 2010
       and 2 months before the hearing for periods  of  between  14  and  22
       days. The judge took all these circumstances into consideration  when
       finding there were no exceptional circumstances. It is  difficult  to
       construe this case as anything other than a normal child of that age.
       There is nothing to demonstrate that it would be disproportionate  or
       require consideration outside of the Immigration Rules.

   11. Mr Clarke submitted  that  in  accordance  with  Bossade  (ss.117A-D-
       interrelationship with Rules) [2015] UKUT 00415 (IAC) s117  does  not
       come into effect until you get to the second stage. He submitted that
       there is no merit in the argument that if you do  not  qualify  under
       the Immigration Rules you have to look outside the Immigration Rules.
       The judge took into account other circumstances but where  there  are
       no compelling circumstances there is no need to consider s117  unless
       you are considering the claim outside of the Immigration Rules.

   12.  With  regard  to  7  years  Mr  Clarke  submitted  this  is  not   a
       determinative factor. In Azimi-Moayed it was  considered  that  there
       are other issues to be considered. The starting point is  that  being
       with parents is likely to be in a child's  best  interests.  7  years
       residence is only one factor. The parents have no entitlement  to  be
       in the UK. This is not a child on his own in the UK, there are  other
       countervailing factors. Even if the case is  considered  outside  the
       Immigration Rules the appellants cannot succeed. The test in s117B is
       if it reasonable for the child to leave the UK. In AM (s.117B) Malawi
       [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC) speaking English and financial independence is
       only neutral, no rights from 117 can be obtained.

   13. In reply Ms Dogra submitted that in  the  grant  of  permission  with
       regard to EX.1 there was no indication that it is to be  argued.  The
       Immigration Rules do not apply, EX.1 would not have  been  triggered.
       It is not correct that the First-tier Tribunal judge must have  taken
       factors into consideration - there were no findings  on  the  factors
       set out. There was simply a rehearsal of what the evidence  was.  The
       judge needed to make findings. With regard to Mahad it is clear  from
       the witness statement that what was detailed was the consequences  of
       removal,  the  emotional  trauma,  setbacks  and   deterioration   in
       education. These factors rendered any removal  disproportionate.  The
       consequences were not dealt with by the judge.  The  third  appellant
       has spent longer in the UK than he has  in  Pakistan.  He  has  never
       attended school in Pakistan. Whilst he hasn't reached a pivotal stage
       in his education he  is  in  secondary  school.  He  is  involved  in
       activities outside of school.  The  fact  that  he  has  returned  to
       Pakistan for holidays does not suggest a connection to Pakistan  that
       would be renewable. Whilst he does speak some Urdu the level  is  not
       of a fluent speaker. His school reports indicate he  is  speaking  in
       English. Ms  Dogra  referred  me  to  the  headnote  in  Azimi-Moayed
       particularly ii) and iii). There is nothing significant to  say  that
       the appellants should  be  removed.  Taking  into  account  the  best
       interests of the  child  the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration
       control would not outweigh the interests.

Legislative Provisions

  Nationality and Immigration Act 2002 ('NIA Act')

   14. As from 28 July 2014 statutory provisions in a new Part 5A of the NIA
       Act (inserted by s.19 of  the  Immigration  Act  2014)  requires,  in
       legislative form for the first time, the  Tribunal  to  take  certain
       factors into account when determining whether a decision  made  under
       the Immigration Acts breaches respect for private  and  family  life.
       The decision in the  instant  case  is  a  decision  made  under  the
       Immigration Acts. The relevant provisions provide:

   15. As from 28 July 2014 statutory provisions in a new  Part  5A  of  the
       2002 Act (inserted by s.19 of the Immigration Act 2014) requires,  in
       legislative form for the first time, the  Tribunal  to  take  certain
       factors into account when determining whether a decision  made  under
       the Immigration Acts breaches respect for private  and  family  life.
       The decision in the  instant  case  is  a  decision  made  under  the
       Immigration Acts. The relevant provisions provide:

   16. Section 117A sets out the scope of the new Part 5A headed "Article  8
       of the ECHR; Public Interest Considerations" as follows:

           '117A Application of this Part

           (1)    This Part applies where a court or tribunal  is  required
           to determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-

                (a)    breaches a person's right to respect for private  and
                family life under Article 8, and

                (b)    as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of  the
                Human Rights Act 1998.

           (2)    In considering the public interest question, the court or
           tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

                (a)    in all cases, to the considerations listed in section
                117B, and

                (b)     in  cases  concerning  the  deportation  of  foreign
                criminals, to the considerations listed in section 117C.

           (3)    In subsection (2), "the public interest  question"  means
           the question of whether an interference with a person's right to
           respect for private and family life is justified  under  Article
           8(2).'

   17. The considerations listed in s.117B are applicable to all  cases  and
       are:

           '117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in
           all cases

           (1)    The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in
           the public interest.

           (2)    It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
           interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
           persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are
           able to speak English, because persons who can speak English-

                (a)    are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                (b)    are better able to integrate into society.

           (3)    It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
           interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
           persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are
           financially independent, because such persons-

                (a)    are not a burden on taxpayers, and

                (b)    are better able to integrate into society.

           (4)    Little weight should be given to-

                (a)    a private life, or

                (b)    a relationship formed with a qualifying partner, that
                is established by a person at a time when the person is in
                the United Kingdom unlawfully.

           (5)    Little weight should be given to a private life
           established by a person at a time when the person's immigration
           status is precarious.

           (6)    In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,
           the public interest does not require the person's removal where-

                (a)    the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
                relationship with a qualifying child, and

                (b)    it would not be reasonable to expect the child to
                leave the United Kingdom.'

   18. Section 117D provides the definition of a number  of  terms  used  in
       Part 5A. A "qualifying child" means a person under the age of 18  who
       is either a British citizen  or  who  has  lived  in  the  UK  for  a
       continuous period of seven years or more.  The requirement in  s.117A
       to "have regard" to the considerations in s.117B  means  a  court  or
       Tribunal must have regard to those considerations in  substance  even
       if no explicit reference is made to  the  statutory  provisions  (see
       Dube (ss.117A - 117D) [2015] UKUT 90 (IAC)).

   19. As a consequence, the court or Tribunal is required to give  the  new
       Rules (at [47]): "greater weight than as merely a starting point  for
       the consideration of the  proportionality  of  an  interference  with
       Article 8 rights" (see also SSHD v SS (Congo) and Others [2015]  EWCA
       Civ 387).

   20. Immigration Rules

           'EX.1. This paragraph applies if

                (a)

                    (i)    the applicant has a genuine and subsisting
                    parental relationship with a child who-

                        (aa)   is under the age of 18 years;

                        (bb)   is in the UK;

                        (cc)   is a British Citizen or has lived in the UK
                        continuously for at least the 7 years immediately
                        preceding the date of application; and

                    (ii)   it would not be reasonable to expect the child to
                    leave the UK; or

                (b)    the applicant has a genuine and subsisting
                relationship with a partner who is in the UK and is a
                British Citizen, settled in the UK or in the UK with refugee
                leave or humanitarian protection, and there are
                insurmountable obstacles to family life with that partner
                continuing outside the UK.'

           'Paragraph 276ADE (in force from 9 July 2012 to 27 July 2014)

           The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave  to  remain
           on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the date of
           application, the applicant:

                (i)    does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in
                Section S-LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1.  in  Appendix
                FM; and

                (ii)   has made a valid application for leave to  remain  on
                the grounds of private life in the UK; and

                ...

                (iv)    is  under  the  age  of  18  years  and  has   lived
                continuously in the UK for at east 7 years (discounting  any
                period of imprisonment) and it would be not be reasonable to
                expect the applicant to leave the UK ...'

Discussion

   21. The only real challenge in respect of the findings of the  First-tier
       Tribunal judge are in relation to  the  third  appellant  Mahad.  The
       findings in relation to the fourth appellant are not  challenged  and
       neither are  the  findings  in  relation  to  the  first  and  second
       appellants.

   22. The judge has engaged with the evidence in some detail. At paragraphs
       9-26 of the decision the evidence and contradictory factors  are  set
       out. A judge does not have to set out every piece of evidence that he
       has  considered  and  weighed  in  the   balance   when   considering
       proportionality. However, the judge has not engaged in any meaningful
       way with a consideration of the best interests  of  the  children  in
       this case. Whilst a judge does not need to refer to section 55  there
       does need to be  a  consideration  of  the  child's  best  interests.
       Although the respondent's reasons for refusal letter engages with the
       Secretary of State's  duty  under  s55  the  judge  appears  to  have
       referred only in passing to the consideration given to  Mahad's  best
       interests  by  the  Secretary  of  State  and  has  not  reached  any
       conclusion as to what the best interests are identified to  be.   For
       example at paragraph 7 the judge states:

           "The respondent considered its obligations under Section  55  of
           the Borders, citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 in respect  of
           the  children's  welfare,  but   there   were   no   exceptional
           circumstances justifying leave  outside  the  Immigration  Rules
           under Article 8 European Convention on Human Rights."




   23. At paragraph 35 the judge states:

           "...  I  have  taken  into  account  the  Secretary  of  State's
           responsibilities under section 55 of [the] 2009 Act to  consider
           the welfare of the children and much emphasis  was  put  by  the
           appellants' representative on the rights of the third child, who
           is clearly well integrated into school and social  life  in  the
           UK, having arrived in the UK aged 5 and now being aged 13."

   24. I find that the judge has materially erred by failing to consider the
       best interests of the children. It is not clear that another tribunal
       would be likely to have arrived at the same conclusions.

Re-making the decision

   25. As I set out above the grounds of appeal and the submissions made  by
       Ms Dogra concern the third appellant. There is no  challenge  to  the
       findings in relation to the other appellants other  than  if  Mahad's
       appeal succeeds then the other  appellants  should  be  permitted  to
       remain in the UK.

   26. In this case the third appellant had  not  lived  in  the  UK  for  a
       continuous period of 7 years at the time of the application. Although
       the grounds of appeal assert that Paragraph EX.1 applies  Ms  Dogra's
       submissions were that the appellants did not satisfy the  Immigration
       Rules. As Mahad had not lived in the UK for a continuous period of  7
       years EX.1 and 276ADE(iv) are not satisfied. The appellants  fail  to
       satisfy the requirements of the Immigration  Rules  and  I  therefore
       accept Ms Dogra's submission that the child's best interests can only
       be considered when considering Article 8 outside of  the  Immigration
       Rules. The best interests of the  children  were  considered  by  the
       respondent when considering exceptional circumstances.

   27. The correct approach to determining a claim under Article 8  is  that
       set out in R v SSHD ex parte Razgar [2004] UKHL 27. A Tribunal should
       consider 5 questions, namely:

           "(i)   Will the proposed removal be an interference by a  public
           authority with the exercise of the applicant's right to  respect
           for his private or (as the case may be) family life?

           (ii)   If so, will such interference have consequences  of  such
           gravity as potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?

           (iii)  If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

           (iv)   If so, is such interference  necessary  in  a  democratic
           society in the interests of national security, public safety  or
           the economic wellbeing of the country,  for  the  prevention  of
           disorder or crime, for the protection of health  or  morals,  or
           for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others?

           (v)     If  so,  is  such  interference  proportionate  to   the
           legitimate public end sought to be achieved?"

   28. In this case I do not consider it necessary to consider the  first  4
       questions posed as it is not disputed that there is  a  private  life
       and that a decision that would result in Mahad being removed from the
       UK is an interference with his private life, that the consequences in
       the circumstances of this case are of such gravity to engage  Article
       8, that the interference  is  in  accordance  with  the  law  and  is
       necessary. The core issue is to determine what Mahad's best interests
       are, to consider whether it would be reasonable for him to leave  the
       UK and whether the  interference  in  Mahad's  Article  8  rights  is
       proportionate to a legitimate aim.

   29. In ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4 the Supreme Court noted that  s
       55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009  was  enacted
       to incorporate the UK's obligation under article 3(1) United  Nations
       Convention  on  the  Rights  of  the  Child  that,  'In  all  actions
       concerning children, whether undertaken by public or  private  social
       welfare institutions, courts of law,  administrative  authorities  or
       legislative bodies, the best  interests  of  the  child  shall  be  a
       primary consideration.'

   30. The court held:

           "26.   ... This did not mean (as it would do in other  contexts)
           that identifying their best interests would lead inexorably to a
           decision in conformity with those interests. Provided  that  the
           Tribunal did not treat any  other  consideration  as  inherently
           more significant than the best interests  of  the  children,  it
           could conclude that the strength  of  the  other  considerations
           outweighed them. The important thing, therefore, is to  consider
           those best interests first. ...

           ...

           33.     We  now  have  a  much  greater  understanding  of   the
           importance of these issues in assessing the  overall  well-being
           of the child. In making  the  proportionality  assessment  under
           article 8, the best interests of the child  must  be  a  primary
           consideration. This means that they must  be  considered  first.
           They can, of course, be outweighed by the cumulative  effect  of
           other  considerations.  In   this   case,   the   countervailing
           considerations  were  the  need  to  maintain  firm   and   fair
           immigration  control,  coupled  with  the   mother's   appalling
           immigration history and the precariousness of her position  when
           family life was created. But, as the  Tribunal  rightly  pointed
           out, the children were not to be blamed for that. ..."

   31. In Azimi-Moayed and  others  (decisions  affecting  children;  onward
       appeals) [2013] UKUT 197(IAC) the Upper Tribunal in  considering  the
       case law in relation to decisions affecting children  identified  the
       following principles to assist in the determination of appeals  where
       children are affected by the appealed decisions:

           "i)    As a starting point  it  is  in  the  best  interests  of
           children to be with both their parents and if both  parents  are
           being removed from the United Kingdom then  the  starting  point
           suggests that so should dependent  children  who  form  part  of
           their household unless there are reasons to the contrary.

           ii)    It is generally in the interests of children to have both
           stability and continuity of social and educational provision and
           the benefit of growing up in the cultural norms of  the  society
           to which they belong.

           iii)   Lengthy residence in a country other than  the  state  of
           origin  can  lead  to  development  of   social   cultural   and
           educational ties that it would be inappropriate to  disrupt,  in
           the absence of compelling reason to the contrary.  What  amounts
           to lengthy residence is not  clear  cut  but  past  and  present
           policies have identified seven years as a relevant period.

           iv)    Apart from the terms of published policies and rules, the
           Tribunal notes that seven years from age four is  likely  to  be
           more significant to a child than the first seven years of  life.
           Very young children are focussed on their  parents  rather  than
           their peers and are adaptable.

           v) Short periods of residence, particularly ones  without  leave
           or the reasonable expectation of leave to enter or remain, while
           claims are promptly considered, are unlikely  to  give  rise  to
           private life deserving of respect in the absence of  exceptional
           factors.  In any event, protection of the economic well-being of
           society amply justifies removal in such cases."

   32. In EV (Philippines) and Others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874 it was held
       that a decision as to what is in the best interests of children  will
       depend on a number of factors such as (a) their age; (b)  the  length
       of time that they have been here; (c) how  long  they  have  been  in
       education; (c) what stage their education has reached;  (d)  to  what
       extent they have become distanced from the country  to  which  it  is
       proposed that they return; (e) how renewable their connection with it
       may be; (f) to what extent they  will  have  linguistic,  medical  or
       other difficulties in adapting to life in that country; and  (g)  the
       extent to which the course proposed will interfere with their  family
       life or their rights (if they have any) as British citizens.

   33. I have considered the factors identified  in  ZH  (Tanzania),  Azimi-
       Moayed and EV Philippines set out above. Mahad is  now  13  years  of
       age. He entered the UK when he was 5 � years of age. He has  been  in
       education in the UK for just over 8 years. It  is  generally  in  the
       interests of children to have both stability and continuity of social
       and educational provision. Mahad is not however at a  critical  stage
       in his education.  It was stated that Mahad is at an  age  where  his
       social and school connection are more important than his  family.  It
       was stated that he can no longer remember Pakistan and has no ties or
       connections there. Mahad in his letter to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
       sets out several reasons as to why he wants to remain in the  UK.  He
       is very happy with his school and the teachers from whom he  gains  a
       great deal of support. The school has excellent facilities.  All  his
       friends are here and he has no friends in Pakistan. He says  that  he
       knows that he lived in Pakistan before because his parents  told  him
       but he does not remember it  any  more.  He  says  that  his  'mom's'
       brothers and sisters and his grandparents are all in the  UK  and  he
       sees them all the time. His father's family are also  here.  He  also
       has friends at the basketball and tennis club. In  oral  evidence  at
       the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal it  became  apparent  that
       there were some material inconsistencies in  the  evidence.  In  fact
       Mahad's maternal grandparents and other relatives are in Pakistan and
       Mahad has visited Pakistan for  holidays  and  has  stayed  with  his
       maternal grandparents there. There  was  an  inconsistency  with  the
       evidence from Mahad's school report which stated that  Urdu  was  his
       first language.

   34. Mahad has  clearly  has  had  an  opportunity  to  develop  a  social
       awareness and to have built up independent friendships outside of his
       family as is demonstrated by the witness evidence. Although he speaks
       some  Urdu  I  accept  that  he  would  experience  some   linguistic
       difficulties in re-locating to Pakistan.

   35. It is in the best interests of children to grow up  in  the  cultural
       norms of the society  to  which  they  belong.  It  is  in  the  best
       interests of children to be with  both  their  parents  and  if  both
       parents are being removed from the United Kingdom then  the  starting
       point suggests that so should dependent children  who  form  part  of
       their household unless there are reasons to the contrary. Mahad is  a
       national of Pakistan as are his  parents.  I  consider  that  Mahad's
       residence in the UK is not so lengthy that would be inappropriate  to
       disrupt the development of his social, cultural and educational ties.
       He has spent some of his formative years here but he is still  at  an
       age where his family is central to his well-being. Although 7+  years
       residence is a weighty factor, there was never an expectation that he
       would remain in the UK  permanently  as  his  parents  entered  on  a
       temporary  basis.  This  factor  cannot  be  held  against  Mahad  in
       assessing his best interests as he had no knowledge of  his  parent's
       immigration status. However, this does not mean that this  factor  is
       irrelevant. In MH (Pakistan) [2011] CSOH 143, at  Paragraph  56,  the
       court held:

           "The propriety of taking account  of  immigration  history,  the
           precariousness of the position when a relationship  was  entered
           into, and the need to maintain immigration control is  confirmed
           by Lady Hale at paragraph 33 in ZH (Tanzania)."

   36. Both parents are from Pakistan and have been here for 8  years.  They
       came to the UK on a temporary basis. Mrs Kalsoom  obtained  leave  to
       enter as a Tier 4 student and was subsequently granted Tier  2  leave
       until January 2016 but that was curtailed in 2014 at which point  she
       had no leave to remain in the UK. The appellant have a family network
       and connections in Pakistan. They do not meet the requirements of the
       Immigration Rules for leave to remain. Their ties  to  Pakistan  have
       been maintained and it is reasonable to expect that  the  benefit  of
       the education and work experience that they have had in the  UK  will
       enhance their opportunities in Pakistan.

   37. In the case of E-A (Article 8 -  best  interests  of  child)  Nigeria
       [2011] UKUT 00315 (IAC) it was held that:

           "35.   In our judgment, putting together the various sources  of
           guidance noted above, the correct starting point in  considering
           the welfare and best interests of a young child would be that it
           is in the best interests of a child to live with and be  brought
           up by his or her parents, subject to  any  very  strong  contra-
           indication. Here the parents and the children are Nigerian.  The
           parents came here for the temporary  purpose  of  study  by  the
           first appellant and neither they  nor  their  children  had  any
           basis of expectation that they would be allowed  to  make  their
           future home here. The  children  have  no  connection  with  the
           United  Kingdom  by  way  of  nationality  or  any  other  nexus
           independent or their residence as being  part  of  the  parents'
           household.

           ...

           43.    It is important to recall that  although  the  appellants
           may all have been here lawfully, they  came  to  the  UK  for  a
           temporary purpose with no expectation of being able to remain in
           the UK. The third appellant happened to be born in the UK whilst
           her parents were here for a temporary purpose.  The  expectation
           was that they  would  all  return  to  Nigeria  once  the  first
           appellant's  studies  were  completed.  Those  who  have   their
           families with them during a period of study in the UK must do so
           in the light of that expectation of return."

   38. At Paragraph 10 of MH Pakistan [2011] CSOH 143the court held:

           "None of this was a matter of controversy  between  the  parties
           and I noted that in one of the cases to which I was referred, ZH
           (Tanzania) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011] 2
           WLR 148, Baroness Hale of Richmond considered how these  factors
           would apply in an ordinary immigration case where a  person  was
           to be removed because he has no right to be  or  remain  in  the
           country.  At  paragraph  18  she  noted  that   the   Convention
           jurisprudence recognised that the starting point was  the  right
           of all states to control the entry and residence of aliens ..."

   39. I find that the best interests of Mahad are to be cared for by and to
       live with his parents. He has gained  the  benefits  of  8  years  of
       education in the UK which will enhance his opportunities in Pakistan.
       The Secretary of State noted in the reasons for refusal  letter  that
       Pakistan has a functioning education system.  Mahad  is  not  British
       citizen and has no rights to be educated in the UK. I do not consider
       that it would be inappropriate to disrupt level of development of his
       social cultural and educational  ties  as  there  are  countervailing
       factors to the contrary.  Whilst I recognise that a move to  Pakistan
       will require some adaptation to a new home and a  new  school  he  is
       still at an age where he is adaptable. He will be  supported  by  his
       parents. He is part of what is obviously a close knit and  supportive
       family. As set out in E-A neither he nor his parents had any basis or
       expectation that they would be allowed  to  make  their  future  home
       here.

   40. I am mandated by Parliament to give effect to section 117 of the 2002
       Act. Section 117A is engaged because I am required to decide  whether
       the impugned decision to refuse leave  to  remain  would  breach  the
       right to respect for private life under  Article  8  enjoyed  by  the
       appellants.

   41. Sufficient weight must be accorded to  the  public  interest  in  the
       maintenance of effective immigration  controls  (s117B(1)).  In  this
       case the appellants do not meet the requirements for leave to  remain
       in the UK.  Further,  sufficient  weight  must  be  accorded  to  the
       interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom,  in  that
       persons who seek to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  must  be
       financially independent  (s117B(3)).  The  appellants  have  not  had
       recourse to public funds. Little  weight  is  to  be  accorded  to  a
       private  life  formed  when  the  person's  Immigration   status   is
       precarious (s117B (5)). Although, as I set out above, the  precarious
       status of Mahad's stay in the UK cannot be held against him it is not
       an irrelevant factor when  considering  the  proportionality  of  the
       decision to remove the appellant.

   42. However, section 117B(6) is of a different  nature  and  is  directly
       relevant. In Treebhawon and  others  (section  117B(6))  [2015]  UKUT
       00674 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal held, at paragraph 20  that :

           "...

           Within this discrete regime, the statute proclaims unequivocally
           that where these  three  conditions  are  satisfied  the  public
           interest does not require the removal of  the  parent  from  the
           United Kingdom. Ambiguity there is none."

   43. In the headnote in that case the position was set out as

           "(i)   ... In any case where the conditions enshrined in section
           117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  are
           satisfied, the section 117B(6) public interest prevails over the
           public interests identified in section 117B (1)-(3)."

   44. In considering section 117B(6) therefore the only  real  question  in
       this case is whether it would not be reasonable for  Mahad  to  leave
       the UK. The public interest in immigration control is not relevant.

   45. The Court of Appeal stated in VW (Uganda):

           "19.   ...  While it is of course possible that the facts of any
           one case may disclose an insurmountable obstacle to removal, the
           inquiry into  proportionality  is  not  a  search  for  such  an
           obstacle and does  not  end  with  its  elimination.   It  is  a
           balanced judgment of what can  reasonably  be  expected  in  the
           light of all the material facts ...

           ...

           24.    EB (Kosovo) now confirms that the  material  question  in
           gauging the proportionality of a removal  or  deportation  which
           will or may break up a family unless the family  itself  decamps
           is  not  whether  there  is  an  insuperable  obstacle  to  this
           happening but whether it is reasonable to expect the  family  to
           leave with the appellant ..."

   46. For the reasons I have already set out above I  have  found  that  it
       would be reasonable for Mahad to leave the UK with his  family.  This
       is so even in the absence of any of the countervailing factors that I
       identified.

   47. Having weighed all the factors set out above and having found that it
       is reasonable to expect Mahad  to  leave  the  UK  I  find  that  the
       interference with his  Article  8  rights  is  proportionate  to  the
       legitimate public end sought  to  be  achieved  namely,  the  aim  of
       preserving the economic well-being of the  country.  The  refusal  to
       grant the appellant leave to remain in the UK  is  proportionate  and
       therefore the appeal is allowed and the Secretary of State's decision
       stands.

   48. I have considered whether any parties require the  protection  of  an
       anonymity direction. No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously.
       Having considered  all  the  circumstances  and  evidence  I  do  not
       consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

Decision

   49. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved  the  making  of  an
       error of law.  I set aside that decision.

   50. I re-make the decision. The appellants' appeals  are  dismissed.  The
       Secretary of State's decision stands.


Signed   P M Ramshaw   Date 4 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw
