
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/37970/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 September 2015                 |On 24 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     Mrs OPHELIA PRIYANTHI JENOLUCKSHAN
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Nizami (counsel) instructed by Rasiah & Co,
solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.    The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal  but
in order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in  the
First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a
decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Suffield-Thompson,  promulgated  on  2
March 2015.

Background

3     The appellant is a Sri Lankan national, born on 14  July  1992.  On  6
August 2014, the appellant applied for leave to remain as the partner  of  a
person present and settled in the UK.

4      On  19  September  2014,  the  respondent  refused  the   appellant's
application and decided that the appellant should be removed from the UK  by
way of directions under Section 47 of the 2006 Act.

The Judge's Decision

5     The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal.  First  Tier
Tribunal Judge  Suffield-Thompson  ("the  judge")  allowed  the  appellant's
appeal both under the Immigration Rules and on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

6     Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 5 May 2015, First  Tier  Tribunal
Judge Levin granted permission to appeal, stating inter alia:

    "... both the grounds and the  decision  disclose  arguable  errors  of
    law".

7     Ms A Nizami, Counsel for the appellant  asked  to  address  me  first,
even though this is the respondent's appeal. Ms Nizami told me that she  had
had discussions with Mr Jarvis, for the respondent, and  accepted  that  the
decision contained material errors  in  law  and  asked  that  the  case  be
remitted to the First Tier Tribunal for a full hearing.

8     Mr Jarvis adopted the terms of the grounds of appeal and told me  that
there were inadequate findings in fact which have deprived the appellant  of
a fair hearing. For that reason, he asked that the case be remitted  to  the
First Tier Tribunal to be heard of new.

Analysis

9     Between [23] and [28], the judge considered the appellant's  case  but
it is not clear from the contents of [23] to [28] whether  the  judge  finds
that either family life or private life exists for  this  appellant  in  the
UK. It is not clear if the judge was  considering  the  terms  of  Paragraph
276ADE or the terms of Appendix FM.

10    [23] and [26] are little more than a summary of submissions that  were
made to the judge. In [27], the judge finds that the appellant  fulfils  the
requirements of Appendix FM, paragraph EX.1, but the judge does not set  out
adequate  findings  in  fact  to  demonstrate  how  she  arrives   at   that
conclusion.

11    At [28], the judge appears to pursue the five stage test  set  out  in
Razgar but does not  set  out  findings  in  fact  to  support  the  judge's
conclusions on proportionality.

12    In MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC), it  was
held that

    (i) It was axiomatic that a determination disclosed clearly the reasons
    for a tribunal's decision.

    (ii) If a tribunal found oral evidence to be implausible, incredible or
    unreliable or a document to be  worth  no  weight  whatsoever,  it  was
    necessary to say so in the determination and for such  findings  to  be
    supported by reasons. A bare statement that a witness was not  believed
    or that a document was afforded no weight was unlikely to  satisfy  the
    requirement to give reasons.

Conclusion

13    I find that the judge's decision is  tainted  by  material  errors  of
law. The Judge's decision  cannot  stand  and  must  be  set  aside  in  its
entirety. All matters to be redetermined afresh.

14.    Under  Part  3  paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Practice
Statement of the 25th of September 2012 the case  may  be  remitted  to  the
First Tier Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

    (a)    the effect of the error has been to deprive a party  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other  opportunity  for  that
    party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or



    (b)    the nature or extent of  any  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
    necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such
    that, having regard to the  overriding  objective  in  rule  2,  it  is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

15.   In this case I have  determined  that  the  case  should  be  remitted
because both parties' representatives agree that the Appellant did not  have
a fair hearing. In this case none of the findings of fact are to  stand  and
the matter will be a complete re hearing.

16.   I consequently remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal to  be
heard before any First-tier  judge  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
Suffield-Thompson.


Signed      Date 23 September 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

