
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/37499/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2nd June 2015                              |On 26th June 2015             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KELLY

                                   Between

                         miss dorothy doreen edwards
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Hannan, Counsel instructed by Corban Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

[This decision was delivered orally in the presence of the  parties.  It  is
therefore couched in the present tense]

 1. This is an appeal by Miss Dorothy Doreen Edwards against a decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Bartlett, sitting at Hatton Cross, which  was
    promulgated on 27th January 2015.  The background to the appeal  is  as
    follows.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Jamaica who was born on 18th August 1965.
     She applied for leave to remain in the United Kingdom on  private  and
    family life grounds.  In view of the point that is taken in this appeal
    the following dates are relevant, indeed critical, to  the  outcome  of
    this appeal.

 3. I  shall  assume  for  these  purposes  that  the  Appellant  made  her
    application, albeit that there is some dispute about it, on  18th  June
    2012.  Her application was refused on  11th  September  2014  and,  for
    reasons that it is unnecessary to  consider,  a  separate  decision  to
    remove her was made on 15th September 2014.

 4. In considering the Appellant's application, the judge applied what  are
    commonly referred to as 'the new Rules', which came into effect on  9th
    July 2012.  Those Rules,  at  least  in  part,  sought  to  codify  the
    jurisprudence relating to Article 8 of the European Convention on Human
    Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.  As far as family life  is  concerned,
    the relevant  provisions  are  to  be  found  in  Appendix  FM  to  the
    Immigration Rules.  So far as private life, with which this  appeal  is
    principally concerned, the Secretary of  State  sought  to  codify  the
    Article 8 jurisprudence in paragraph 276ADE.

 5. Somewhat ironically, in view of the point  that  is  now  taken,  Judge
    Bartlett recorded the following at paragraph 13 of her decision:

         The parties agreed that the relevant version of paragraph 276ADE(1)
         to  be  considered  was  the  one  which  required   at   paragraph
         276ADE(1)(vi) that an individual who is over the age  of  18  years
         but  without  20  years  continuous  residency  ...  has  no   ties
         (cultural, social and family) to the  country  to  which  she  must
         return. [Emphasis added]

    The irony of this stems from the fact  that  the  agreement  which  the
    judge thus recorded is not only now in dispute, but it also lies at the
    very heart of this appeal.

 6. The Appellant now says that the judge was wrong to  consider  paragraph
    276ADE (which forms part of the new Rules) at  all.   Put  simply,  the
    argument that is now advanced is that because the application was  made
    before the introduction of the new Rules, on 9th July 2012, the general
    rule that new Rules apply to pending applications  (albeit  that  those
    Rules were not in force at the date of the application) is one that was
    displaced by the transitional provisions of those Rules.

 7. In support of this argument, reliance is placed upon  the  decision  of
    the Court of Appeal in Edgehill and others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ  402,
    where it was held that although the general rule (first established  by
    the House of Lords in Odelola) is that new Rules will apply to  pending
    applications, that general rule is displaced in the case  of  paragraph
    276ADE by the specific transitional provisions of the Immigration Rules
    themselves.   In  Edgehill,  this  was  held  to  be   an   unqualified
    proposition of law.  However, what had not been drawn to the  Court  of
    Appeal's attention was that by the time it had decided that appeal  the
    Secretary  of  State  had  already  thought  better  of  it,  and   had
    accordingly amended the transitional provisions so  as  effectively  to
    restore the general rule that was  first  recognised  in  the  case  of
    Odelola.  Thus it was that the issue once again came before  the  Court
    of Appeal, this time in the appeal of Singh v Secretary  of  State  for
    the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 74.

 8. Although I shall later consider the other matters that  are  raised  on
    behalf of the Appellant, for the first time today, it  is  my  judgment
    the only point that was raised in the Grounds of Appeal is one that  is
    disposed of in paragraph 56 of the Court of Appeal's judgment in Singh,
    wherein Lord Justice Underhill stated the position under the  Rules  to
    be as follows:

         1.   When HC 194  first  came  into  force  on  9  July  2012,  the
             Secretary of State was not entitled to take into  account  the
             provisions of the new Rules (either directly  or  by  treating
             them as  a  statement  of  her  current  policy)  when  making
             decisions on private or family life applications made prior to
             that date but not yet decided.  That is because, as decided in
             Edgehill, 'the implementation provision' set out at  paragraph
             7 above displaces the usual Odelola principle.

         2.   But that position was altered by HC565 - specifically  by  the
             introduction of the new paragraph A277C - with effect  from  6
             September 2012.  As from that date the Secretary of State  was
             entitled to take into account the provisions  of  Appendix  FM
             and paragraphs 276ADE-276DH in deciding private or family life
             applications even if they were made prior to 9 July 2012.  The
             result is that the law as it was held to be in  Edgehill  only
             obtained as regards decisions taken in  the  two-month  window
             between 9 July and 6 September 2012. [Emphasis added].

 9. Returning to the facts of this case,  the  immigration  decisions  that
    were the subject of appeal to  Judge  Bartlett  (whether  that  be  the
    refusal of further leave to remain or indeed the decision to remove the
    Appellant) were  both  taken  outside  the  parameters  of  the  window
    described in Singh (above).  It therefore follows that, notwithstanding
    the fact that I have treated the application in this case as  predating
    the introduction of the  new  Rules,  it  remains  the  case  that  the
    Secretary of State was entitled to consider this application under  the
    new Rules and that the Tribunal was therefore right to consider  it  in
    the same way.  The Tribunal did not therefore make any  error  of  law,
    whether material or otherwise.  That is sufficient to dispose  of  this
    appeal in relation to the matters raised in the grounds.

10. Today, however, Ms Hannan of Counsel has raised what are in effect  new
    arguments.  In my judgment  they  stray  well  beyond  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal, as indeed did the  reasoning  of  Judge  Hollingworth  when  he
    granted permission to appeal. Neither seem to me to bear  any  relation
    to the point that was being raised in the grounds  of  appeal.  Rather,
    they  relate  to  what  may  be  described   as   general   Article   8
    considerations.

11. Ms Hannan's further submissions may be summarised thus.

12. Firstly, Judge Bartlett erred in law by not undertaking  a  full  free-
    standing Article 8 assessment of the Appellant's case.  Secondly,  even
    if she is wrong in that submission and the judge was right to apply  an
    intermediate test of 'compelling circumstances' before  embarking  upon
    such an exercise, there were in fact compelling circumstances  in  this
    case that warranted a grant of discretionary leave  to  remain  outside
    the Rules.  I take those points in turn.

13. The first point, namely that the judge erred in failing to undertake  a
    full assessment under Article 8, is one that is  in  reality  dependent
    upon the success of the point that was raised in the Grounds of Appeal;
    namely, that 'the old Rules', under which no  provision  was  made  for
    consideration under Article 8, should have been applied.  However, that
    argument cannot succeed because I have already held that the new  Rules
    did apply at the date of the Secretary of State's decision.  It follows
    that the judge was right not to proceed immediately to a full Article 8
    assessment, but instead firstly to consider the provisions of  the  new
    Rules, and then to  ask  herself  whether  there  were  any  compelling
    circumstances that merited consideration  outside  the  Rules  [see  SS
    (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387].

14. I turn to Ms Hannan's second argument, which was  that  there  were  in
    fact such compelling circumstances.  However the only circumstances  to
    which Ms Hannan was  able  to  point  were,  firstly,  the  Appellant's
    fifteen years' residence in the United Kingdom, secondly,  the  private
    and family life that she claimed to have established during that period
    and, thirdly, the lack of any social, cultural and in particular family
    ties to Jamaica.  However, these were all factors that the Tribunal had
    already considered under paragraph 276ADE of the Rules and they  cannot
    therefore be said to be 'compelling  circumstances'  that  lie  outside
    them.

15. So far as the existence  of  social,  cultural  and  more  particularly
    family ties to Jamaica were concerned, Ms Hannan  also  suggested  that
    there was no evidence  to  support  the  Tribunal's  finding  that  the
    appellant could be accommodated by a number of  her  grown-up  children
    who still reside in Jamaica.  The Appellant's case  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal had been that she had no contact with those children  and
    could not therefore turn to  them  for  any  kind  of  support,  be  it
    emotional or financial. However, the judge disbelieved that  claim  for
    good and sufficient reasons, not least of which was the fact  that  the
    Appellant had given inconsistent evidence as to whether she remained in
    contact with her children.

16. I mention these matters for the sake of completeness. I wish however to
    stress that the reason that I have ultimately decided to  dismiss  this
    appeal is because the sole issue that  is  raised  in  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal - that the judge had  considered  the  appeal  under  the  wrong
    version of the  Rules  -  is  clearly  misconceived  in  light  of  the
    judgments of the Court of Appeal in the appeal of Singh (above).

Notice of Decision

17. I am accordingly left with no alternative but to dismiss this appeal.

18. No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Date
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kelly

