
[pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38960/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 25th February 2016                    |On 24th March 2016                  |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               meer wais islam
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Shah of 786 Law Associates


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against the decision of Judge Malone  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 12th August 2015.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the  Claimant  before  the
    FTT and I will refer to him as the Claimant.

 3. The Claimant is a citizen of Afghanistan born 1st January 1967.

 4. The Claimant applied for and was granted a Tier 1  (Entrepreneur)  visa
    valid until 5th March  2016.   He  first  entered  the  United  Kingdom
    pursuant to that visa on 19th January 2013.

 5. On 25th September 2014 the Claimant was re-entering the United  Kingdom
    at London Heathrow when he was interviewed.  He was given  twenty  days
    temporary admission, and interviewed again on 2nd October 2014.

 6. On 2nd October 2014 the Secretary of State refused the  Claimant  leave
    to enter the United Kingdom.  This was because it was contended that he
    had with his application for the Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) visa,  submitted
    a TOEIC certificate from Educational  Testing  Service  (ETS)  and  the
    Secretary of State  believed  that  the  certificate  was  fraudulently
    obtained.  The Secretary of State relied upon paragraph  321A(2)  being
    satisfied that the Claimant had used false documents in order to obtain
    leave to enter, and paragraph 321A(1) on the  basis  of  employment  of
    deception amounting to a  significant  change  in  circumstances.   For
    those reasons the Claimant  was  refused  leave  to  enter  the  United
    Kingdom, and his existing leave was cancelled.

 7. The Claimant's appeal was heard by the FTT on 29th  June  2015.   After
    hearing evidence from the Claimant and his brother, the FTT found  that
    the Secretary of State had failed to justify the  cancellation  of  the
    leave to enter, and described the evidence relied upon by the Secretary
    of State, both specific and generic, as  being  "woefully  inadequate."
    The appeal was allowed.  The Secretary of State applied for  permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal relying upon two grounds which  may  be
    summarised as follows.

 8. Firstly it was contended that the FTT failed to have regard to relevant
    and material evidence.  The Secretary of State had relied upon specific
    evidence, that being an invalidation notice issued by  ETS,  confirming
    that the English language tests taken by  the  Claimant  were  invalid.
    There was no reference to this evidence in the FTT  decision.   It  was
    contended that the FTT had regarded the interview with the Claimant  as
    the only specific evidence.

 9. Secondly it was contended  that  the  FTT  had  erred  in  relation  to
    paragraph 321A(1) on the basis that even if deception  was  not  found,
    the  Claimant's  English  language  test  had  been  invalidated,   and
    therefore he did not have  an  English  language  qualification.   This
    amounted to a change of circumstances and the FTT should have so found.

10. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Nicholson of the FTT  in  the
    following terms;




         2.   The Appellant's leave was cancelled on the grounds that he had
             submitted a false ETS English language certificate.
         3.   Ground 1 contends that the judge erred in failing to  properly
             consider the Respondent's evidence -  in  particular  the  ETS
             printout confirmation that the tests taken were invalid.
         4.   The judge stated at  paragraph  23  that  the  Respondent  had
             concluded that  the  certificate  was  false,  based  on  both
             generic and specific evidence.  The judge did not identity the
             actual  specific  evidence  but  at  paragraph  24  the  judge
             referred to the Respondent's  generic  evidence  from  Rebecca
             Collings and Peter Millington.   At  paragraph  25  the  judge
             pointed out that this evidence had been considered  in  R  (on
             the application of Gazi) v SSHD (ETS -  judicial  review)  IJR
             [2015] UKUT 00327 by Mr Justice  McCloskey.   The  judge  then
             added  that  Mr  Justice  McCloskey   "found   it   thoroughly
             inadequate  to  justify  a  finding  of  deceit  against   the
             individual in possession of what he claimed was a valid  TOEIC
             certificate."
         5.   In fact at paragraph 35 of R (on the application of  Gazi)  Mr
             Justice McCloskey found that the evidence had the hallmarks of
             care,  thoroughness,  underlying  expertise   and   sufficient
             reliability  such  as  to  warrant  an  assessment   that   an
             applicant's TOEIC had be procured by deception.
         6.   Whilst Mr Justice McCloskey did not suggest that  the  generic
             evidence was determinative and, at  paragraph  14,  he  stated
             that  all  cases   involving   ETS   certificates   would   be
             "unavoidably fact sensitive", it is arguable  that  the  judge
             erred in relation to the Respondent's evidence by rejecting it
             for the reasons given at paragraph 25 and by paying no heed to
             the specific document from ETS.
         7.   Permission is therefore granted on  this  ground.   I  do  not
             refuse permission on the other grounds.

11. Directions were subsequently  issued  that  there  should  be  an  oral
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal to  ascertain  whether  the  FTT  had
    erred in law such that the decision must be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

Preliminary Issues

12. Mr Shah confirmed that no response pursuant to rule 24 of the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008  had  been  submitted,  but  the
    Claimant's position was that the FTT had not erred, and reliance  would
    be placed upon a skeleton  argument  contained  at  pages  2-9  of  the
    Claimant's bundle comprising 28 pages which the Tribunal  had  received
    on 18th February 2016.

13. I observed that reliance was placed upon two unreported Upper  Tribunal
    decisions and that Practice Direction 11 which deals with  citation  of
    unreported determinations did not appear to have been complied with.  I
    asked Mr  Shah  whether  he  needed  some  time  to  consider  Practice
    Direction 11, but he advised that he did not, and that he did not  seek
    to rely upon unreported Tribunal decisions.





The Secretary of State's Submissions

14. Mr Duffy relied upon the grounds contained within the  application  for
    permission to appeal.  I was  asked  to  find  that  the  FTT  had  not
    referred to the specific evidence  relied  upon  by  the  Secretary  of
    State, and the relevance of that evidence was explained in the  generic
    witness statements made by M Harold, R Collings and P Millington.

15. In addition the FTT had erred by misinterpreting the decision in Gazi.

16. Moreover, leaving aside the issue of deception, it was clear  that  ETS
    had  cancelled  the  Claimant's  English  language   certificate,   and
    therefore he no longer held the required qualification, which  amounted
    to a change of circumstances.  The FTT had  erred  by  not  recognising
    this.

The Claimant's Submissions

17. Mr Shah relied upon  his  skeleton  argument,  with  the  exception  of
    reference to unreported Tribunal decisions.  Mr Shah pointed  out  that
    the generic evidence, in the form of the witness statements made  by  R
    Collings and P Millington did not relate to the Appellant at all.

18. In relation to specific evidence, Mr Shah referred to  the  copy  TOEIC
    certificates, the speaking and writing certificate which was issued  on
    15 May 2012, and the listening and reading certificate issued  on  10th
    April 2012, pointing out that it was endorsed on the certificates  that
    "TOEIC scores more than two years old cannot be reported or validated."
     Mr Shah therefore argued that as ETS had  confirmed  that  the  scores
    could not be validated after two years, and more  than  two  years  had
    elapsed between the Claimant taking the tests, and being interviewed by
    the Secretary of State in September and October 2014, it followed  that
    it was not possible for the test scores to be invalidated.

19. In relation to the printout issued by ETS, which it was  contended  the
    FTT had ignored, Mr Shah submitted that this evidence  was  unreliable,
    as the printout was not signed or stamped, and  the  Claimant  did  not
    accept that his English language tests had been invalidated.

The Secretary of State's Response

20. Mr Duffy submitted that the fact that  a  TOEIC  result  could  not  be
    validated  after  two  years  did  not  mean  that  it  could  not   be
    invalidated.  The generic statements explained how  the  investigations
    had been undertaken, and the printout issued by ETS confirmed that  the
    Appellant was one of those individuals whose English language tests had
    been invalidated because of  deception.   The  FTT  had  erred  by  not
    considering the printout evidence.

21. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.



My Findings and Conclusions

22. I find that the FTT materially erred in  law  by  failing  to  consider
    specific evidence relied upon by the Secretary of State, that being the
    printout issued by  ETS  confirming  that  the  English  language  test
    undertaken by the Claimant had been declared invalid.

23. The evidence relied upon by the Secretary of State was in my  view  the
    generic evidence in the form of the witness statements by M  Harold,  R
    Collings and P Millington, together with the printout which  needed  to
    be considered together with that generic evidence, and  the  Claimant's
    interview record.

24. The error made by the FTT was to fail to make any reference or findings
    upon the printout.  If no weight is to be  attached  to  any  evidence,
    there must still be an analysis of the evidence and reasons  given  for
    attaching no weight to it, or finding that it is not probative.   There
    was no such analysis in this case, there was simply no reference to the
    printout whatsoever.

25. In addition I find that the  FTT  dismissed  the  generic  evidence  by
    misinterpreting the conclusions reached in Gazi.  It is  apparent  from
    paragraph 25 of the FTT decision, that it was thought that McCloskey  J
    had found the evidence  of  R  Collings  and  P  Millington  thoroughly
    inadequate to justify a finding of  deceit  against  an  individual  in
    possession of what he  claimed  was  a  valid  TOEIC  certificate.   As
    pointed out by the judge granting permission to  appeal,  if  Gazi  had
    been considered in its entirety, there was reference by McCloskey J  in
    paragraph 35 to the following;

         "It suffices for this Tribunal to be satisfied  that  the  evidence
         upon which the impugned decision was  made  has  the  hallmarks  of
         care,   thoroughness,   underlying   expertise    and    sufficient
         reliability."

26. The failure to have regard to the evidence, and  the  misinterpretation
    of Gazi, amount to material errors of law.  I find  that  those  errors
    have infected the findings made by  the  FTT,  and  conclude  that  the
    decision of the FTT is unsafe and cannot stand.

27. The decision of the FTT is therefore set aside.  Accordingly it is  not
    necessary to go on to  consider  the  second  ground  advanced  by  the
    Secretary of State as to error of law.

28. When I announced at the hearing that I was reserving  my  decision,  Mr
    Shah submitted that if a material error of law was found, it  would  be
    appropriate to remit the appeal back to the FTT.  Mr  Richards  had  no
    submissions to make on that issue.

29. I have considered  paragraph  7  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statements and find that it is appropriate to remit the appeal back  to
    the FTT because of the nature and extent of judicial fact-finding  that
    will be necessary in order for this decision to be remade.

30. The appeal will be heard at the Taylor House  Hearing  Centre  and  the
    parties will be advised of the time and date in due course.  The appeal
    is to be heard by an FTT Judge other than Judge Malone.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that  it
is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal with no findings of fact preserved.

Anonymity

The FTT made  no  anonymity  direction.   There  has  been  no  request  for
anonymity made to the Upper Tribunal and I see no need to make an  anonymity
order.






Signed                              Date 29th February 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The issue of any fee award will need to  be  considered  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal when the appeal is heard again.






Signed                              Date 29th February 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

