
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/38663/2014
                                                               IA/38668/2014
                                                               IA/38670/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Directions given orally and     |
|                                |confirmed in writing on:        |
|On 25 October 2016              |On 6 December 2016              |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before:

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL

                                   Between

                                  Anton [G]
                                  Anne [A]
                                    [M G]
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms. S Pinder, of Counsel, instructed by Polpitiya &
                    Co Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                        (1) DECISION ON JURISDICTION
    (2) NOTICE OF WITHDRAWAL AND REASONS FOR THE TRIBUNAL GIVING CONSENT

 1. These appeals were listed for hearing before me on 2 December  2015,  4
    March 2016 and 25 October 2016. At the hearing on 25 October  2016,  Mr
    Tarlow requested, on behalf of the  respondent,  the  Upper  Tribunal's
    consent to her withdrawal of her decision  to  remove  the  first-named
    appellant dated 10 September 2014. I explain the circumstances and deal
    with this issue at paras 10-14 below.

 2. There is also a jurisdiction issue in this case,  which  I  explain  at
    paras 4-9 below. For the reasons given  at  paras  4-9  below,  I  have
    concluded that Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Birk who,  following  a
    hearing on 15 January 2015 dismissed the appeals of the  appellants  on
    human rights grounds (Article 8), did not have jurisdiction to hear the
    appeals. This means that her decision cannot stand and  should  not  be
    used as a starting point  in  line  with  the  guidance  in  Devaseelan
    (Second appeals - ECHR - Extra-Territorial Effect) Sri Lanka  *  [2002]
    UKIAT 00702  in the event that the First-tier  Tribunal  ("FtT")  hears
    further  appeals  by  the  appellants  in  which  such  guidance  would
    otherwise have been applied.

 3. As matters stood as at 25 October 2016, the second and third appellants
    had not lodged Notices of appeal with the FtT against decisions made by
    the Secretary of State dated 8 March 2016 by which she informed them of
    her intention to remove them as family members of the first  appellant.
    If they were to lodge such appeals now, their appeals would be  out  of
    time. At paras 10-14 below, I explain the proceedings before the  Upper
    Tribunal on 5 December 2015, 4 March 2016 and 25 October 2016. At paras
    16-17 below, I explain why it is my view that any delay on the part  of
    the second and third appellants in lodging the appeals as at 25 October
    2016, the date of this hearing before me, should not  be  held  against
    them, although of course I stress that the issue of whether time should
    be extended is a matter entirely for the FtT when it comes to  consider
    any such applications.

The jurisdiction point

 4. The appellants are nationals of Sri Lanka  born,  respectively,  on  28
    February 1972,  13  November  1979  and  2  December  2003.  The  first
    appellant is the husband of the second appellant and the father of  the
    third. The third appellant is the daughter  of  the  first  and  second
    appellants.

 5. The decisions that were the subject of the decision of Judge Birk  were
    made on 10 September 2014 and are as follows:

    i.   In respect of the first appellant, a decision to remove him  (form
         IS.151B) which stated that he had a right of appeal. This  did  not
         state that his right of appeal was only exercisable  after  he  had
         left the United Kingdom. It followed that, according  to  his  form
         IS.151B, he had an in-country right of appeal.  However,  this  was
         plainly incorrect because para  50  of  the  "reasons  for  refusal
         letter" ("RFRL") which considered the Article 8 claims of all three
         appellants, stated that the human rights claims were  certified  as
         clearly unfounded under s.94(2) of the Nationality, Immigration and
         Asylum Act 2002 (the "2002  Act").  Para  51  of  the  RFRL  stated
         (correctly) that an appeal may not be brought whilst in the  United
         Kingdom.

    ii.  In respect of the second appellant, a decision to remove her (form
         IS.151A Part 2) which stated that she was entitled  to  appeal  the
         decision after she had left the United Kingdom.

    iii. In respect of the third appellant, a decision to remove her  (form
         IS.151A Part 2) which stated that she was entitled  to  appeal  the
         decision after she had left the United Kingdom.

 6. Given that the respondent had issued a clearly unfounded certificate in
    the RFRL, there was no in-country right  of  appeal.   I  am  therefore
    satisfied that the decision to remove addressed to the first  appellant
    (i.e. the document mentioned at para 5.i above) was invalid because the
    notice as to the right of appeal failed to inform him that his right of
    appeal was exercisable after  he  had  left  the  United  Kingdom.  The
    notices in  respect  of  the  second  and  third  appellants  correctly
    informed them that they could exercise their  rights  of  appeal  after
    they had left the United Kingdom.

 7. This was the position as at the date that the decision of the judge was
    promulgated, on 29 January 2015. Unfortunately, the  judge's  attention
    was not drawn to the jurisdiction issue.

 8. Given that the respondent had issued the clearly unfounded certificate,
    none of the appellants had an in-country right  of  appeal.  The  judge
    therefore did not have jurisdiction to entertain the appeals.

 9. For  the  above  reasons,  I  declare  that  the  judge  did  not  have
    jurisdiction to entertain the appeals and that her decision should  not
    be used as a starting point pursuant to Devaseelan in the event of  any
    appeals being brought in which Article 8 is relied upon by any  of  the
    appellants.   I   am   obliged   to   take   the   jurisdiction   issue
    notwithstanding that it was  only  considered  at  the  hearing  on  25
    October 2016 (Virk v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 652).

The withdrawal of the respondent's decisions

10. In error, the jurisdiction issue was not considered at the hearings  on
    2 December 2015 and 4 March 2016. Unfortunately, it was not apparent to
    me then that there was a jurisdiction issue. At the time,  I  took  the
    view (with which the parties did not disagree) that it was  appropriate
    to ascertain whether the respondent had intended to issue  the  clearly
    unfounded certificate at para 50 of the RFRL, with a view  to  avoiding
    the necessity for the parties to commence proceedings again before  the
    FtT. It was my view then (with which  the  parties  did  not  disagree)
    that, if the respondent did not intend to issue the  clearly  unfounded
    certificate, any procedural  irregularity  arising  by  virtue  of  the
    appellants being served decisions that incorrrectly  informed  them  of
    their rights of appeal could be  waived,  pursuant  to  Ravichandran  v
    SSHD, SSHD v Jeyeanthan [1999] EWCA Civ 3010, such that the decision of
    Judge Birk was properly before the Upper Tribunal on appeal.

11. This led to my issuing the Directions at the hearing on 2 December 2015
    (confirmed in writing on 7 December 2015) and Directions dated 4  March
    2016. The following then took place:

    i.   In her email dated 3 December 2015, the respondent stated that the
         certified decisions for the second and third appellants were served
         erroneously and  that  she  would  proceed  to  serve  the  correct
         immigration decisions on them.

    ii.  Under cover of a letter dated 15  December  2015,  the  respondent
         served an amended "Reasons for refusal letter"  dated  15  December
         2015 addressed to the first appellant  (the  "amended  RFRL")  from
         which paras 50-51 of the RFRL had been deleted.

    iii. In respect of  the  second  appellant,  the  respondent  served  a
         "Notice of immigration decision", "Notice of intention to remove  a
         family member" dated 8 March 2016 which informed her that  she  was
         liable to  administrative  removal  as  the  spouse  of  the  first
         appellant who was being administratively removed.

    iv.  In respect of the third appellant, the respondent served a "Notice
         of immigration decision", "Notice of intention to remove  a  family
         member" dated 8 March 2016 which informed her that she  was  liable
         to administrative removal as the daughter of  the  first  appellant
         who was being administratively removed.

12. At the hearing on 25 October 2016, I raised the jurisdiction issue with
    the parties. It seemed to me then that the application of s.94  of  the
    2002 Act did not turn upon whether the Secretary of State  intended  to
    certify a claim as clearly unfounded but whether she did certify it  as
    a matter of existing fact. As at the date  of  the  decision  of  Judge
    Birk, the respondent had issued a clearly unfounded certificate,  as  a
    consequence of which there was no in-country right of appeal whether or
    not that had been intended by the respondent. The issue that arose  was
    an issue of jurisdiction, not one of procedural irregularity. Mr Tarlow
    and Ms Pinder discussed matters and agreed.

13. Mr Tarlow took instructions as to whether the respondent would withdraw
    the decision to remove dated 10 September 2014 addressed to  the  first
    appellant (i.e. the document mentioned at para 5.i. above)  because  it
    incorrectly stated the right of appeal and issue a new decision.

14. Having done so, Mr Tarlow informed  me  that  the  Secretary  of  State
    requested the Upper Tribunal's consent  to  withdraw  the  decision  to
    remove addressed to the first appellant (i.e. the document mentioned at
    para 5.i. above). Since it is plain that the notification of the  right
    of appeal is incorrect, the Upper Tribunal consents to  the  withdrawal
    of this decision, if such consent is required.

15. Going forward and in order to ensure that no  further  jurisdiction  or
    procedural issues arise, the respondent may wish to consider  (although
    this is a matter entirely for her) serving or re-serving the  documents
    mentioned  at  para  11.ii-iv  above,  together  with  any  immigration
    decision that she issues in relation to the first appellant, at one and
    the same time.

Timeliness of notices of appeal

16. In the event that the respondent decides not to re-serve the  decisions
    mentioned at para 11.iii-iv above and  on  the  assumption  that  these
    decisions carry rights of appeal, it will  be  evident  that  the  time
    limit within which notices of appeal should have been lodged  with  the
    FtT against these decisions will have started to run from 8 March 2016.
    As at the hearing before the Upper Tribunal on  25  October  2016,  the
    second and third appellants had not lodged  their  notices  of  appeal.
    Accordingly, any Notices of appeal that they lodge now would be out  of
    time.

17. Although this is entirely a  matter  for  the  judge  of  the  FtT  who
    considers any application by the second and third appellants  for  time
    to be extended, it is my view that they have  not  been  at  fault  for
    failing, to date (i.e. 25 October 2016), to lodge their appeals against
    the decisions of 8  March  2016.   It  is  plain  from  para  2  of  my
    Directions dated 4 March 2016 that they and  Counsel  on  their  behalf
    were under the impression that the errors in the documents served on 10
    September 2014 amounted to procedural  irregularities  which  could  be
    waived before the Upper Tribunal, as I was, and that  this  would  mean
    that they would have appeals before the Upper Tribunal which they could
    pursue and which they had instructed Ms Pinder to pursue.


Signed:

[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Gill               Date: 1 November 2016
