

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
IA/38690/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                   |         Decision & Reasons          |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 23 August 2017                     |         On 1 September 2017         |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MR SHAHBAZ IMAM
                       (Anonymity DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Aboni (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Coleman (Counsel)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.  This is the Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  brought
   with the permission of a Judge of the Upper Tribunal, from a decision  of
   the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Pooler hereinafter "the Judge")  whereupon
   he allowed the claimant's appeal against a decision of the  Secretary  of
   State which had been made as long ago as 23 September 2014, to remove him
   from the United Kingdom.

2. By way of brief background the claimant, who is a national  of  Pakistan,
   had entered the United Kingdom on 10 January 2011 with leave to enter  as
   a Tier 4 (Student) Migrant. On 17 October 2013 he sought further leave in
   the same capacity and such was granted until 30 August 2015.  On  6  June
   2014, though, he married and on 14 July 2014  he  applied  for  leave  to
   remain as a spouse under appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.

3. The Secretary of State refused the application and decided  that  he  was
   to be removed. Underpinning the decision was  the  Secretary  of  State's
   belief that, during the process of applying for  his  original  grant  of
   limited leave as a student, he had used a  "proxy"  to  take  an  English
   language test for him and had gone on to submit what,  in  view  of  that
   dishonesty, was a false English language certificate. It is to be  noted,
   though, a different English language certificate which he  had  submitted
   with respect to the spouse application was not a falsely obtained one. It
   is also important to note that in the detailed reasons for refusal letter
   which was issued on 23 September 2014 the Secretary of State had  relied,
   as the basis of refusal upon what was said to be the  claimant's  failure
   to meet the Suitability Requirement under Appendix FM as  set  out  under
   paragraph S-LTR.2.2 (a). The claimant appealed. There were  some  earlier
   hearings and earlier judicial decisions but, eventually, the matter  came
   before Judge Pooler for  a  complete  rehearing.  At  that  hearing  both
   parties  were  represented.  Judge  Pooler,  as  indicated,  allowed  the
   claimant's appeal. He did so in a decision which was  promulgated  on  24
   November 2016.

4. Prior to coming to the Judge's reasoning, it is  perhaps  appropriate  to
   set out some of the potentially relevant legal provisions.  S  -  LTR.2.1
   and 2.2 are as follows:

      "S - LTR.2.1. The applicant will normally be  refused  on  grounds  of
suitability if any of paragraphs S - LTR.2.2 - 2.5 apply.

      S - LTR.2.2. Whether or not to the applicant's knowledge -

       (a)  false  information,  representations  or  documents  have   been
submitted in     relation to the application  (including  false  information
submitted to any       person to obtain a document used in  support  of  the
application); or



      (b) there has been a failure to disclose material  facts  in  relation
to the      application.

5. To complete the picture paragraph S -  LTR.1.1  and  S  -  LTR.1.6,  when
   taken together make provision for a refusal to be based on an applicant's
   conduct, character or other reasons which make it  undesirable  to  allow
   him/her to remain in the United Kingdom.

6. The Judge allowed the appeal without making a finding as to  whether  the
   claimant had ever used a proxy as alleged or not.  He took the view  that
   because of the use of the word "the"  in  S  -  LTR.2.2  (a),  any  false
   information, representations or documents had to have been  submitted  in
   relation to the current  application  for  that  provision  to  bite.  As
   indicated, there has never been any suggestion that there has  been  such
   conduct in relation to the spouse application. He dealt with and rejected
   an argument that S - LTR.2.2 (b) could be relied upon, on the basis  that
   the  Secretary  of  State's  representative  before  him  was  unable  to
   demonstrate the existence of any obligation in the context of the current
   application, to disclose matters relating to an earlier  application.  He
   also noted the Secretary of State's representative's acceptance  that  if
   he (the representative) was not  able  to  successfully  rely  upon  S  -
   LTR.2.2 the appeal should succeed. The Judge explained his  reasoning  as
   to all of that in this way;

      "9. The relevant chronology,  agreed  by  the  representatives  is  as
follows. The      ETS  English  language  test,  in  respect  of  which  the
respondent submitted   evidence that  it  was  obtained  by  deception,  was
obtained by the appellant on      20 August 2013.  On  17  October  2013  he
applied for leave to remain as a  student and submitted the ETS  certificate
with that application. On 14  July        2014  the  appellant  applied  for
leave to remain as a spouse, but did not rely in   that application  on  the
ETS certificate. He submitted instead a certificate      issued  by  Trinity
College London on 23 June 2014,  a  copy  of  which  is  found       in  the
respondent's bundle.

           10. Having  taken  instructions,  Mr  Evans  [the  Secretary  of
           State's representative  before  the  Judge]  accepted  that  the
           Respondent was  unable  to  prove  that  a  false  document  was
           submitted in relation to the application for leave to remain  as
           a spouse. On the basis  of  that  concession  I  find  that  the
           respondent was unable to rely on sub-paragraph (a). Mr Evans, on
           instructions, wished to rely on sub-paragraph (b) and  submitted
           that there had been a failure to disclose material facts. He was
           however unable to direct my attention to any obligation, whether
           arising under the Immigration Rules or  otherwise,  to  disclose
           material facts in relation to an earlier application  for  leave
           to remain. He was also unable to direct my attention to any part
           of the application form which required  similar  disclosure.  At
           section 8.4  the  appellant  was  asked  if  he  had  passed  an
           acceptable English language test; he answered in the affirmative
           and produced the certificate issued by Trinity College London in
           respect of which the Respondent takes no  issue.  The  appellant
           signed a lengthy declaration at page 50 of the  application  but
           this  included  no  declaration  which  might  have  founded  an
           assertion that the appellant failed to disclose material facts.

           11.   Despite the reference  in  the  refusal  letter  to  other
           grounds of refusal, Mr Evans on behalf of the Respondent  relied
           solely on the issue of deception  which  was  raised  under  the
           Suitability requirement. In addition, having taken instructions,
           he conceded that if I was  not  satisfied  that  paragraph  S  -
           LTR.2.2 applied then it would be appropriate to allow the appeal
           on the ground that the decision was not in accordance  with  the
           Immigration Rules."

7.    So the appeal was, indeed, allowed. However that was not  the  end  of
the matter because the Secretary of State applied for permission  to  appeal
to the Upper Tribunal. In so doing he argued that the  Judge  had  erred  in
failing to  apply  the  principle  of  "ex  turpi  causa"  and  had  wrongly
permitted the claimant "to hide behind the literal wording of paragraph S  -
LTR.2.2 to defeat an important public interest principle that he should  not
benefit from his own wrongdoing".

8.    Permission to appeal was initially refused by a Judge  of  the  First-
tier Tribunal but was subsequently granted by a Judge of the Upper  Tribunal
who said this;

           "There is an arguable issue as to whether para. S - LTR.2.1  and
           2.2 (a) applies only to "false information,  representations  or
           documents" submitted in relation to the application which is the
           subject of the decision appealed, as  Judge  of  the  First-tier
           Tribunal Pooler considered was the case in reaching his decision
           to allow the appeal.

           It is also arguable that the Judge ought to have considered  the
           applicability of para. S - LTR.1.1 and S - LTR.1.6, pursuant  to
           which a person does not satisfy the suitability  requirement  if
           his or her presence is not conducive to the public good "because
           their conduct  ...,  character...,  or  other  reasons  make  it
           undesirable to allow them to remain in the  UK".  Arguably,  the
           Respondent would have been entitled to conclude that, given  the
           appellant had submitted a false TOPEIC certificate in a previous
           application, his presence in the UK was  not  conducive  to  the
           public good because his conduct or character made it undesirable
           to allow him to remain in the UK."

9.    Pausing there, I would simply observe that no argument based  on  S  -
LTR.1.6 had been raised before the Judge (or  indeed  by  the  Secretary  of
State in the relevant reasons for refusal  letter)  and  that  it  does  not
appear that there has ever been any finding to the effect that the  claimant
had or had not submitted  a  false  certificate.  As  indicated,  the  Judge
dealing with matters by  way  of  a  complete  rehearing  did  not  find  it
necessary to resolve that contested issue of fact.

10.   Permission having been granted the  matter  was  listed  for  an  oral
hearing before the Upper Tribunal (before me). Representation was as  stated
above and I am grateful to each  representative.  In  the  end  it  was  not
necessary for me to hear from Mr Coleman. Mrs  Aboni,  who  I  think  had  a
difficult case to argue, quite appropriately in my view did  not  rely  upon
the doctrine of "ex turpi causa".

11.   I have concluded, as I told the  parties  at  the  hearing,  that  the
Judge did not err in law. I set out my reasons for reaching that  conclusion
below.

12.   First of all,  paragraph  2.2  does  refer  to  "the"  application  as
opposed to "an" or "any" application. On the face of it that would  seem  to
suggest that the behaviour identified in the rule must  have  been  detected
in the context of the current application under consideration as opposed  to
a previous application. I appreciate it  is  not  appropriate  to  interpret
immigration rules in the  way  that  one  would  interpret  a  statute  but,
nevertheless, the simple and straightforward wording  does  seem  to  afford
significant support for the interpretation adopted by  the  Judge.  Further,
it would have been very easy to have used an alternative word  such  as  one
of the two suggested above if there had been any different intention on  the
part of the Secretary of State when drafting  these  rules.  Further  still,
the fact that there are other provisions as indeed identified in  the  grant
of permission to appeal in  this  case,  which  might  permit  the  sort  of
dishonesty said to have occurred here to be  taken  into  account,  supports
the  Judge's  interpretation  because  that  interpretation  would  not,  in
consequence, negate  the  possibility  of  misconduct  or  dishonesty  being
punished.

13.   As to "ex turpi causa", I have never come across  an  attempt  to  use
the doctrine in an immigration context  before.  As  I  understand  it  that
doctrine, sometimes referred to as "the illegality defence"  is  a  creature
of private law and is capable of founding a defence to actions in  contract,
tort or trust law. It does not seem to me  to  have  any  application  in  a
public law forum or in any "State v individual" type of case. In  any  event
Mrs Aboni, as I say, chose not to argue it.

14.   I have concluded then, on the basis  of  the  material  and  arguments
before me, that the Judge's interpretation was  correct  and  that  for  the
provision to bite the misconduct has to relate to the current application.

15.   No challenge has been made with respect to the way in which the  Judge
dealt with the possible application of paragraph 2.2  (b)  so  I  shall  now
turn to paragraph 1.6 which was only raised in the grant  of  permission  to
appeal.

16.   It does seem to me  that,  in  principle,  paragraph  1.6  might  have
application to cases such as this if the misconduct  alleged  is  proven  to
the necessary standard.  However,  paragraph  1.6  was  not  raised  in  the
reasons for refusal letter and, much more importantly in my  view,  was  not
raised  before  the  Judge.  Indeed,  as  paragraph  11  demonstrates,   the
Secretary of State's representative  not  only  did  not  rely  on  1.6  but
accepted that if he could  not  succeed  under  2.2  the  appeal  should  be
allowed. So, quite simply, the matter was not before the Judge  for  him  to
decide. The fact that there was a possible argument which  might  have  been
pursued but wasn't does not establish error of law.

17.   In the circumstances, therefore, the Judge did not make  an  error  of
law. His decision shall, therefore, stand.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law. That decision shall stand.

I make no  anonymity  direction  since  none  was  made  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal and none was sought before me.

                                         Signed

                                           M           R           Hemingway
                                                               Judge of  the
Upper Tribunal

                                                     Dated        31  August
2017


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.


                                         Signed

                                           M           R           Hemingway
                                                               Judge of  the
Upper Tribunal

                                                     Dated        31  August
2017
