

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38436/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 1 June 2015                                |On 5 June 2015               |



                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM



                                   Between

                         SACHIN BHUPENDRABHAI PATEL
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms Norman, instructed by YD Visas
For the Respondent: Mr Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS




     1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge Agnew promulgated on 5  February  2015  which  dismissed  the
        appellant's appeal against the refusal of leave to remain as a Tier
        4 (General) Student.


     2. The appellant applied on 28 June 2014 for further leave  to  remain
        as a student. The application was refused on 10 September  2014  by
        the respondent.

     3.  The  application  was  refused  for  two  reasons.  Firstly,   the
        respondent maintained that the appellant was  sent  letters  on  11
        July 2014 and 31 July 2014 inviting him to an interview  to  assist
        in the assessment of the application. The letters indicated that if
        the appellant failed to attend without prior agreement  this  "may"
        result in the application being refused.  The respondent maintained
        that the appellant did not respond  to  the  letters  and  did  not
        attend.

     4. The application was then refused under  paragraph  322(10)  of  the
        Immigration Rules. This provides that an application for  leave  to
        remain "should normally" be refused  where  there  is  a  "failure,
        without providing  a  reasonable  explanation,  to  comply  with  a
        request made on behalf of the Secretary  of  State  to  attend  for
        interview".

     5. The grounds of appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  maintained  that
        the appellant did not  receive  the  letters  inviting  him  to  an
        interview. There was no witness statement to  this  effect  or  any
        other  documentation  to  support  this  assertion.  The  appellant
        elected to have his appeal considered on the papers.

     6. Judge Agnew found at [11]-[14] and [17] that it  was  not  credible
        that the appellant had not received the interview letters, that  he
        had not provided a reasonable explanation for failing to attend and
        that the decision to refuse under  paragraph  322(10)  was  rightly
        made.

     7. We could see nothing about that finding that approached an error on
        a point of law. As above, before the First-tier Tribunal there  was
        only an assertion in the grounds that the appellant did not receive
        the interview letters, not even a letter or witness statement  from
        the  appellant.  Nothing  precluded  the  appellant  from  adducing
        further evidence in relation to the 322(10) refusal. It was open to
        Judge Agnew to place weight on the letters having been sent  to  an
        address that, but for only those two particular interview  letters,
        had not been shown to be problematic.

     8. Ms Norman sought to argue that the First-tier Tribunal should  have
        required the respondent to show  better  evidence  of  service  and
        receipt of the interview  letters.  We  did  not  agree  where  the
        respondent's case on the point was clear, copies of the letter were
        provided, the address had not been shown to be otherwise  defective
        and there was nothing more from the appellant for consideration  by
        the First-tier Tribunal. The invitation letters were  not,  in  our
        view, analogous to immigration decisions  that  might  require  the
        respondent to comply with formal  notices  regulations  or  bear  a
        higher burden of showing good service and receipt such  as  in  the
        case of Syed (curtailment of leave -  notice)  [2013]   UKUT  00144
        IAC.

     9. Ms Norman also suggested that the First-tier Tribunal  should  have
        taken  into  account  the  large  amount  of   documentation   that
        accompanies a refusal decision whereas the interview  letter  would
        have been a smaller piece of correspondence  and  thus  potentially
        more likely to be  mislaid  or  somehow  not  received.  There  was
        nothing to indicate that this was something the First-tier Tribunal
        judge was asked to take into account.  It  did  not  appear  to  us
        something of sufficient force capable of making a difference to the
        conclusion  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal   judge,  in  any  event,
        additionally  so  where  the  interview  letters   enclosed   other
        documents, an interview reply form and a declaration.


    10. We concluded that no error arose in the decision of the  First-tier
        Tribunal that the appeal had to be refused in line  with  paragraph
        322(10) of the Immigration Rules.

    11. Where that was so, it was not  strictly  necessary  to  proceed  to
        consider the appellant's second ground of  appeal  which  concerned
        the Certificate of Acknowledgement of Studies (CAS) submitted  with
        the application. As  we  heard  detailed  argument  on  the  point,
        however, we can give a brief view here.

    12. The respondent also refused the application as at the date  of  the
        decision the CAS  relied  upon  by  the  appellant  was  marked  as
        withdrawn. As we understood it, the appellant  maintains  that  his
        CAS assigned on 26 June 2014 was withdrawn in error as a result  of
        his college being suspended by the respondent.

    13. An immediate difficulty with that part of his argument is  that  we
        did not have any evidence to show that this was  why  his  CAS  was
        withdrawn. There is a reference in a document entitled "Home Office
        immigration action against education  institutions:  factsheet"  to
        the suspension of his college on or after 24 June 2014.  There  was
        nothing before the First-tier Tribunal or us to show  the  specific
        date of suspension, however, or whether it was  by  4  August  2014
        when the CAS at appendix C of the respondent's bundle shows it  had
        been withdrawn.

    14. There was also nothing before us  in  the  factsheet  or  elsewhere
        indicating that colleges were instructed to withdraw a CAS if  they
        were suspended by the respondent or that  the  appellant's  college
        did withdraw his CAS on this or some other erroneous basis.

    15. Even had the appellant shown that his college withdrew his CAS on a
        mistaken basis, it would be the  fault  of  the  college,  not  the
        respondent who was entitled to make a decision on 10 September 2014
        on the basis of the information before her which indicated that the
        CAS had been withdrawn. The factsheet relied upon by the  appellant
        does not preclude the respondent making a decision to refuse  where
        a CAS is withdrawn by a college.

    16. We drew support for this view from the case of EK (Ivory  Coast)  v
        SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1517. The undisputed facts there were that the
        appellant's CAS was wrongly withdrawn by her college and  that  she
        did not know of this until informed in  the  respondent's  refusal.
        Even where this was so the Court of Appeal concluded  at  [51]  and
        [52] that the respondent was entitled to  rely  on  the  withdrawal
        without having to give the claimant an opportunity to comment  even
        though she did not know of the withdrawal until being  informed  of
        it in the respondent's refusal letter.

    17. The facts before us are, in addition, less supportive where  it  is
        unclear why the CAS here was withdrawn by the college and the First-
        tier Tribunal was entitled to conclude at  [15]  that  it  was  not
        credible that the appellant did not know of the withdrawal  of  his
        CAS where he could be expected to  have  been  in  touch  with  his
        college at material times.

    18. Ms Norman submitted that the appellant could  not  be  expected  to
        provide evidence as to the suspension of his college and reason for
        withdrawal of the  CAS  as  he  was  precluded  from  doing  so  by
        paragraph 85A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002.
        It did not appear to us that this could allow him to rely  on  mere
        assertion as to what happened, effectively usurping the  provisions
        of s.85A. In addition, the arguments about  the  CAS,  if  properly
        formulated, really go towards a case that the respondent's decision
        gave rise to an Article 8 fairness case, which is not restricted as
        to evidence by s.85A, as opposed to a claim  that  the  substantive
        Points Based System provisions of the Immigration  Rules  could  be
        met to which the s.85A evidential restrictions would apply.

    19. For all of these reasons, we  did  not  find  that  the  First-tier
        Tribunal Judge erred in law.

Decision

    20. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal  does not disclose  an
        error on a point of law and shall stand.



Signed:  [pic]                                        Dated: 2 June 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt







