
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: IA/38867/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |      Determination         |
|                                     |promulgated                 |
|On 28 January 2015                   |      On 4 February 2015    |
|                                     |                            |

                                   Before

                       Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton

                                   Between

                           Mr Muhammad Noman Tariq
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:           Ms A Holmes
For the Respondent:    Mr R Sharma


REASONS FOR FINDING THAT TRIBUNAL MADE AN ERROR OF LAW, SUCH THAT ITS
DECISION FALLS TO BE SET ASIDE


 1. For ease the parties are referred to as they were before the First-tier
    Tribunal so that Mr Tariq is the appellant and the Secretary  of  State
    is the respondent.

 2. The appellant applied for a permanent residence card on 30 April  2013.
    On 5 September 2013 the respondent refused to issue such a  card.   The
    appellant appealed and the matter came before Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal P J Clarke.  In a determination promulgated on 15 May 2014 the
    judge dismissed the appeal under the EEA Regulations but allowed it  on
    human rights grounds.

 3. The respondent sought and was given permission to appeal that decision.
     Such permission was granted on the basis that it was arguable that the
    judge failed to consider all the requirements  specified  in  paragraph
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules when allowing the appeal.

 4. The matter came before the Upper Tribunal on 21 July 2014 on  an  error
    of law hearing when, in the absence of the appellant, a material  error
    of law was found in  the  First-tier  Judge's  determination  and  upon
    further  consideration  the  appeal  was  dismissed  on  all   grounds.
    Following an application for that decision to be set aside on the basis
    that the appellant had no notice of that  hearing  the  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge decided to set his decision  aside  under  paragraph  43  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  Having  done  that  he
    directed that the appeal be heard afresh by another Judge of the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Hence the matter came before me.

 5. In paragraph 23 of the determination  the  judge  stated  that  he  was
    satisfied that the appellant satisfies the  requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE as the appellant is under 18 and has been continuously in the UK
    for seven years.  Unfortunately that particular Rule  at  276ADE(1)(iv)
    has the additional requirement set out in it  that  "it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the appellant to leave the UK".  This was added by
    HC 760 as from 13 December 2012.  It seems likely that  the  judge  was
    not aware of this change.  If he was aware of it he  has  not  referred
    anywhere in the decision to his finding in relation to that aspect.

 6. I am not able to say that such an error is without  importance.   There
    needs to be an assessment as to  whether  it  would  or  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the appellant to leave the UK and the fact has  to
    be found to establish whether  the  appellant  complies  with  all  the
    requirements of that particular Rule.

 7. I therefore announced my decision at the hearing that the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge  is  to  be  set  aside  and  the  appeal
    reheard.  After hearing submissions  I  was  persuaded  that  there  is
    missing documentation in both parties' files and the evidence needs  to
    be brought up-to-date.  The Tribunal was also pressed for time  and  so
    in all the circumstances this appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be heard afresh.

 8. I was not addressed in relation to the matter of anonymity.  However, I
    note that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  made  an  anonymity  direction
    because the appellant was then a minor.  He is now aged over 18  and  I
    see no need for the anonymity direction to continue so that there is no
    longer any anonymity in relation to this appeal.


Signed:

Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton
