
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38244/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 10 December 2014                           |On 7 January 2015            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        THE HON. MRS JUSTICE CARR DBE
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D CONWAY

                                   Between

                           GEORGE ALEXANDER BOOTHE

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Adophy, Solicitor instructed by Ranas & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal brought by the  appellant  who  appeals  against  the
    decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Howard  promulgated  on   12
    September 2014 whereby he refused the appellant's  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision to issue a registration certificate as  a
    dependent relative.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica with a date of birth  of  8  June
    1948.  He left Jamaica in 2000 at the  age  of  52.   He  was  educated
    there, he was married there and he brought up a family there.  On entry
    to the United Kingdom in August 2001 he was issued with family leave to
    remain, such leave being valid until 24 September 2001.   According  to
    CID notes he was issued with  indefinite  leave  to  remain  as  of  16
    October 2001.  However this leave was issued on the back of a  passport
    which was subsequently found  to  be  counterfeit.   We  refer  to  the
    determination of Immigration Judge Bennett of 1 March 2012.  On 12 June
    2005 the appellant sought a no time limit ruling and again  in  October
    2008 on each occasion unsuccessfully.  On  3  May  2011  the  appellant
    sought an EEA residence  card  as  the  unmarried  partner  of  an  EEA
    national.  That application also  was  refused.   He  then  turned  his
    sights on the current application, namely the application  made  on  28
    November 2012 when he applied for an EEA residence card as a  dependent
    family member, in this case father  of  an  EEA  national,  namely  his
    daughter, who is of German nationality.

 3. On 7 September 2013 the Secretary of State refused to issue a residence
    card as confirmation of a right of residence under  European  Community
    Law as the father of an EEA national exercising treaty  rights  in  the
    United Kingdom.  Her reasons were  given  on  21  September  2013.   In
    essence the application was refused on the basis that the Secretary  of
    State was not satisfied that the appellant was a dependent relative  of
    his daughter by reference to Regulation 7 of the Immigration, (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the EEA Regulations").  The Secretary
    of State reasoned that  the  appellant  had  provided  no  evidence  of
    dependency on  his  daughter.   There  was  no  evidence  of  financial
    dependency; indeed  the  evidence  suggested  that  the  appellant  was
    working with an income.  The Secretary of State also noted that in 2011
    the appellant's application then had said that  he  was  in  a  durable
    relationship with his partner.  He had submitted evidence that  he  was
    living with his partner.  It followed accordingly that at that time not
    part of his daughter's household.

 4. The appellant lodged notice of appeal on 17 September 2013.

 5.  The  legal  framework  can  be  summarised  shortly.   Under  the  EEA
    Regulations, Regulation 7 provides as follows:

         "7(1)    Subject to subparagraph  (2)  for  the  purpose  of  these
             Regulations the following persons  shall  be  treated  as  the
             family members of another person...

             (c)  dependent direct relatives in his ascending line or  that
                  of his spouse or his civil partner and

             (b)  dependent direct descendants of his, his  spouse  or  his
                  civil partner who are -

                       (i) under 21 or

                       (ii)     dependants of his, his spouse or  his  civil
                      partner"

 6. By Regulation 17 of the EEA Regulations the  Secretary  of  State  must
    issue a residence card to a person who is not an EEA national  but  who
    is the family member of a qualified person or of an EEA national with a
    permanent right of residence on application and production  of  certain
    specified documents.

 7. Regulation 8 of the EEA Regulations applies  only  to  extended  family
    members.  Extended family members are defined as persons who are not  a
    family member of an EEA national under Regulation 7 and  who  satisfies
    other certain conditions.

 8. To succeed in his appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  the
    appellant had to prove in the context of the requirements  set  out  in
    the EEA Regulations that he had a right of residence  under  regulation
    7.

 9. The first ground of appeal raised on behalf of the  appellant  is  that
    the judge below applied  the  wrong  Regulation  and  in  that  context
    considered the wrong authorities.

10. It is clear at paragraphs 14 to 16 of the judgment that the  judge  did
    so  err  in  law.   It  is  common  ground  before  us  that  in  those
    circumstances the judge's  decision  must  be  set  aside.   The  judge
    wrongly  considered  the  question  of  dependency  by   reference   to
    Regulation 8 and extended family membership as opposed to Regulation 7,
    being the relevant one dealing with relation of father  and  son.   The
    factual matrix here was as we have described the appellant as a non-EEA
    national was the allegedly dependent father of  his  daughter,  an  EEA
    national who is exercising treaty rights.  Accordingly we set aside the
    decision.  But whether or not when, having set aside the  decision  and
    remaking the decision as we are invited to do, that error  would  avail
    the appellant is a separate question.  It raises head on  the  question
    of dependency.

11. For the appellant Mr Adophy helpfully took us to the  written  evidence
    before the judge below.  The witness statement of the appellant and his
    daughter in particular are relied on.  In the witness statement of  the
    appellant at paragraphs  3  and  onwards  the  appellant  confirmed  he
    resides with his daughter.  He says he does not have the right to  work
    and his daughter provides for his daily needs.  He says he  resides  in
    the property rent-free.  He sets out his  employment  history,  stating
    that he ceased to work in circumstances which are not particularised in
    any way in 2010.  His daughter's witness  statement  again  in  general
    terms asserts that she provides for her father.  She  states  that  she
    has been supporting him since he stopped working in 2010.  She confirms
    that he resides rent-free and all of his other needs are met by her.

12. Whilst the appellant and his daughter gave evidence before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, no material findings of fact were made by the  Judge  in
    relation to such evidence.  The appellant has chosen not to  give  oral
    evidence before us.  This is of course  his  right,  but  the  position
    remains that we have been asked to rely for the appellant simply on the
    written witness statements and associated documentation.

13.  We  have  considered  carefully  whether  or  not  the  appellant  has
    discharged the burden that lies on him in satisfying us on the  balance
    of probabilities that he meets the dependency test.   That  test  is  a
    factual  one  -  see  Reyes  [2013]  UKUT  314  :   has  the  appellant
    established on a balance of probabilities the factual situation is  one
    characterised by material support in terms of meeting  the  appellant's
    essential needs and an inability to support himself.

14. Having carefully considered the material put  before  us,  including  a
    tenancy  agreement,  bank  statements  and  payslips  relating  to  the
    daughter, we have come to the conclusion that  the  appellant  has  not
    discharged the relevant burden of proof.  In  particular  his  evidence
    and the material upon which he relies amounts to no  more  than  simple
    assertion.  There is a total lack of particularisation in  the  witness
    statements to which we have referred of,  for  example,  how  much  the
    daughter provides to her father, when and for  what  purpose.   Nor  is
    there any documentary evidence to support the  assertions  there  made.
    The fact that the appellant and his daughter have chosen  not  to  give
    evidence means that the evidence has also not been capable  of  testing
    by cross-examination.  In those circumstances the weight to be attached
    to the broad  assertions  made  can  only  be  limited.   We  are  also
    influenced by the fact that the daughter's documentation in the form of
    her bank statements suggest that she is not in a position independently
    to support her father, let alone in a way that meets all his  essential
    needs.  She appears to be a student herself  and  her  bank  statements
    suggest that she is at least on occasion overdrawn.  She  is  certainly
    not in receipt of significant wages.

15. For all these reasons the appeal under the Regulations fails  upon  the
    original decision being set aside.

16. We turn in those circumstances to the second  ground  of  appeal  which
    relates to the application of Article 8.  Article 8 of course  provides
    materially that everyone has the right to respect for his  private  and
    family life, his home and his correspondence and the appellant  asserts
    that there was no  proper  proportionality  assessment  for  Article  8
    purposes in this case.

17. We comment at the outset that, as appears to have been ignored  by  the
    parties, there is a very substantial question mark as to whether or not
    Article 8 is engaged at all in relation to this type of decision  under
    the EEA Regulations.  The interplay between  the  EEA  Regulations  and
    Article 8 has been identified as a potentially problematic issue for  a
    number  of  years  with  recent  conflicting  decisions.   There  is  a
    substantial body of relevant case law to which we have not been  taken.



18. However it does not appear to us necessary for us to determine  whether
    or not Article 8 is engaged or can be engaged in principle.  We  assume
    for present purposes only in the appellant's favour that Article  8  is
    engaged in principle.

19. We are however wholly unpersuaded that there is any  viable  basis  for
    alleging any disproportionate interference with the appellant's private
    or family life.

20. So far as the existence of family life  is  concerned  we  see  on  the
    evidence before us no more than normal emotional ties in  circumstances
    where more is needed - see for example Ghising v Secretary of State for
    the Home Department [2012] UKUT 00160 (IAC).  Nor has  there  been  put
    before us any evidence sufficient of private life  such  as  to  engage
    Article 8.  There is no evidence before us of wider  engagement  within
    the community or of any longstanding.  Even if we are wrong about  that
    it cannot be said on the evidence before us that any interference would
    be disproportionate.  As we have already noted the appellant  has  only
    been in this country since about 2001 having spent the vast majority of
    his life in Jamaica, having married there and also brought up a  family
    there.  We note for the majority of his time in the United Kingdom  (as
    recorded by the Judge in his judgment at paragraphs  22  and  23),  the
    appellant was not even in  regular  or  significant  contact  with  his
    daughter and there is no other evidence before us of any other relevant
    family in this country.  It is true that the appellant  was  apparently
    treated by the NHS for certain medical conditions here, but there is no
    evidence that such treatment would for  example  not  be  available  in
    Jamaica.

Decision

21. The decision of the First Tier Tribunal showed material  error  of  law
    and is set aside.  We re-make the decision  by  dismissing  the  appeal
    under the EEA Regulations and under Article 8.

22. Finally, the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did  not  make  an  anonymity
    direction.  We have not been asked to do so and in the absence  of  any
    explanation as to what good reasons there might be we do not make  such
    a direction.







Signed                                  Date


Mrs Justice Carr

