
[pic]
IAC-fH-nl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/38335/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 22 July 2015                      |On 23 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                      v

                             Dieudonne Alang FUH
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C. Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Jacques M. Rene, counsel instructed by Eagles
Solicitors


                           ERROR OF LAW & REASONS

1.    The Respondent is a national of Cameroon, born on 27  March  1989.  He
applied for a residence card as  the  family  member  of  Mrs  Mokulu-Kokonu
Lucie Mangbau, a French national exercising  treaty  rights  in  the  United
Kingdom. This application was  refused  on  9  September  2014  because  the
Secretary of State was not satisfied that (a) the parties have entered  into
a valid marriage  in  Cameroon  and  (b)  the  Appellant  is  in  a  durable
relationship with the Sponsor as claimed.

2.    The  Respondent  appealed  and  his  appeal  came  before  First  Tier
Tribunal Judge  Grant-Hutchison  for  determination  on  the  papers  on  16
February 2015. In a determination promulgated on 3  March  2015,  the  Judge
found that the parties had not entered into a valid  marriage  under  French
law but allowed the appeal on the basis that the Respondent  had  discharged
the burden of proving that he had entered into a durable  relationship  with
his Sponsor.

3.    The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the  basis  that
the Judge erred materially in law in allowing the  appeal  outright  as  the
Secretary  of  State  has  not  exercised  discretion  in  this  case  under
regulation 17(4) of the 2006 EEA Regulations. As the  Respondent  was  found
to  be  an  extended/other  family  member  under  regulation  8(5)  it  was
submitted that the Judge should have remitted the case to the  Secretary  of
State for consideration under  regulation  17(4)  instead  of  allowing  the
appeal outright cf. Ihemedu (OFMs  -  meaning)  Nigeria  (2011)  UKUT  00340
(IAC).

4.    Permission to appeal  was  refused  by  a  Judge  of  the  First  Tier
Tribunal but granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede on  the  basis  that  it
was arguable  that,  in  allowing  the  appeal  outright,  the  Judge  acted
inconsistently with the guidance in Aladeselu (2006 Regs -  reg  8)  Nigeria
(2011) UKUT 253 at 29 as referred to in Ihemedu  (OFMs  -  meaning)  Nigeria
(2011) UKUT 00340 (IAC) with respect to  the  appropriate  course  in  cases
involving the issue of residence cards  to  extended  family  members  under
Regulation 17(4).

5.    At the hearing before me Mr Rene stated that he and  Mr  Avery  agreed
that the matter should be remitted back to the Secretary of State. Mr  Avery
confirmed that there was no challenge by  the  Secretary  of  State  to  the
findings of fact and reasons by the First Tier Tribunal  Judge  and  he  was
only challenging the fact that the Judge allowed  the  appeal  outright  and
not what he said.

Decision

6.    For this reason I allow the appeal of the Secretary of  State  against
the decision of First Tier Tribunal Judge  Grant-Hutchison.  The  effect  of
this decision is  that  the  Respondent's  case  is  remitted  back  to  the
Secretary of State for her to consider the exercise of her discretion  under
regulation 17(4) of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006, in light of  the
findings of fact by First Tier Tribunal Judge Hutchison at [16-17] that  the
parties have lived together  since  the  Sponsor's  arrival  in  the  United
Kingdom and that the Respondent had discharged the burden  of  proving  that
he has entered into a durable relationship with his Sponsor.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

22 July 2015
