
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38567/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On : 25 January 2017                       |On : 26 January 2017           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           tejinder pal singh gill
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Rai, instructed by Gills Immigration Law


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department  against
a decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Webb  allowing  Mr  Gill's  appeal
against the respondent's decision to remove him from the  UK  following  the
refusal of his human rights claim.

For the purposes of this decision, I shall refer to the Secretary  of  State
as the respondent and Mr Gill as the appellant, reflecting  their  positions
as they were in the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

The appellant is a national of India born on 15 May  1986.  He  entered  the
United Kingdom on 12 January 2010 on a Tier 4 student visa  valid  until  18
November 2011 and was granted further leave to remain as a  Tier  4  student
until 16 September 2013. On 11  August  2012  his  leave  was  curtailed  to
expire on 10  October  2012,  following  the  revocation  of  his  sponsor's
licence. He made another application on 9 October 2012 for Tier 4 leave  and
was granted  leave  until  24  February  2014.  With  that  application  the
appellant submitted an ETS TOEIC  English  language  certificate.  Following
his marriage on 21 December 2014 to Sarandeep Birk, a British  citizen,  the
appellant made an application for leave to remain in the UK  as  the  spouse
of a settled person. His application was rejected as  invalid  due  to  non-
payment of the fee, and he then made another application on the  same  basis
on 4 March 2014. That  application  was  refused  by  the  respondent  in  a
decision dated 6 September 2014.


The respondent, in refusing the application, considered that  the  appellant
could not meet the criteria in Appendix FM or  paragraph  276ADE  under  the
suitability requirements, as he was  considered  to  have  sought  leave  to
remain by deception in his application of 9 October 2012 in relation to  the
English language test taken  on  12  September  2012.  The  respondent  also
considered that the appellant could not meet the criteria in  EX.1(b)  as  a
partner as he had failed to show that there  were  insurmountable  obstacles
to family life continuing in India, he could not show that there  were  very
significant obstacles to integration in India for the purposes of  paragraph
276ADE(1), and there were no exceptional circumstances  justifying  a  grant
of leave outside the immigration rules on wider Article 8 grounds.


The appellant appealed against that decision and his  appeal  was  heard  by
First-tier Tribunal Judge Webb on 20 April 2016. By the time of  the  appeal
hearing, the appellant and his wife had  had  a  child,  a  son  born  on  8
September 2015, who was a British citizen.


Judge Webb concluded that the  respondent  had  failed  to  meet  the  legal
burden of proving dishonesty  and  that  the  appellant  therefore  met  the
suitability  requirements  in  section  S-LTR  of  Appendix  FM.  Whilst  he
considered that the appellant was unable to qualify as a partner  under  the
five-year  route  as  a  result  of  an  inability  to  meet  the  financial
requirements therein, he concluded that he could qualify under the  ten-year
route as he was able to meet the criteria in EX.1(a). He concluded  that  it
would  not  be  reasonable  for  the  appellant's  son  to  leave  the   UK.
Accordingly he allowed the appeal under the immigration rules on  Article  8
grounds.

Permission to appeal was sought by the respondent on the  grounds  that  the
judge had failed  to  provide  adequate  reasons  for  concluding  that  the
Secretary  of  State  had  failed  to  meet  the  legal  burden  of  proving
dishonesty and had failed to provide adequate reasons  for  concluding  that
there were insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing in  India  and
that it was unreasonable for the appellant's son to leave the UK.

Permission to appeal was initially refused in the First-tier  Tribunal,  but
was subsequently granted in the Upper Tribunal on 21 November 2016.

At the hearing both parties made submissions  before  me.  Whilst  Mr  Duffy
submitted that the judge's decision was inconsistent with  the  approach  in
SM and Qadir v Secretary of State for the Home Department (ETS - Evidence  -
Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT 229, Mr Rai argued that it was.


In fact it is not at all clear from [18] of his decision whether  the  judge
misunderstood the shifting burden of proof as set out in SM  and  Qadir,  or
whether he simply omitted to give any reasons as to  why  the  legal  burden
had shifted to the respondent.  It may be that he took it as read  that  the
evidential burden of proof had been met by  the  respondent  and  indeed  Mr
Duffy accepted that he was bound to find that that was the case. However  he
then jumped to the conclusion that the legal burden had not been met by  the
respondent without first considering, or  at  least  giving  any  indication
that he had considered, whether the appellant had met the evidential  burden
of raising an 'innocent explanation', as  required  in  SM  and  Qadir  (see
[68]). It was Mr Rai's submission that that consideration was given in  [10]
and  [11].  However,  whilst  those  paragraphs  contained  the  appellant's
evidence in response to the deception allegation, including evidence of  his
English language ability, they were not findings made by the judge,  and  at
no point in his decision did the judge  actually  assess  the  evidence  and
weigh it up against the evidence the respondent. That assessment  has  still
to be undertaken and accordingly the judge's conclusions on the  appellant's
ability to meet the suitability requirements in section  S-LTR  of  Appendix
FM cannot be sustained and must be set aside.

Furthermore, and on the basis that those conclusions plainly impact  on  the
question of "reasonableness" for the purposes of EX.1(a) of Appendix FM  and
the consideration of Article 8 outside the rules, the  judge's  findings  in
that respect cannot be sustained.


Both parties agreed  that  if  an  error  of  law  were  to  be  found,  the
appropriate course would be for the case to be remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal for a complete rehearing of the appeal. That must be the case.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The Secretary of State's appeal  is  allowed.
The decision is set aside in its entirety. The appeal  is  remitted  to  the
First-tier  Tribunal,  to  be  dealt  with  afresh,  pursuant   to   section
12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007  and  Practice
Statement 7.2(b), before any judge aside from Judge Webb.


                               Signed


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
