
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38469/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 9 April 2015                               |On 27 April 2015              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                Samuel Addae
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Ms A Figiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I see no need for and do not make an order restricting reporting.

 2. The appellant appeals a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  dismissing
    his appeal against a decision of the Secretary of State refusing him  a
    residence card as the family member of an EEA national.  The appeal was
    heard at Richmond on 28 November 2014 when neither  the  appellant  nor
    the respondent troubled to attend.  Before me the  Secretary  of  State
    was represented by a Senior Presenting Officer but  the  appellant  did
    not attend or give  the  Tribunal  any  explanation  for  his  absence.
    Notice of hearing was sent out on 24 February 2015 to  the  address  on
    the file and I checked with Ms Figiwala  to  make  sure  that  she  was
    unaware of any reason to think that the appellant had changed address.

 3. It follows that I was satisfied that the appellant has  notice  of  the
    hearing under the Rules and I decided to continue with the  hearing  in
    his absence.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge who giving permission was aware that  the
    appellant was unrepresented and was particularly  astute  to  look  for
    possible problems in the determination even if they were not identified
    by the appellant. She drew attention to the  fact  that  the  appellant
    clearly  and  unequivocally  relied  on  Article  8  of  the   European
    Convention on Human Rights when he made his application and  the  judge
    appears to have lost sight of this when determining the appeal.

 5. I do not see how this can be anything other than an error of law and  I
    therefore set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  solely  to
    the extent that it was wrong for not  dealing  with  the  human  rights
    claim.  I now attempt remedy that in two different ways.

 6. Firstly, and foremostly, this is an EEA  case.   There  is  no  removal
    decision or imminent prospect of removal and the grounds wholly fail to
    show how in the absence of a removal decision the  decision  complained
    of in any way interferes with the appellant's human rights.   There  is
    no human right to have a  residence  card  and  in  the  event  of  the
    appellant being subject to removal directions he would then be able  to
    raise human rights  in  any  appeal  he  made.   Similarly,  if  he  is
    concerned about his position he  can  make  an  application  for  leave
    outside the Rules relying on human rights, and as far as I am aware, he
    has not done that.

 7. In the alternative the First-tier Tribunal Judge, understandably  given
    the appellant's absence, found the appellant an  unsatisfactory  source
    of evidence who had not established a genuine relationship  that  would
    have supported the finding that he sought.  Building on that finding, I
    note that the appellant has been in  the  United  Kingdom  for  (about)
    eight years but has not drawn  attention  to  any  close  relationships
    other than one that is not believed  that  would  begin  to  support  a
    finding that it would be contrary to his human rights to remove him.

 8. He has not been in the  United  Kingdom  long  enough  to  satisfy  the
    requirements of the Rules.  He does not claim to be  the  parent  of  a
    child who has to be considered.

 9. All that I can say  with  any  confidence  is  that  there  is  sketchy
    evidence of some sort of private life established over  an  eight  year
    period which does not begin to justify a decision outside the Rules  or
    under the Rules for him to remain.

10. It follows therefore that, having set aside the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal to the limited extent indicated above, I go on to dismiss
    the appeal on human rights grounds.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal erred by not considering the claim on  human  rights
grounds. I dismissed the appeal on human rights grounds.



|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 23 April 2015                  |

