


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38750/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre      |          Decision & Reasons      |
|                                           |Promulgated                       |
|On 9 February 2016                         |          On 12 February 2016     |
|                                           |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                                hardeep singh
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Ahmed, instructed by Rakkani Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against the decision  and  reasons  statement  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Narayan that was promulgated on 6 July 2015.

 2. As I announced at the end of the hearing,  I  would  allow  the  appeal
    because the decision and reasons are infected with  legal  error.   The
    decision has to be remade and it is appropriate  to  remit  it  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.  I reserved my reasons,  which
    I now give.

 3. Without intending any disrespect to either Mr  Ahmed  or  Mr  Harrison,
    there is no need for me to labour through the arguments each  presented
    because the errors are obvious.  Mr Harrison acknowledged  this  to  be
    the case and had no strong  submissions  to  make  but  was  unable  to
    concede the appeal.

 4. The first error relates to the application of the burden of proof.   In
    this case much turned on the Secretary of State's allegation  that  the
    appellant had obtained an English language test qualification by fraud.
     It is settled case law that the burden of proof lies on the respondent
    in such matters yet at paragraphs 8 and 21 Judge  Narayan  places  that
    burden on the appellant.  This is not a situation where the  error  can
    be attributed to a slip (such as by the use of standard paragraphs when
    drafting the decision) because it is clear from the findings made  that
    Judge Narayan thought the burden of  proof  lay  on  the  appellant  in
    respect of the allegation of fraud.

 5. This finding is sufficient of itself to remit the appeal but is not the
    only error.  At paragraph 22 Judge Narayan  expressly  finds  that  the
    appellant did sit the impugned test.  It may  be  that  he  has  simply
    omitted a negative but given the confusion over the burden of  proof  I
    cannot be satisfied this is merely a typographical slip.

 6. The final error relates to the approach to article 8 ECHR.  As  already
    noted, the judge misdirected himself in relation to the burden of proof
    on the  fraud  issue.   That  finding  is  central  to  his  article  8
    assessment and therefore that finding cannot stand.

 7. In light of these errors, the case has to be  reheard.   The  appellant
    has been deprived of a fair hearing  because  the  judge  inverted  the
    burden of proof and this is reason for the matter to be remitted.



Decision

The appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  is  allowed  because  the  decision  and
reasons statement of First-tier Tribunal Judge Narayan contains legal  error
and his decision is set aside.



Remittal

The appeal is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh  hearing
before a judge other than Judge Narayan.

To  avoid  potential  confusion,  nothing  is  preserved  from  the  earlier
decision.

The parties request the remitted hearing to be in Birmingham.



                               Signed                     Date


                               Judge McCarthy
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
