

                                                       [pic]


The Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal number:
IA/38997/2014

                                                THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester             |                  Decision and Reasons  |
|                                |Promulgated                             |
|On July 17 2015                 |                  On  July 20 2015      |
|                                |                                        |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR BAKHT GILLANI
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
Appellant   Mr Harrison (Home Office Presenting Officer)
Respondent  Unrepresented

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Whereas the original respondent is the appealing party, I shall, in the
    interests of convenience and consistency, replicate the nomenclature of
    the decision at first instance.


 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan and is now twenty-two  years  of
    age. He applied on August 14, 2014 for leave to  remain  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student Migrant having originally entered the United  Kingdom
    on March  18,  2012  with  leave  valid  until  August  15,  2014.  The
    respondent refused this application on September 12, 2014  and  took  a
    decision to remove him by way of directions under  section  47  of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality  Act  2006  because  he  failed  to
    provide a valid Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies (CAS).

 3. The appellant appealed that decision on October 1, 2014  under  section
    82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 4. The matter came before Designated  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Garratt on February 23, 2015 and in a decision promulgated on April  2,
    2015 he allowed the appellant's appeal to the extent that  he  remitted
    the decision back to the respondent for reconsideration  in  line  with
    sixty-day policy guidance.

 5. The respondent applied for permission  to  appeal  on  April  10,  2015
    submitting the Tribunal had erred because at the  time  of  application
    the appellant did not have a valid  CAS  and  consequently  the  policy
    guidance did not cover his appeal.

 6. Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Zucker gave  permission  to
    appeal  on  June  8,  2015  finding  it  arguable  the   Tribunal   had
    misconstrued the guidance.

 7. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction pursuant to
    Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and I see
    no reason to make an order now.

    ERROR OF LAW SUBMISSIONS

 8. Mr Harrison relied on the grounds of appeal and submitted the  Tribunal
    had misunderstood the guidance. At the time the  application  had  been
    made the appellant had completed his studies and that  included  taking
    his end of year exams. He had failed those exams and was fully aware in
    July 2014 that his sponsor's licence had been suspended.  He  therefore
    knew he could not meet the Rules when he submitted his application. The
    respondent's  policy  covered  situations  where  the   appellant   was
    blameless but this  was  a  case  where  the  appellant  submitted  his
    application in full knowledge  that  the  sponsor's  licence  had  been
    suspended. Whilst he may have had  compassionate  reasons  for  failing
    these were rejected by the examining board and did not have any bearing
    on  his  application.  It  was  submitted  the  Tribunal  had   wrongly
    interpreted the guidance and the decision should be set aside  and  the
    appeal remade and dismissed.


 9. The appellant adopted a statement that he handed to  me  on  the  above
    date and asked that the original  decision  be  allowed  to  stand.  He
    stated that before submitting his current application he had  contacted
    the respondent and had been told to submitted his application with  the
    original CAS certificate even though it was no longer  valid.   He  had
    spent a lot of money on both his  studies  and  the  legal  proceedings
    wanted to complete his degree. He had retaken the  exams  that  he  had
    failed in June 2014 and was awaiting the results that were due sometime
    in July/August 2015. He invited the Tribunal  to  uphold  the  original
    decision and to grant him sixty-days to obtain a new sponsor.

    FINDINGS ON ERROR IN LAW

10. The appellant had come to the United Kingdom to study and in July  2014
    he failed four exams. His leave was due to expire on  August  15,  2014
    and on August 14 he submitted an application for further leave based on
    the CAS that he had been issued with. The  respondent  considered  that
    application and concluded that he did not have a valid certificate  and
    was therefore  not  entitled  to  the  appropriate  points  needed.  In
    allowing the  appeal  the  Tribunal  relied  on  the  respondent's  own
    guidance that allowed an applicant a period  of  time  to  find  a  new
    sponsor where their previous  Sponsor's  licence  had  been  suspended,
    revoked, surrendered or had expired.


11. The Tribunal had been provided with a copy of the November 2014 Tier  4
    guidance and the Tribunal had regard  to  pages  122  to  126  of  that
    guidance.

12. There was no dispute that when the appellant submitted his  application
    he was fully aware that his Sponsor's licence  had  been  suspended.  A
    bundle of documents had been submitted to the Tribunal but it is  clear
    from the email correspondence that the appellant had taken no steps  to
    find an alternative college despite knowing his current  Sponsor  would
    be unable to sponsor him further. The emails demonstrating steps  taken
    all post dated the date of his application.

13. In JA (revocation of registration - Secretary of State's policy)  India
    [2011] UKUT  52  (IAC)  the  Tribunal  held  that  in  cases  where  an
    educational provider  has  its  licence  withdrawn  during  the  period
    between a student's application for extension of  leave  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student Migrant and the Secretary of State's decision on  the
    application, it is the Secretary of State's practice  (as  set  out  in
    applicable guidance) to limit a student's existing leave to 60 days, if
    the student has extant leave of six months or more and if  the  student
    was not involved in the reasons why  the  education  provider  had  its
    licence withdrawn. The guidance states that the leave of a student  who
    has less than six months will not be limited. This  guidance  does  not
    give rise to any legitimate expectation that  the  Secretary  of  State
    will grant a period of 60 days' leave to  any  student  whose  original
    leave had expired by the date of the decision, so as to afford  him  an
    opportunity to register with an alternative education provider.  It  is
    not  irrational  or  unreasonable  for  the  Secretary  of   State   to
    distinguish between students who lodge their applications for extension
    of their leave many months in advance of the expiry of their leave  and
    those who do not.


14. In Patel (Tier 4 - no '60-day extension') India [2011] UKUT  187  (IAC)
    the Tribunal held that (i)    Where  a  sponsor's  Tier  4  licence  is
    withdrawn, the UKBA Policy Guidance operated to restrict the  remaining
    leave granted to sixty days where a student has more than  six  months'
    of the original leave remaining.  It has no effect on periods  of  less
    than six months; (ii) The policy does not operate to extend  leave  and
    in particular, it does not provide a sixty-day extension  of  leave  to
    remain in a case where that leave to remain has already expired;  (iii)
    The sixty-day restriction, if applicable, rums from the time  when  the
    Secretary of State notifies  the  student  of  the  imposition  of  the
    restriction following the withdrawal of the licence.

15. In  Alam v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 960 the Court  of  Appeal  that  Patel
    (revocation of sponsor licence - fairness)  India [2011]  UKUT  00211
    (IAC) demonstrates that even in the context of such a statutory scheme
    the public law requirement of fairness (see  paragraphs  13-15  of  the
    Upper Tribunal's determination) must still be  observed,  and  fairness
    may impose additional obligations on the Secretary of State as decision
    maker under the PBS. However, the obligation to give  those  applicants
    whose colleges had lost sponsorship status an opportunity to vary their
    application by giving them  time  to  find  a  substitute  college  was
    imposed  on  the  Secretary  of  State  as  a  matter  of  fairness  in
    circumstances where there had been a change of position  of  which  the
    Secretary of State was aware, but the applicants were themselves not at
    fault in any way: they were "both innocent of any practice that led  to
    the loss of the sponsorship status and ignorant of  the  fact  of  such
    loss of status".


16. Case law clearly demonstrates that where an appellant is blameless  and
    a Sponsor's position changes between the date of application  and  date
    of decision then the appellant should be given  a  period  of  time  to
    rectify his position and policy states that should be sixty days.

17. This was not the  position  facing  the  Tribunal  when  it  heard  the
    appellant's appeal in February of this year. The appellant did not have
    a valid license when he submitted his application and  his  application
    was bound to be refused by the respondent in those  circumstances.  The
    sixty-day policy could not save the appellant.

18. The Tribunal allowed his appeal by remitting the decision back  to  the
    respondent but this was an error  because  the  appellant  should  have
    obtained that certificate before submitting his application due to  the
    fact he was aware his Sponsor's licence  had  already  been  suspended.
    Regardless of any conversation he may have had with the respondent  the
    appellant was not blameless in this case. In order to benefit from  the
    policy the appellant has to be blameless.

19. The policy guidance was not intended to allow every student sixty  days
    to rectify their position. The guidance was there to assist  applicants
    whose Sponsors had either had their licences revoked or suspended after
    they had  submitted  their  applications  but  prior  to  the  date  of
    decision.

20. In the circumstances, I find  the  Tribunal  erred  in  remitting  this
    matter back to the respondent and I set aside that decision and  remake
    it by dismissing the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

21. The appellant has since retaken  his  failed  exams  and  is  currently
    awaiting the outcome of those results.  His  option  is  of  course  to
    submit a fresh application but regrettably that application may have to
    be submitted out of country.

    DECISION


22. There was a material error.  I set aside the decision and I remake  the
    decision and dismiss the appeal.

Signed:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award because I have dismissed the appeal.

Signed:





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
