
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38549/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 October 2015                   |On 6 November 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MS Jinfeng Jiang
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Lam, Counsel instructed by David Tang & Co


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of State.  However,
    for convenience I refer to the parties as they were before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

 2. Thus, the appellant is a citizen of China born on 30 November 1987.  On
    12 May 2014 she made an application for a residence card on  the  basis
    of a claimed derivative right of residence with reference to Regulation
    15A of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006  ("the
    EEA Regulations"). That application was refused in a decision dated  15
    September 2014.

 3. The appellant appealed against that decision and her appeal came before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Hunter at a hearing on 13 April 2015  whereby
    the  appeal  was  allowed  under  the  Article  8  Immigration   Rules.
    Permission to appeal against the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  was
    granted to the respondent, thus the appeal came before me.

 4. At the hearing before me there was an  application  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent to amend the grounds of appeal to include a  ground  relying
    on the decision in Amirteymour and others (EEA appeals;  human  rights)
    [2015] UKUT 00466 (IAC), to the effect that the First-tier Judge had no
    jurisdiction to consider the appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR and the
    Article 8 Immigration Rules.  There was no objection to the application
    for the grounds to be amended and I allowed the amendment.

 5. In fact, the grounds as originally drafted on behalf of the  respondent
    do  flag  up  the  question  of  whether  the  First-tier   Judge   had
    jurisdiction to consider Article  8  at  all,  pointing  out  that  the
    respondent's decision does not require any of the individuals  affected
    by the decision, to leave the UK.   The  decision,  it  is  argued,  is
    simply that the appellant is not entitled to confirmation of a right of
    residence on the basis of derivative rights.

 6. Otherwise, the grounds take issue with the judge's conclusion that  the
    appellant meets the suitability and  eligibility  requirements  of  the
    Rules, in the absence  of  knowledge  of  the  appellant's  immigration
    status.  Furthermore, it is argued that in concluding that it would  be
    unreasonable to expect the appellant's daughter J, born  on  1  October
    2013, to leave the UK the judge proceeded  under  a  mistake  of  fact,
    given that there is no removal  decision.   The  respondent  had  never
    expressed the view that J would be required to leave the UK.

 7. In addition, it is said that the First-tier Judge was wrong to conclude
    at [50] that there had to be "repeated" breaches of  Immigration  Rules
    for the respondent to conclude that there was a very  poor  immigration
    history.  Similarly, the absence of any criminal record on the part  of
    the appellant is nothing other than a neutral factor and the First-tier
    Judge had erred in relying on the lack of criminal record as a positive
    factor.

 8. Lastly, it is argued that  there  had  been  no  consideration  of  the
    question of the appellant returning to China to seek entry clearance.

 9. In submissions before me Ms Brocklesby-Weller relied on  those  grounds
    and also on the Amirteymour point.  Insofar as the appellant sought  to
    rely on the decision of Vladimir Granovski v Secretary of State for the
    Home Department [2015] EWHC 1478 (Admin), that was a different type  of
    case which did not involve the EEA Regulations.

10. Other aspects of the determination were referred to in suggesting  that
    the assessment under the Article  8  Immigration  Rules  was  otherwise
    flawed.

11. Mr Lam relied on the decision in Granovski, in  particular  at  [80]  -
    [82].   That  was  a  decision  involving  the  question  of   adequate
    consideration of the 'Section 55' duty.  Although it is  accepted  that
    that is not an EEA case, it was one involving a child it was submitted.

12. Reliance was placed on the skeleton argument put before the  First-tier
    Tribunal, including with reference to the  decision  in  Dereci  &  Ors
    (European citizenship) [2011]  EUECJ  C-256/11  specifically  at  [72],
    which concerned the refusal of a right of residence  and  whether  that
    undermined the right to respect for private and  family  life  provided
    for in Article 7 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of  the  European
    Union.

13. In general terms it was argued that, the facts not  being  in  dispute,
    the judge was entitled to consider EX.1 and  the  relationship  between
    the appellant and her children in the UK.  Reliance was also placed  on
    the decision in Zambrano [2011] EUECJ C-34/09.

14. Furthermore, it was submitted that the judge was similarly entitled  to
    take into account that there was no criminality evident in this case in
    terms of the Immigration Directorate Instructions referred to at  [50].
    So far as the decision in Amirteymour is concerned,  it  was  submitted
    that  there  was  a  distinction  between  Article  8  proper  and  the
    Immigration Rules under Appendix FM.  Paragraph EX  requires  different
    considerations although there is some overlap.

    My assessment

15. I do not consider it necessary to deal with the detailed  challenge  to
    the judge's conclusions with respect to the Immigration  Rules  because
    it is clear that the Secretary of State's appeal succeeds on the ground
    in relation to the Amirteymour point.

16. It was conceded before the First-tier Tribunal that the  appellant  was
    not able to meet the requirements of the EEA Regulations,  (see  [14]).
    The appeal was considered  with  reference  to  Article  8,  the  judge
    starting his consideration under the Article 8 Immigration Rules.

17. At [41] the judge said that although the respondent  did  not  consider
    the appellant's position under Article 8, he accepted the submission on
    behalf of the appellant that he had jurisdiction to consider that as  a
    ground of appeal.

18. Mr Lam submitted that Amirteymour was a decision  based  on  Article  8
    proper, rather than the Article 8 Immigration Rules and the position is
    therefore different in the case of this appellant. I do not agree  with
    that submission.  It  is  clear,  for  example  from  [38]  -  [42]  of
    Amirteymour that this is precisely the issue that was determined by the
    Upper Tribunal in Amirteymour.  The contrary is unarguable.

19. I have not found the decision in Granovski of any assistance, not least
    because that was not a case dealing with refusal of  a  residence  card
    under the EEA Regulations and a subsequent reliance  on  an  Article  8
    ground of appeal.

20. Similarly, although the appellant seeks to  rely  on  the  decision  in
    Dereci, in the appellant's case the Secretary of State's decision  does
    not involve any interference with family life, there being  no  present
    decision to remove  the  appellant.   The  appellant  has  a  route  to
    establish entitlement to leave to  remain  through  an  application  on
    Article 8 grounds, which the statutory regime precludes in a case where
    the application is made for a residence card and where no s.120  notice
    has been served.

21. In the circumstances, whilst the First-tier  judge  did  not  have  the
    benefit of the decision in Amirteymour, I am satisfied that he  had  no
    jurisdiction to determine an Article 8 ground of appeal, whether  under
    the Article 8 Immigration Rules or under Article 8 proper. His decision
    to allow the appeal on that basis must be set aside.

22. Accordingly, I do not consider  it  necessary  to  consider  the  other
    grounds advanced on behalf of the Secretary of State in  terms  of  the
    conclusions of the First-tier  Judge  in  relation  to  the  Article  8
    Immigration Rules.  I set aside the decision and re-make it, dismissing
    the appeal.

    Decision

23. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  Its decision is set aside.   The  decision  is  re-
    made, dismissing the appeal.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek  5/11/15

