



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38109/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 September 2015                           |On 25 September 2015          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                             (1) MRS GRACE IYARE
                           (2) miss JESSICA IYARE
                           (3) master DANIEL IYARE
                           (4) master JOSEPH IYARE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                       Respondents/Claimants

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Specialist Appeal Team
For the Respondent:    Mr P Uzoechina, Legal Representative, Patterson & Co

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals from  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge O'Garro sitting at Hatton Cross on  23  December  2014)
    allowing the appeal of the first claimant against the decision  by  the
    Secretary of State to refuse her application for leave to remain in the
    UK on human rights grounds and to issue directions for her removal from
    the UK to Nigeria as a person subject to administrative  removal  under
    Section 10 of the Immigration and  Asylum  Act  1999.   The  second  to
    fourth claimants are her children under the age of 18, and all of  them
    joined in the first claimant's appeal as her  dependants.   The  First-
    tier Tribunal did not  make  an  anonymity  direction,  and  I  do  not
    consider that the claimants require to be accorded anonymity for  these
    proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. On 17 March 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Levin granted the  Secretary
    of State permission to appeal for the following reasons:

         2.   It is arguable that the Judge's failure to have regard to  the
             judgment and guidance of the Court of Appeal  in  the  leading
             case of EV (Philippines) and Others v SSHD [2014]  EWCA  (Civ)
             874 in her consideration of whether it would be reasonable  to
             expect the 2 elder children to return to Nigeria  amounted  to
             an error of law which arguably affected  the  outcome  of  the
             Appeal.

         3.   There is however no arguable merit that  the  Judge  erred  by
             failing to have regard to sections 117B(1) to (5) of the  2002
             Act in circumstances where she had  found  that  the  elder  2
             children were qualifying children  and  that  section  117B(6)
             therefore applied.  However the Judge's findings that  section
             117B(6) applied is tainted  by  her  failure  to  consider  EV
             (Philippines).

         4.   For these reasons both the grounds and the  decision  disclose
             an arguable error of law.

The Factual Background

3.   The first claimant is the main  claimant,  and  so  I  shall  hereafter
    refer to her as  "the  claimant",  save  where  the  context  otherwise
    requires.  The claimant is a  national  of  Nigeria,  as  are  all  her
    children.  Her eldest child Jessica was born in Nigeria on 22  November
    1999 and son Daniel was born in  Nigeria  on  13  February  2003.   The
    claimant was issued with a visit visa which was valid  from  24  August
    2006 until 24 February 2007.  The date of entry was not  recorded,  but
    it appears not to be disputed that the  claimant  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom as a visitor, with her two elder children, and then returned to
    Nigeria before the expiry of her visit visa.   The  claimant  was  then
    issued with a multi-visit visa which was valid from 2 March 2007  until
    2 March 2009.  Again, the date of entry is  not  recorded.   Daniel  is
    recorded as having re-entered the UK with his mother. There appears  to
    be no record of Jessica's re-entry.  But there is no challenge  to  the
    finding of the First-tier Tribunal  that  the  two  children  both  re-
    entered with their mother in May 2007 (see below).  The  claimant  must
    have been pregnant with her third child on entry, as  on  27  September
    2007 Joseph was born in the United Kingdom.

4.   The claimant did not leave the United  Kingdom  within  six  months  of
    entering as a visitor, and overstayed.  She first sought to  regularise
    her status by making an EEA application on  25  September  2012.   This
    application was refused.  In August 2014 her legal representatives made
    representations that her case should  be  considered  under  Article  8
    ECHR.  On 29 August 2014 the Secretary of State gave  her  reasons  for
    rejecting the Article 8 claims of the claimant and  her  children,  and
    for serving on each of them an IS151A notice notifying  them  of  their
    liability to removal.

5.    At  the  beginning  of  the  letter,  it  was   explained   that   the
    circumstances of the claimant's  child  Tom  Iyare,  who  was  born  in
    Nigeria on 10 September 1993, had been considered separately as he  was
    an adult, and it had been confirmed he  was  attending  university  and
    living at a separate address to that at which  his  mother  claimed  to
    live.  The  Secretary  of  State  went  on  to  review  the  claimant's
    immigration history.  It was noted that in her EEA application made  in
    September 2012 only Tom Iyare and  Daniel  Iyare  were  listed  as  her
    dependants.

6.   Her case had been considered under EX.1 of Appendix FM.   Her  youngest
    child was born in the UK less than seven years ago, and so he  did  not
    meet the requirement of living in the  UK  continuously  for  at  least
    seven years immediately preceding the  date  of  application.   As  the
    remaining two youngest children were under the  age  of  18  years  and
    appeared to have lived continuously in the UK for at least seven years,
    an assessment had been undertaken to determine if it would unreasonable
    to expect them to leave the UK.   She  was  specifically  requested  by
    letter dated August 2014 to explain why her children could  not  return
    to Nigeria with her.  Not only was no evidence received in this regard,
    but no mention of this was made in the response of 26 August 2014.   No
    evidence had been provided to demonstrate the impact  of  removing  the
    children, whose father was known to live in Nigeria, nor indeed had the
    impact even  been  mentioned  in  representations.   Nothing  had  been
    provided to demonstrate how it would not  be  in  the  children's  best
    interests to return to Nigeria with their mother, to a country in which
    they could reside legally and in  which  their  mother  could  work  to
    support them.  It was not considered that the children's removal  would
    be to their  detriment  to  the  extent  that  it  would  outweigh  the
    legitimate aim being sought.  Remaining with  their  mother  outweighed
    the desirability of them being educated at public expense  in  the  UK.
    Although the claimant had apparently been absent for  seven  years  and
    five months from Nigeria, it was not considered  that  the  passage  of
    time resulted in  very  significant  obstacles  to  her  reintegration.
    There was no evidence that she  had  not  been  integrated  within  the
    Nigerian community during her time  in  the  UK,  so  as  to  make  her
    reintegration easier.

7.   It was noted that the justification for  the  claimant  remaining  here
    illegally was the breakdown of her relationship with her  husband,  the
    father of her children.  Her legal representative had not explained why
    this was a good excuse.

8.   Consideration had been given  to  exceptional  circumstances.   It  was
    claimed that she had been living  without  recourse  to  public  funds,
    having been supported by her EEA partner.  It was accepted that she did
    not appear to  have  claimed  public  funds,  but  she  had  failed  to
    demonstrate how she had been supported.  There was no evidence  of  the
    duration of her claimed relationship and it was  likely  that  she  had
    worked illegally.  She had also not explained how  her  eldest  child's
    study at University of Portsmouth had been funded, nor  why  the  child
    had entered  under  the  name  Efosa  Iyare,  despite  having  a  birth
    certificate in the name of Tom Iyare, and now a passport in that  name.
    The claimant was not considered of good character as she  had  remained
    illegally in the United Kingdom since the expiry of her  leave,  making
    only a single application to regularise her stay.  So it was considered
    that her removal from the United  Kingdom  remained  appropriate.   Her
    conduct was extremely poor, as she  had  remained  here  illegally  and
    developed ties in the United Kingdom, along with her children,  despite
    being fully aware that she and they had no right to remain  here.   She
    had made no attempt to regularise her stay until 25 September 2012, and
    she had not included two  of  her  children  as  dependants  upon  this
    application.  Having failed to leave the UK following the expiry of her
    leave as a visitor, the claimant had shown a complete disregard for the
    Immigration Rules.  Her minor children  were  not  considered  to  have
    responsibility for their  overstaying  or  lack  of  status.  This  was
    entirely her fault.

The  Hearing  before,  and  the  Decision  of,   the   First-tier   Tribunal



9.   Both parties  were  legally  represented  before  Judge  O'Garro.   The
    claimant gave oral evidence, and was cross-examined by  the  Presenting
    Officer.  In her subsequent decision, the judge's findings were set out
    at paragraphs [27] onwards.  She found  that  the  claimant  could  not
    succeed as a partner under Appendix FM and she had provided no evidence
    that she was in a subsisting relationship with  a  partner.   She  also
    could not succeed under the parent route in Appendix FM as she did  not
    meet the eligibility requirements.  This was because  she  had  entered
    the United Kingdom as a visitor.  The judge  turned  to  consider  Rule
    276ADE:

         34.  The first appellant has submitted no  evidence  to  show  that
             there would be very significant obstacles to her reintegration
             if she was returned to Nigeria.  The appellant left Nigeria at
             the age of 37 and at that age  she  would  have  formed  solid
             social ties  in  her  country.   I  have  no  doubt  that  the
             appellant would still retain some of those ties and may  still
             have close family members in Nigeria  who  would  be  able  to
             assist her in reintegration.

         35.  However, I also have to consider the article 8 rights  of  the
             first appellant's dependant children.  I accept that the first
             appellant has been the parent with whom the  minor  appellants
             have lived since their entry to the United  Kingdom  and  that
             she has been the parent providing for their day to day care.

         36.  It is accepted that the first  appellant  entered  the  United
             Kingdom with her children in May 2007 then Jessica and  Daniel
             have lived in the United Kingdom for more than seven years  by
             the date of the application to the  respondent  was  made.   I
             noted that the respondent in her Refusal  Letter  acknowledges
             this may be the case.

         37.  This must mean that consideration has to be given to Paragraph
             276ADE in relation to Jessica and Daniel's Article 8 right  to
             their private lives.

         38.  Paragraph 276ADE(iv) says that an  applicant  would  meet  the
             requirements of that paragraph if he is under the  age  of  18
             years and has lived continuously in the  UK  for  at  least  7
             years (discounting any period of imprisonment)  and  it  would
             not be reasonable to expect the applicant to leave the UK.

         39.  Jessica is 15 years old.  It has to be accepted that  she  has
             formed strong attachments in the United Kingdom.  Her  brother
             Daniel is 11 years old and he too  would  have  formed  strong
             attachments by now.

         40.  The question for me to determine is whether  it  is  in  these
             children's best interest to remove them with their  mother  to
             Nigeria.  In considering this question and whether it would be
             reasonable to expect Jessica and Daniel to return to  Nigeria,
             I have born in mind what the Tribunal said in E-A (Article 8 -
             best interests of  child)  Nigeria  [2011]  UKUT  00315.   The
             Tribunal held that absent other  factors,  the  reason  why  a
             period of substantial  residence  as  a  child  may  become  a
             weighty   consideration   in   the   balance   of    competing
             considerations it that in the course of such  time  roots  are
             put down, personal identities are developed,  friendships  are
             formed and links are  made  with  the  community  outside  the
             family unit ...  That during a child's very early years, he or
             she will be primarily focused on self and the  caring  parents
             or guardian.  Long residence once the child is likely to  have
             formed ties outside the  family  is  likely  to  have  greater
             impact on his or her well being.

         41.  Jessica has lived in the United Kingdom for more than 7  years
             and would have made firm  friends  and  solid  attachments  at
             school and in the community.  I am told that she sings in  the
             Church Choir.  I am also told that Jessica  is  in  the  first
             year of the GCSE curriculum programme which means that she  is
             getting ready to take her GCSE examination in  the  summer  of
             this new year.  That being the case, I  find  to  disturb  her
             education now by her removal could have a  detrimental  effect
             on her future educational progress and that would  not  be  in
             her best interest.

         42.  Daniel has also lived in the United Kingdom for more than seen
             years.  He is of the age where he would have started secondary
             school.  I find to disrupt his education now by his removal to
             an educational system alien to him would not be  in  his  best
             interest either.

         43.  I therefore find that it would not  be  reasonable  to  expect
             Jessica and Daniel appellants to leave the United Kingdom  and
             be returned to Nigeria as they are well  integrated  into  the
             educational system in the United Kingdom.

10.  Having found that the two eldest children succeeded  in  their  appeals
    under Rule 276ADE, the judge went on to consider the Article  8  claims
    of the mother and the youngest child outside the Rules.  She  found  it
    was not in the interests of Jessica and Daniel  to  be  separated  from
    their mother and of course it could not be in Joseph's interest  to  be
    removed from his mother and siblings.  So she allowed  the  second  and
    third claimants' appeals under the Rules,  and  the  first  and  fourth
    claimants' appeals under Article 8 ECHR outside the Rules.

The Rule 24 Response

11.  Following the grant  of  permission  to  appeal  by  Judge  Levin,  the
    claimant's  representative,  Mr  P  Uzoechina,  legal   representative,
    Patterson & Co served a Rule 24 response opposing the appeal.

12.  His first ground of opposition was that the Presenting Officer  at  the
    hearing had not relied or raised any issue touching on the case  of  EV
    Philippines and therefore it was unreasonable, and indeed unfair in  an
    adversarial system, "to require the Tribunal to argue her case."

13.   His  second  ground  of  opposition  is  that  consideration   of   EV
    Philippines would have made no material difference to  the  outcome  of
    the present appeal, as the facts were clearly distinguishable.   Unlike
    the children in EV Philippines, all the children in  the  present  case
    satisfied the requirements of Rule 276ADE in their own individual right
    at the date  of  application  and/or  hearing.   Also,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had properly considered the "reasonability of expulsion"
    taking into account all the facts that she was required  to  take  into
    account: namely, the children's age, length of residence, the  strength
    of ties with their community, their ties with the educational community
    and finally the precariousness of Jessica's educational future  if  she
    was forced to leave her settled environment.  The judge's conclusion at
    paragraph [43] that it would not be reasonable to  expect  Jessica  and
    Daniel to leave the United Kingdom was  a  finding  of  fact  that  was
    reasonably open to the judge.

14.  His third ground of opposition was that in reaching her  conclusion  on
    reasonability, the judge also had the benefit of the unchallenged  oral
    and documentary evidence to which the judge refers at  paragraphs  [22]
    to [25] of her decision.  This  evidence  supported  the  finding  that
    removal would be unreasonable and might breach Articles 2 and 3 of  the
    ECHR.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

15.  At the hearing  before  me,  Mr  Uzoechina  developed  the  grounds  of
    opposition which he had outlined in his Rule 24 response.  As  well  as
    relying on Dube [2015] UKUT 90 (IAC), Mr Uzoechina also sought to  rely
    on two unreported decisions by Deputy Judges of the Upper Tribunal.  Mr
    Tufan objected to this on the ground that Mr Uzoechina had not complied
    with  the  Practice   Direction   on   the   citation   of   unreported
    determinations.  These Practice Directions are to be found at page  612
    of Phelan, 9th edition.  Paragraph 11.2  provides  an  application  for
    permission to cite a determination which has not been reported  must  -
    (b) identify the proposition for  which  the  determination  is  to  be
    cited; and (c) certify that the proposition is not to be found  in  any
    reported determination of the Tribunal, the IAT or the AIT and has  not
    been superseded by the decision of a higher authority.  Paragraph  11.3
    provides that permission under paragraph 11.1 will be given only  where
    the Tribunal considers it be  materially  assisted  by  citation  of  a
    determination, as  distinct  from  the  adoption  in  argument  of  the
    reasoning to be found in the determination.  Such instances are  likely
    to be rare.

16.  I had read the decisions in advance of the hearing, and  they  did  not
    contain any proposition that was  not  to  be  found  in  any  reported
    decision of the Upper Tribunal.  Moreover, as Mr  Uzoechina  confirmed,
    he  was  only  seeking  to  adopt  in  argument  the  reasoning   which
    underpinned the unreported decisions, rather than relying  on  them  as
    illuminating a legal proposition which was not be found in  a  reported
    decision of the Upper Tribunal or Court of  Appeal.   So  I  upheld  Mr
    Tufan's objection.

17.  Mr Tufan produced a  contemporaneous  memorandum  from  the  Presenting
    Officer who appeared before the First-tier Tribunal. She asserted  that
    she had relied explicitly on EV Philippines  and  Azimi-Moayed  in  her
    submissions to the First-tier Tribunal  Judge.  Mr  Uzoechina  insisted
    this was not true. I informed the parties that there  was  no  explicit
    reference to either authority  in  the  judge's  manuscript  Record  of
    Proceedings.  There was also no reference  to  any  other  authorities.
    However, the submissions of the Presenting Officer reflected the  ratio
    of EV Philippines.

18.  After protracted argument on a number of  related  issues,  I  gave  my
    ruling.  I found that there was an error of law such that the  decision
    should be set aside and re-made.  I gave my reasons for so  finding  in
    short form, and my extended reasons are set out below.

Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

The developing jurisprudence on the significance of seven  years'  residence
    as a child

19.  Prior to the introduction of the new Rules, the significance  of  seven
    years' residence was that under the child policy  concession  known  as
    DP5/96 the Secretary of State used  to  grant  discretionary  leave  to
    families with an otherwise irregular status where at least one child of
    the family had accrued seven years' residence.   Although  this  policy
    was withdrawn in 2008, the President in LD Zimbabwe observed that seven
    years' residence on the part of a child was still significant, as prima
    facie after seven years' residence a child's best interest lay  in  him
    remaining in the host country.

20.  However, these observations were made alongside  the  observation  that
    the circumstances prevailing in  the  prospective  country  of  return,
    Zimbabwe, were dire.  When the  Upper  Tribunal  considered  again  the
    seven year benchmark in EA (Article 8 - best interests of child) [2011]
    UKUT 00315 (IAC) (a  panel  consisting  of  the  President  and  Senior
    Immigration Judge Jarvis) it was noted that the  former  policy  DP5/96
    made reference to other factors which had to be taken into account when
    considering whether to grant leave to remain under the policy:

    (a)  the length of the parents' residence without leave;

    (b)  whether removal has been delayed  through  protracted  (and  often
         repetitive) representations or by the parents going to ground;

    (c)  the age of the children;

    (d)  whether the children were conceived at a time when either  of  the
         parents had leave to remain;

    (e)  whether return to the  parents'  country  of  origin  would  cause
         extreme hardship for the children or put their health seriously  at
         risk;

    (f)  whether either of the parents has a history of criminal  behaviour
         or deception.

21.  A useful summary of the learning on the best interests of  children  in
    the context of immigration is to be found the determination  of  Azimi-
    Moayed & Others (decisions affecting children; onward  appeals)  [2013]
    UKUT 197 (IAC):

         30.  It is not the case that the best interests principle means  it
             is automatically in the interests of any child to be permitted
             to remain in the United Kingdom, irrespective of  age,  length
             of stay, family background or other circumstances.   The  case
             law  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  has  identified  the  following
             principles to assist in the  determination  of  appeals  where
             children are affected by the decisions:

             (i)  As a starting point in the best interests of children  to
                  be with both their parents and if both parents  are  being
                  removed from the United Kingdom then  the  starting  point
                  suggests that so should dependent children who  form  part
                  of  their  household  unless  there  are  reasons  to  the
                  contrary.

             (ii) It is generally in the interests of children to have both
                  stability  and  continuity  of  social   and   educational
                  provision and the benefit of growing up  in  the  cultural
                  norms of the society to which they belong.

             (iii)    Lengthy residence in a country other than  the  state
                  of origin can lead to development of social, cultural  and
                  educational  ties  that  it  would  be  inappropriate   to
                  disrupt, in the  absence  of  compelling  reasons  to  the
                  contrary.  What amounts to lengthy residence is not  clear
                  cut but past and present policies  have  identified  seven
                  years as a relevant period.

             (iv) Apart from the terms of published policies and Rules, the
                  Tribunal notes that seven years from age 4 is likely to be
                  more significant to a child than the first seven years  of
                  life.  Very young children are focused  on  their  parents
                  rather than peers and are adaptable.

             (v)  Short periods of  residence,  particularly  ones  without
                  leave or the reasonable expectation of leave to  enter  or
                  remain, while claims are promptly considered, are unlikely
                  to give rise to private life deserving of respect  in  the
                  absence of exceptional factors.  In any event,  protection
                  of the  economic  wellbeing  of  society  amply  justifies
                  removal in such cases.

22.  The following observations of the Court  of  Appeal  in  JW  (China)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1526  are
    also pertinent:

         22.  In my view the correct approach is very well summarised in the
             Upper Tribunal decision of MK (Best interests of child) [2011]
             UKUT 00475 (IAC), where this was said at paragraphs 23 and  24
             of the determination:

                  "...If, for example, all the factors weighing in the  best
                  interests of the child consideration point  overwhelmingly
                  in favour of the child and or relevant  parents  remaining
                  in the UK, that is very likely to mean  that  very  strong
                  countervailing factors can outweigh it.  If, at the  other
                  extreme,  all  the  factors  of  relevance  to  the   best
                  interests of the child consideration (save for the child's
                  and/or parents own claim that they want to  remain)  point
                  overwhelmingly to the child's interest being  best  served
                  by him returning with his parents to his country of origin
                  ...  then   very   little   by   way   of   countervailing
                  considerations to do with immigration control etc. may  be
                  necessary in order for the  conclusion  to  be  drawn  the
                  decision appealed against was and is proportionate."

23.  EV (Philippines) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874 provides  the  most  recent
    guidance from the senior courts on the approach to best  interests  and
    the question of reasonableness.  Clarke LJ said:
       34. In determining whether or not, in a case such  as  the  present,
           the need for immigration control outweighs the best interests of
           the children, it is necessary to determine the relative strength
           of the factors which make it in their best interests  to  remain
           here; and also to take account of any  factors  that  point  the
           other way.


       35. A decision as to what is in the best interests of children  will
           depend on a number of factors such as (a)  their  age;  (b)  the
           length of time that they have been here; (c) how long they  have
           been in education; (c) what stage their education  has  reached;
           (d) to what extent they have become distanced from  the  country
           to which it is proposed that  they  return;  (e)  how  renewable
           their connection with it may be; (f) to what  extent  they  will
           have linguistic, medical or other difficulties  in  adapting  to
           life in that country; and (g) the extent  to  which  the  course
           proposed will interfere with their family life or  their  rights
           (if they have any) as British citizens.


       36. In a sense the tribunal is concerned with how emphatic an answer
           falls to be given to the question: is it in the  best  interests
           of the child to remain? The longer the child has been here,  the
           more advanced (or critical) the  stage  of  his  education,  the
           looser his ties with the  country  in  question,  and  the  more
           deleterious the consequences of  his  return,  the  greater  the
           weight that falls  into  one  side  of  the  scales.  If  it  is
           overwhelmingly in the child's best interests that he should  not
           return, the need to maintain immigration control  may  well  not
           tip the balance. By contrast  if  it  is  in  the  child's  best
           interests to remain, but only  on  balance  (with  some  factors
           pointing the other way), the result may be the opposite.


       37. In the balance on the other side there falls to  be  taken  into
           account the strong weight to be given to the  need  to  maintain
           immigration control in pursuit of the economic well-being of the
           country and the fact that, ex hypothesi, the applicants have no
           entitlement to remain. The immigration history  of  the  parents
           may also be relevant e.g. if they are overstayers, or have acted
           deceitfully.
24.  Lewison LJ said:

         49.  Second, as Christopher Clarke LJ points out, the evaluation of
             the  best  interests  of  children  in  immigration  cases  is
             problematic.  In the  real  world,  the  appellant  is  almost
             always the parent who has no right to remain in the  UK.   The
             parent thus relies  on  the  best  interests  of  his  or  her
             children in order  to  piggyback  on  their  rights.   In  the
             present case, as  there  is  no  doubt  in  many  others,  the
             Immigration Judge made two findings about the children's  best
             interests:

             (a)  the best interests  of  the  children  are  obviously  to
                  remain with their parents; [29] and

             (b)  it is in the best interests of the  children  that  their
                  education in the UK [is] not to be disrupted [53].

         50.  What, if any, assumptions are to be made about the immigration
             status of the parent?  If one takes the facts as they  are  in
             reality, then the first of the  Immigration  Judge's  findings
             about  the  best  interests  of  the  children  point  towards
             removal.  If, on the other hand, one assumes that  the  parent
             has the right to remain, then one is assuming  the  answer  to
             the very question the Tribunal has to decide.  Or is there  is
             a middle ground, in which one has to assess the best interests
             of the children without regard to the  immigration  status  of
             the parent?

25.  The judge went on to analyse ZH (Tanzania) v  Secretary  of  State  for
    the Home Department [2011] UKSC 4 in order to elicit an answer to  this
    question.  He reached the following conclusion:

         58.   In  my  judgment,  therefore,  the  assessment  of  the  best
             interests of the children must be made on the basis the  facts
             are as they are in the real world.  One parent has no right to
             remain, but the other parent  does,  that  is  the  background
             against which the assessment is conducted.  If neither  parent
             has the right to remain, then that is the  background  against
             which the assessment is conducted.  Thus the ultimate question
             will be is it reasonable to expect the  child  to  follow  the
             parent with no right to remain to the country of origin?"

      On the facts of ZH it was not reasonable to  expect  the  children  to
      follow their mother to Tanzania, not least because the family would be
      separated and the children would be deprived of the right to  grow  up
      in the country of which they were citizens.  That was a long way  from
      the facts of the case before them.  No one in the family was a British
      citizen.  None had the right to remain in the country.  If the  mother
      was removed, the father had no independent right to remain.  With  the
      parents removed,  then  it  was  entirely  reasonable  to  expect  the
      children to go with them:

         Although it is, of course a question of fact for  the  Tribunal,  I
         cannot see that  the  desirability  of  being  educated  at  public
         expense in the UK can outweigh  the  benefit  to  the  children  of
         remaining with their parents.  Just as we  cannot  provide  medical
         treatment for the world, so we cannot educate the world.

      Jackson LJ agreed with both judgments.

26.  The "hypothetical" approach sanctioned by Christopher Clarke LJ  is  in
    line with the guidance given by the Upper Tribunal in MK (India)  which
    he cites with approval.  In MK, the Upper Tribunal emphasised the  need
    to conduct the initial best interest assessment without any immigration
    control overtones.  These only came into play when the  decision  maker
    moved on to a wider proportionality assessment.

27.   However,  the  "real  world"  approach  is  not   unprecedented.    In
    particular, it is reflected in the leading  speech  of  Lord  Hodge  in
    Zoumbas v Secretary of State [2013] UKSC 74, where  the  Supreme  Court
    dismissed an appeal against  removal  brought  by  a  Congolese  family
    comprising Mr and Mrs Zoumbas and two daughters, who had been  born  in
    the United Kingdom on 3 February 2007 and 14 April  2011  respectively.
    At paragraph [24] Lord Hodge said:

         There is no irrationality in the conclusion  that  it  was  in  the
         children's best interests to go with their parents to the  Republic
         of Congo.  No doubt it would have  been  possible  to  have  stated
         that, other things being equal, it was in the best interests of the
         children that they and their parents stayed in the  United  Kingdom
         so that they could obtain such benefits as healthcare and education
         which the decision maker recognised might be of a  higher  standard
         than would be available in the Congo. But  other  things  were  not
         equal.  They were not British  citizens.   They  had  no  right  to
         future education and healthcare in this country.  They were part of
         a close-knit family with highly educated parents and were of an age
         when their emotional needs could  only  be  fully  met  within  the
         immediate family unit.   Such  integration  as  had  occurred  into
         United Kingdom society would have been predominantly in the context
         of that  family  unit.   Most  significantly,  the  decision  maker
         concluded that they could be removed to the Republic  of  Congo  in
         the care of  their  parents  without  serious  detriment  to  their
         wellbeing.

28.  The significance of this brief survey of the relevant law  is  that  it
    illuminates the question of how the decision maker should go about  the
    task of  deciding  whether  an  applicant  meets  the  requirements  of
    EX.1(a)(ii) or Rule 276ADE(1)(iv).  The assessment of reasonableness is
    a holistic one, and the immigration status and history of  the  parents
    is a relevant consideration, following EV (Philippines).  The fact that
    there is a qualifying child, either because the child has accrued seven
    years residence in the UK or because the child is a  British  national,
    is not a trump card, as otherwise there would not be a  requirement  to
    go on to consider whether, nonetheless, it is reasonable to expect  the
    child to leave the United Kingdom.

The relationship between s117B(6) and the Rules

29.  In AM (S117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260 (IAC) the Tribunal held  that  the
    duty of the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  quite  clear.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal was required  to  have  regard  to  considerations  listed  in
    Section  117B.   It  had  no  discretion  to   leave   any   of   those
    considerations out of account, if  it  was  a  consideration  that  was
    raised on the evidence before it.  The Tribunal continued in  paragraph
    [13]:

         There is also in our judgment no requirement that  the  FtT  should
         pose and answer the same question  more  than  once,  simply  as  a
         matter of form.  Thus since both  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  of  the
         Immigration Rules, and S117B(6), both raise the  same  question  in
         relation to a particular child, of  whether  or  not  it  would  be
         reasonable to expect that child to leave the UK: it is  a  question
         that need only be answered once.

Disruption to education

30.  The facts of AM  were  that  AM  had  entered  the  United  Kingdom  in
    September 2006 as a student.  His last grant of  leave  to  remain  had
    expired on 2 December 2012.  In  the  meantime,  his  wife  and  eldest
    daughter were granted entry clearance to  join  him  as  dependants  in
    January 2007, and a second child was then born to the couple in the  UK
    on 3 April 2011.  All the family were citizens of Malawi.  As was  held
    by the Upper Tribunal  at  paragraph  [35],  the  eldest  child  was  a
    qualifying child as defined by Section 117D(1) by virtue  of  entry  to
    the UK in January 2007. It was not in  dispute  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that she had lived in the UK for a continuous period of  seven
    years or more at the date of the appeal hearing, and as  a  result  the
    First-tier Tribunal was required to consider her position by  reference
    to Section 117B(6).  There was also no dispute that  the  appellant  as
    her father had a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with  his
    eldest daughter, and thus the only issue was whether or not it would be
    reasonable to expect her to  leave  the  UK.   At  paragraph  [39]  the
    Tribunal said:

         There was no reason to infer that any interruption of the education
         of the elder  child  upon  return  to  Malawi  would  be  any  more
         significant than that faced by any child forced to  move  from  one
         country to another by virtue of the careers of their parents.   Nor
         should the difficulties of a move from one school to another become
         unduly exaggerated.  It would be highly unusual for a child in  the
         UK to complete the entirety of their education within  one  school.
         The trauma, or excitement, of a new school, new classmates and  new
         teachers is an integral part of growing up.  In  too  many  appeals
         the FtT is presented with arguments whose basic premise is that  to
         change a school is to submit a child to a cruel  and  unduly  harsh
         experience.

31.  The Tribunal went on to find that the judge was entitled  to  conclude,
    as she did, that there was every reason to suppose that  both  children
    would be able to access both primary and secondary education in Malawi.
     There was no evidential basis on which the judge could find either  of
    them would be denied the opportunity of  tertiary  education,  and  the
    ability to  access  it  if  they  attained  the  educational  threshold
    requirements.

Failure to follow one of two alternative methodologies

32.  As indicated by my earlier  discussion  of  EV  Philippines,  the  case
    discloses two alternative methodologies.  One of them is the real world
    approach, where in a case such as this the reasonableness question must
    be framed as whether it is  reasonable  for  the  qualifying  child  to
    return to his or her country of origin with the parent who has no right
    to remain here.  The other methodology is to undertake  a  conventional
    best interest assessment, with a view  to  establishing  where  on  the
    spectrum the case for  the  child  remaining  here  lies;  and,  having
    answered that  question,  to  consider  whether  wider  proportionality
    considerations make it disproportionate, and  hence  unreasonable,  for
    the child to follow the parent without leave to the country of  origin.
    Whichever methodology is used, the result should  be  the  same.  As  I
    informed the parties in my oral ruling, Judge O'Garro erred in  law  as
    she followed neither methodology.

33.  Looking at the matter from a  real  world  perspective,  Judge  O'Garro
    failed to acknowledge in her  assessment  of  reasonableness  that  the
    qualifying children's mother had no right to be here, and that what was
    being proposed was the removal of the entire family unit to the country
    of which they were all nationals.  It was against this background  that
    the assessment of reasonableness needed to be conducted.

34.  Turning to a conventional best interest assessment, the  judge  rightly
    placed in the scales the factors  which  militated  in  favour  of  the
    qualifying children remaining here.  But she failed to take account  of
    the considerations which went the other way.  These included  the  fact
    that there were no significant obstacles to the reintegration of  their
    mother, and hence no threat to the children's  well-being  in  Nigeria;
    and prima facie it was in the  best  interests  of  all  the  children,
    including the qualifying children, to remain  within  the  same  family
    unit and to return with their mother who had no right to be here to the
    country of which they were all nationals.  As the Tribunal said  in  AM
    Malawi at paragraph [13], "the mere presence of the children in the UK,
    and their academic success, was not a trump card  which  their  parents
    could deploy to demand immigration status for the whole family".

35.  There is a conflict of evidence as to whether  the  Presenting  Officer
    specifically cited EV Philippines.  It is not a conflict that I need to
    resolve, as the law always speaks.  In any event, EV Philippines simply
    clarified the law. The decision of Judge O'Garro is  clearly  erroneous
    in law by reference to various earlier authorities, including the House
    of Lords' decision in Zoumbas and the well-known Presidential  guidance
    given in Azimi-Moayed.

36.  Moreover, as indicated to the parties during the hearing,  the  judge's
    manuscript Record of Proceedings  shows  that  the  Presenting  Officer
    relied on the real world approach illuminated in EV Philippines in  her
    closing submissions. She relied on the fact that none of  the  children
    were British nationals, and the whole family was present in the country
    illegally.  Although the children were in education  here,  they  could
    continue with their education in Nigeria.  So it was reasonable for the
    qualifying children to return to Nigeria as  part  of  a  family  unit.
    Judge O'Garro did not adequately engage with the  Presenting  Officer's
    submissions when giving her reasons as to why it was not reasonable for
    the qualifying children to leave the country.

37.  The  third  ground  advanced  for  opposing  the  appeal  is  that  the
    conclusion  of  unreasonableness  is  supported  by  the   unchallenged
    evidence of the claimant which is set out earlier in the decision.

38.  As summarised by the judge in paragraphs [22]  to  [25],  the  evidence
    given  by  the  claimant  was  that  following  a  breakdown   in   her
    relationship with her former husband, she  did  not  leave  the  United
    Kingdom with him to return to  Nigeria  because  she  feared  that  her
    former husband's family would have subjected their daughter Jessica  to
    female circumcision.  She also said that she was subjected to  domestic
    violence at the hands of her former  husband  due  to  her  refusal  to
    consent to his second marriage.  Although they were now  divorced,  she
    said she would be vulnerable if she returned to live in Nigeria because
    according to her culture the children belonged to the husband;  and  if
    he knew that she had returned to Nigeria with  the  children  he  would
    find her and take the children away and this would pose a threat to her
    daughter Jessica's life.  She also said that if  she  was  returned  to
    Nigeria she and her children would face destitution.

39.  It is apparent from examination of the court file that, shortly  before
    the scheduled hearing of the claimants'  appeal  against  the  decision
    under Article 8, Mr Uzoechina wrote to the Home Office  on  6  December
    2014 stating that his client's instructions were that the family of her
    ex-husband, including the ex-husband himself, were threatening to carry
    out circumcision of Jessica whenever she returned  to  Nigeria.   In  a
    subsequent letter to the First-tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross  dated  17
    December 2014, Mr Uzoechina said that his client had submitted a  claim
    to the Secretary of State with regards  to  two  issues:  her  fear  of
    persecution/domestic  violence  and  fear  of   having   her   daughter
    circumcised.  It was his view that the issues raised  in  these  claims
    were such that they needed to be considered first by the  Secretary  of
    State, and any adverse decision on the claims would attract a  separate
    right of appeal.  So it would be contentious for the Tribunal to decide
    on the issues without affording the Secretary of State  opportunity  to
    conduct an investigation into the claims and to reach a decision on the
    facts (rejected or otherwise).  In the light of the above, he submitted
    that  the  appeal  could  not  be  justly   determined   without   full
    consideration of the new claims and consequentially he  was  requesting
    an adjournment.

40.  The adjournment request was refused, and it  does  not  appear  that  a
    claim for international protection was pursued at the  hearing.   There
    is no mention of such a claim  in  the  judge's  manuscript  Record  of
    Proceedings, as well as there being no mention of  it  at  all  in  her
    written decision.  It is also not mentioned in  the  skeleton  argument
    which Mr Uzoechina placed before the First-tier Tribunal on 23 December
    2014.  Finally, there has  been  no  cross  appeal  from  the  claimant
    asserting that the judge has erred in law in failing to  make  findings
    on an international protection claim, and specifically on a claim  that
    she has a well-founded fear of persecution at  the  hands  of  her  ex-
    husband, or that her daughter Jessica was being threatened with FGM  if
    she returned to Nigeria.  Accordingly, I conclude that  the  judge  was
    not asked to consider an international protection claim, which  in  any
    event ought to have been pursued by the claimant presenting herself  at
    the Asylum Screening Unit in Croydon.

41.  The evidence which the claimant gave was relevant to  the  question  of
    whether she faced very significant obstacles to  her  reintegration  if
    she was returned with her children to Nigeria.   But  the  judge  found
    against her on this issue, and so by necessary  implication  the  judge
    rejected the evidence of the claimant that she or her children would be
    at risk of harm on return, whether at the  hands  of  her  ex-husband's
    family or on account of them facing destitution.  At all  events,  just
    as there is no cross appeal against the absence of a  decision  on  the
    international protection claim, there is also no cross  appeal  against
    the judge's finding that the claimant retains some solid social ties in
    Nigeria which will assist her in reintegration, and that there are  not
    very significant obstacles to her re-integration  (including  economic,
    familial or cultural obstacles).

The Re-Making of the Decision

42.  Following my error of law ruling, I discussed with the parties how  the
    decision should be re-made.  In light  of  the  procedural  history,  I
    informed the parties that I was not going to entertain an international
    protection claim which, if it was going to be  pursued,  needed  to  be
    presented to the Asylum Screening Interview Unit in the normal way  and
    examined by the Home Office as primary decision maker.  With regard  to
    the Article 8 claim, Mr Uzoechina confirmed that he  did  not  wish  to
    adduce any further oral evidence.  Accordingly, I re-make the  decision
    under the rules and/or Article 8 on the basis that the primary findings
    of fact made by the First-tier Tribunal stand unchallenged and are thus
    preserved.

43.  The claimant has not established an independent right to remain  either
    under the Rules or on Article 8 grounds outside  the  Rules.   She  can
    only resist removal if she can piggyback on the private life claims  of
    her two qualifying children.

44.  The question arising under Rule 276ADE is the same question  as  arises
    under Section 117B(6), and it need only  be  answered  once.   For  the
    purposes of answering  it,  I  will  weigh  in  the  balance  the  best
    interests for and against the children returning with their  mother  to
    their country of  nationality.   The  factors  militating  against  the
    qualifying children  returning  to  Nigeria  are  identified  by  Judge
    O'Garro, and I adopt them.  The best interest considerations in  favour
    of the children  accompanying  their  mother  and  younger  sibling  to
    Nigeria are that Nigeria is the country of their nationality, and their
    mother can legally work there to support them.  They  would  also  have
    the benefit of enjoying family reunion with relatives on their mother's
    side, and they would be able to continue their education, albeit  at  a
    different school and with  a  different  set  of  teachers  and  fellow
    pupils.  Another advantage is that they will be immersed in the  social
    and cultural milieu from which both their parents spring, and they will
    be  able  to  enjoy  to  the  full  the  benefits  of  their   Nigerian
    citizenship.  Accompanying  their  mother  to  Nigeria  will   not   be
    detrimental  to  the  children's  well-being,  and  the   consequential
    preservation of the integrity of the family unit and  other  associated
    advantages will enhance their well-being.

45.  Both qualifying children have strong private life claims as  they  have
    accrued over seven years' residence - from the age of four, in Daniel's
    case, and from the age of eight, in Jessica's case.   Nonetheless,  for
    the reasons given above, I consider that overall their  best  interests
    lie in them returning with their mother  and  younger  sibling  to  the
    country of which they are all nationals.  Even  if  I  am  wrong  about
    that, the scales are only narrowly tipped in favour of  the  qualifying
    children remaining here, and so the considerations arising on  a  wider
    proportionality assessment do not have to  be  very  cogent  to  render
    their removal with the rest of  the  family  proportionate,  and  hence
    reasonable.

46.  As set out in the  decision  letter,  their  mother  is  a  significant
    immigration offender.  The children are of course blameless,  but  they
    have no independent  right  to  live  here  as  they  are  not  British
    nationals. They are not financially independent, and they do not have a
    right to be educated in the UK at the tax payer's expense.

47.   Accordingly,  I  find  that  the  removal  of  the  entire  family  is
    proportionate to the legitimate  public  end  sought  to  be  achieved,
    namely the maintenance of firm and effective immigration controls.   By
    the same token, it is reasonable to expect the two  elder  children  to
    leave the United Kingdom with their mother  and  younger  sibling,  and
    therefore the two elder children do not qualify  for  leave  to  remain
    under Rule 276ADE (1)(iv).

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law,  and
accordingly the  decision  is  set  aside  and  the  following  decision  is
substituted: these appeals against administrative  removal  on  Rule  276ADE
and/or Article 8 grounds are dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have dismissed these appeals and therefore there can be no fee award.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

