
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38415/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision sent to parties on   |
|On 14 June 2016                               |On 2 August 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                              SAmeer ahmed khan

                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Ahmed, Counsel, instructed by Marks & Marks
Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the decision in the appeal of Mr Samir Ahmed Khan IA/38415/2014
    who appeals with permission against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal dismissing his appeal against  the  respondent's  decision  to
    refuse him leave to remain as  the  spouse  of  a  person  present  and
    settled in the United Kingdom.  The respondent refused the  application
    on 12 September 2014  and  the  appellant  applied  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by way of appeal against that decision.

 2. The relevant chronology in relation to this appeal is as follows.   The
    applicant was born in Pakistan in June 1988  and  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom as a student in September 2010.  In  July  2011  he  married  a
    British  citizen  who  became  pregnant  almost  immediately  with  his
    daughter.

 3. On 1 March 2012 he was granted leave to remain for  two  years  as  her
    spouse to expire on 1 March 2014.  A daughter was born to the couple on
    1 April 2012 and she is a British citizen.  However, by the end of  May
    2012 the marriage had broken down and  the  parties  had  separated  at
    least partly on grounds of domestic violence.  I have not seen  a  copy
    of the divorce petition.

 4. In April or May 2014 divorce proceedings were begun on the basis of two
    years' separation and consent but on 27 February 2014 the appellant had
    made an application for indefinite leave to remain as the spouse  of  a
    person present and settled in the United Kingdom.  He would have  known
    at  that  point  that  the  parties  were  estranged  but  the  divorce
    proceedings had not yet begun.

 5. In September or October 2014 his contact with his daughter  ceased  due
    to a breakdown in relations between the former couple. It is not  clear
    what level of contact had been occurring before that because there  was
    simply no evidence before the First-tier Tribunal and  is  no  evidence
    before me which gives any assistance in that respect.

 6. In December 2014, the appellant was divorced from his wife  by  way  of
    decree absolute and the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal was set  for
    28 April 2015.  It appears that just five days before the  hearing  the
    appellant purported to make an  application  to  the  Family  Court  at
    Manchester and there is in the file before me  an  order  made  by  the
    Family Court on 27 April 2015  the  day  before  the  resumed  hearing,
    setting a first hearing dispute resolution appointment for 16 June 2015
    and indicating that  CAFCASS  should  send  a  safeguarding  letter  in
    respect of the parties intent, within seventeen days of receipt of  the
    order.

 7. There is also in the file a sealed copy of the order which  was  before
    the First-tier Tribunal, the operative part of which is:

         "My ex-partner do  not  allow  me  to  see  my  daughter.   I  have
         previously applied for contact of my daughter in 2014 which I  then
         decided to withdraw because my ex-partner assured me that she  will
         settle the contact agreement outside the  court.  I  contacted  the
         mediation office in Manchester before making my  first  application
         and attended a meeting arranged by  them.  They  contacted  my  ex-
         partner but she did not attend.  They then advised me that I should
         apply to the court for contact which I  did.   I  do  not  want  to
         involve mediation again as it will delay the process.  I have  last
         seen my daughter in [left blank].  I have been making efforts since
         the withdrawal of my application in 2014 to  contact  my  daughter.
         My ex-partner agrees sometimes and then changes her mind. I am sick
         of this situation and want to see my daughter."

 8. There are also materials relating to the subsequent  proceedings  which
    were submitted under cover of a letter of 2  June  2015  from  Marks  &
    Marks and it appears that the sealed order was not  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal when this appeal  was  considered.   However,  the  judge
    treated the application as having been made  and  directed  himself  by
    reference to Mohammed (Family Court proceedings  outcome)  [2014]  UKUT
    419 (IAC).

 9. There is an error at paragraph 18 of the decision in  the  citation  of
    the head note which should have read "Whilst it  may  be  that  in  the
    Family Court jurisdiction prior to the coming into force  on  22  April
    2014 of the Children  and  Families  Act  2014  there  was  always  the
    possibility  of  a  parent  making  a  fresh  application  relating  to
    contact."

10. There is nothing in the guidance given in RS  (Immigration  and  Family
    Court) India [2012] UKUT 218 (IAC) which was approved by the  Court  of
    Appeal in Mohan v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2012]
    EWCA Civ 1363 that supports the notion that  the  mere  possibility  of
    such an application being made or pursued is as relevant  criterion  in
    the case of an immigration appeal when deciding whether to  adjourn  an
    appeal or direct a grant of  discretionary  leave  in  order  for  such
    proceedings to be pursued.  The  guidance  is  concerned  with  whether
    there is a realistic prospect of the Family  Court  making  a  decision
    that will have a material impact on the relationship  between  a  child
    and the parent facing immigration measures such  as  deportation.   The
    final sentence is the ratio of  the  decision  and  that  is  correctly
    quoted.

11. The First-tier Tribunal Judge at paragraphs 19 to 25  of  his  decision
    considered that there was no independent evidence  in  support  of  the
    previous settled application for  contact  or  indeed  of  any  or  any
    significant contact between the  appellant  and  his  child  since  the
    breakdown of their relationship between the appellant and  the  child's
    mother two months after the child was born.

12. At paragraph 20 the Judge noted that the burden of  proof  was  on  the
    appellant who had not produced any documents to support his claim  that
    there had  been  past  contact  and  he  considered  and  rejected  the
    possibility of directing discretionary leave.   He  did  not  in  terms
    consider whether to adjourn the appeal but it  is  plain  that  he  had
    before him the test in Mohammed which requires him to consider  whether
    to adjourn and/or whether to direct a grant of discretionary leave.

13. At paragraphs 21 to 25 the Judge found  as  a  fact  that  he  did  not
    believe the appellant's evidence that there had been contact  with  the
    child and therefore that the appellant could not bring  himself  within
    paragraph E-LTRPT 2.4 and EX.1; could  not  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE because he had  been  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a
    relatively  short  time  and  there  were  no   significant   obstacles
    preventing his return to  Pakistan;  that  there  were  no  exceptional
    circumstances making it unduly harsh for him to be removed even  having
    regard to the  fact  that  the  child  was  a  British  citizen  and  a
    qualifying child under paragraph 117B(6) because the appellant had  not
    satisfied the judge that he had a genuine relationship with  his  child
    or that such a relationship was subsisting.  He had not  satisfied  the
    court that he had any contact with the child at all.

14. Regarding the  appellant's  family  and  private  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom, the judge considered the decision of the respondent to  be  in
    accordance with the law and in the public  interest  having  regard  to
    Section 47 of the 2006 Act.

Grounds of appeal

15. The basis of the appeal to the Upper Tribunal is first, that the  judge
    erred in not expressly considering whether  to  adjourn  to  await  the
    outcome of the Family Court proceedings and, secondly, if I  understand
    it correctly, that there was a reasonable  prospect  of  contact  being
    resumed as a result of the proceedings.  I bear in mind that this is an
    appeal against refusal of indefinite leave to remain as  a  spouse  and
    therefore that if this application  were  to  be  made  again,  as  the
    appellant is not a spouse, it would have no prospect of success on that
    basis.

16. The grounds for permission to the Upper Tribunal say at  paragraphs  10
    to 11 as follows:

         "In view of the above we consider that the decision is unlawful and
         harsh and discretionary powers  were  exercised  in  arbitrary  and
         fanciful ways without considering its consequences  on  his  family
         and private life as technically if he withdraw the appeal and  then
         submit a new application for further leave to remain until  getting
         leave he cannot continue to work in the UK.

         He would be here as a destitute and therefore it  would  have  been
         very hard  almost  impossible  to  survive  and  look  after  [his]
         daughter in the UK  and  therefore  we  consider  the  decision  is
         unlawful and disproportionate in the best interests of justice."

17. In the final paragraph of the grounds the appellant seeks

         "A right of appeal  or  alternatively  remit  this  matter  to  the
         respondent to make a new decision in pursuit  of  changed  material
         circumstances therefore he can continue to work under Section 3C of
         the Immigration Act 1971 until further decision of the respondent."

Permission to appeal

18. Permission to appeal was granted  on  the  basis  that  the  Judge  had
    arguably failed to give adequate reasons for  reaching  his  conclusion
    that there  was  no  real  prospect  of  success  for  the  applicant's
    application for contact with his daughter, made just a few days  before
    the First-tier Tribunal hearing and/or that there  was  no  finding  of
    fact on  a  material  matter,  namely  that  the  appellant  maintained
    physical contact with his daughter until  September  or  October  2014,
    when his  ex-wife  terminated  an  out  of  court  agreement  regarding
    contact.

19. The grant of permission concludes as follows:

         "The judge simply found at paragraph 21 of the  decision  that  the
         appellant had not shown that he was in contact  with  the  daughter
         (presumably as of the date of hearing).  It is  arguable  that  the
         history of contact with the daughter and the reasons  for  physical
         contact coming to an end were important issues that required  clear
         findings of fact."

Upper Tribunal hearing

20. At the hearing, Mr  Ahmed  for  the  appellant  acknowledged  that  the
    appellant, who represented himself before the First-tier Tribunal,  had
    not made any application for an adjournment,  but  continued  to  argue
    that the Judge erred in law in not considering whether to  do  so.   He
    accepted that the appellant had no contact with  his  daughter  at  the
    date of hearing. Mr Ahmed recognised that he would have  difficulty  in
    challenging the substance of the First-tier Tribunal  decision,  which,
    he said, was why the appellant was seeking contact with  his  daughter,
    but he  argued  that  the  Judge  had  no  right  not  to  consider  an
    adjournment. He asked me to allow the appeal.

21. For the respondent, Mr Melvin argued that if the appellant did not  ask
    for an  adjournment,  there  was  no  arguable  error  of  law  in  not
    adjourning, particularly in the light of the  overriding  objective  at
    paragraph  2  of   the   Tribunal   Procedure   (First-tier   Tribunal)
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014.   He  contended  that  the
    substantive findings in the First-tier Tribunal's decision were open to
    the Judge, on the evidence before him, and that he had dealt adequately
    with the best interests of the child at paragraphs 21  and  22  of  his
    decision.  He asked me to dismiss the appeal.

Discussion

22. Dealing first with the question of an  adjournment  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, there was no application by the appellant and it  is  not  an
    error of law not to adjourn, where no adjournment is sought.

23. Dealing next with the question of the appellant's contact  application,
    there was nothing before the First-tier Tribunal, and is nothing before
    the Upper Tribunal, to  support  any  history  of  substantial  contact
    between the appellant and his daughter, or to  explain  in  detail  the
    reasons for any contact having ceased.  There is no statement from  the
    appellant. There is no statement from his former partner.  There is  no
    copy  of  divorce  proceedings  or  the   earlier   withdrawn   contact
    application.

24. On the basis of the very limited evidence which  was  advanced  by  the
    appellant, both before the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper  Tribunal,
    I am satisfied that the Judge's reasons are  adequate.   The  appellant
    has not shown any irrationality or Wednesbury unreasonableness  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal decision, having regard to the  test  at  paragraph
    90(2) of the decision of the Court of Appeal Lord Justice  Brook  in  R
    (Iran) & Ors v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2005]  EWCA
    Civ 982).

25. On the evidence, it was unarguably open to the First-tier Judge to find
    as he did that there was  no  evidence  of  any  significant  level  of
    contact or any contact at all between this appellant  and  his  British
    citizen daughter and to dismiss the appeal.

Notice of Decision

26. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.   I  do  not  set  aside  the
    decision.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


Signed:  Judith A J C Gleeson           Date :   1 August 2016
                   Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
