
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38390/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 December 2015                           |On 18 January 2016            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                 THE RIGHT HONOURABLE LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                Mr H J E LATTER (DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE)



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     RA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms R Akther, instructed by Taj, Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Chamberlain)  allowing  an  appeal  by  the
    applicant (the respondent to this appeal) against a decision made on 28
    August 2014 refusing to vary  his  leave  to  remain  on  private  life
    grounds.  In this decision I will refer to the  parties  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal the applicant as the appellant  and  the
    Secretary of State as the respondent.

Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 5  January  1984.   He
    claims that he arrived in the UK in 1998 making an unlawful entry  with
    the assistance of an agent.  He remained without leave until 31  August
    2011 when he applied for leave outside the  rules,  which  was  granted
    from 13 October 2011 until 13 April 2012.  On 4 April 2012  he  applied
    for leave to remain on the basis of exercising  access  rights  to  his
    child.  His application was refused on 9 September 2013  but  following
    the appellant lodging an appeal, on 9 June 2014 the respondent withdrew
    the decision and made a further decision on 27 August 2014 refusing the
    application.  The respondent was not satisfied that the  appellant  was
    able to meet the requirements of Appendix FM for leave to remain  as  a
    parent or  that  he  could  bring  himself  within  the  provisions  of
    paragraph 276ADE in respect of his private life.

The Findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge

3.   At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal the appellant  gave  oral
    evidence and produced documentary evidence in support  of  his  appeal.
    The respondent was not represented and there was  therefore  no  cross-
    examination of the appellant.  The  judge  noted  this  when  assessing
    credibility [10] but she found the appellant to be  an  honest  witness
    who had been open in his answers and not evasive.  She found  that  his
    evidence was consistent with the  documentary  evidence  and  could  be
    relied on.  She made the following findings of fact.  The appellant had
    come to the United Kingdom  in  1998  when  he  was  14  and  had  been
    supported by his relatives.  She noted that there was no other evidence
    to show the date of his arrival but there was a letter  from  a  health
    centre confirming that he had been registered with the  practice  since
    2000.  At the date of hearing the appellant was 31 years of age and had
    lived in the UK for seventeen years.  She found that  it  was  not  his
    decision to come to the UK when he was a minor but his parents had sent
    him here. The appellant said that he now realised that his parents  did
    this so that he could work and send money back to  them.   However,  he
    had not sent money back to his family in Bangladesh.

4.   The judge accepted that the appellant  had  had  a  child  following  a
    relatively short relationship with a partner.  There had been a  number
    of problems, which led to care proceedings and to a full care order and
    placement order with the local authority.  In his witness statement the
    appellant explained that he had fought hard to have  direct  access  to
    his child but at present had only been granted indirect contact twice a
    year.

5.   The judge accepted the appellant's evidence that in consequence of  him
    fathering a child outside marriage his family had disowned him as  they
    were a  very  religious  Sunni  Muslim  family.   She  found  that  the
    appellant last had contact with his mother some three years ago when he
    contacted her through desperation because of the proceedings in respect
    of his child.  He sought help from his family  but  that  was  refused.
    The judge accepted the appellant's evidence that he did  not  have  any
    contact with friends in Bangladesh given the young age when he came  to
    the United Kingdom and the amount  of  time  he  had  been  here.   She
    considered the provisions of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) and found that the
    appellant would face very significant obstacles in  reintegrating  into
    Bangladesh and she accordingly  allowed  the  appeal  on  private  life
    grounds.

6.   The judge went on  to  consider  article  8  outside  the  rules.   She
    accepted that the appellant had established family life  sufficient  to
    engage the operation of article 8 and that  the  respondent's  decision
    would interfere with that life.   She  carried  out  a  proportionality
    assessment taking into account s.117B of the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 as amended.  She took into account that he did  not
    have a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with his child  but
    she accepted that he had indirect contact.  She noted the  comments  of
    the district judge in the family court that the  appellant  "loves  his
    son very much and does want to do everything he can to be with his  son
    and to care for him".  The judge found that it  was  not  in  the  best
    interests of the appellant's child to have his father  removed  so  far
    away as to extinguish all hope of contact in  the  future.   She  found
    that  removal  would  be  disproportionate  to  a  legitimate  aim  and
    accordingly the appeal was also allowed on article 8 grounds.

The Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

7.   In the respondent's grounds of appeal it is  argued  that  the  judge's
    finding that the appellant would face "very  significant  obstacles  in
    reintegrating  into  Bangladesh"  proceeded  on  a  legally   erroneous
    interpretation of that phrase.  The appellant was a young  and  healthy
    male brought up in the UK by relatives of Bangladeshi origin in an area
    densely populated by people from Bangladesh.  He  had  not  turned  his
    back on his  religion,  his  culture,  his  wider  family  or  national
    identity and continued to speak Bengali.  His relatives could  continue
    to provide him with financial support as they had done for the previous
    sixteen years.  The grounds argue that  the  judge  either  misdirected
    herself in law or came to an irrational finding.

8.   In so far as article 8 was concerned, as his  child  had  been  adopted
    and he only had indirect contact, any presumption of  family  life  had
    been rebutted.  The  judge  had  also  erred,  so  it  was  argued,  by
    factoring into the proportionality exercise the appellant's claim  that
    he wanted to fight for custody of his son and had no hope of doing that
    outside the UK.  Indirect contact could continue from Bangladesh or the
    appellant could visit for any court appointed direct contact  which  in
    any event would not be very frequent.  Further, apart from  being  able
    to speak English the whole of S117B was against the appellant.

9.   Mr Kandola adopted these grounds in his submissions.  He accepted  that
    the factual matrix was not in dispute.  He pointed out that in [16] the
    judge  had  referred  to  the  fact  that  the  appellant  "would  face
    significant  obstacles"  on  return  rather  than   "very   significant
    obstacles" as required by the rules.  This, he argued,  indicated  that
    the judge may not have applied the proper test  under  the  rules.   He
    submitted  that  there  was  no  evidence  that   the   appellant   had
    relinquished any ties to  Bangladeshi  culture  and  that  the  judge's
    findings on the issue of private  life  were  irrational.   So  far  as
    article 8 was concerned, he argued that the judge had wrongly proceeded
    on the basis that it would be open to the appellant at  some  point  in
    the future to fight for custody when there was no realistic prospect of
    any such application succeeding.

10.  Ms Akther submitted that the judge  had  reached  a  decision  properly
    open to her.   In  substance,  the  respondent's  grounds  indicated  a
    disagreement with  the  judge's  assessment  of  the  facts.   She  had
    correctly set out the relevant legal tests  and  had  given  more  than
    adequate reasons for her decision.  She had accepted that this  was  an
    unusual case and given clear reasons for  her  decision.   It  was  not
    arguable that her findings were not properly open to her.

Assessment of Whether there is an Error of Law

11.  The issue for us is whether the  judge  erred  in  law  such  that  her
    decision should be set aside.  We are not satisfied that she  made  any
    such error.  When dealing with the application based on the appellant's
    private life she had to consider whether he  met  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), which provide as follows:

         "(vi)    ... [The applicant] is aged 18 years or above,  has  lived
             continuously in the UK for less than twenty years (discounting
             any  period  of  imprisonment)  but  there   would   be   very
             significant obstacles to the applicant's integration into  the
             country to which he would have to go if required to leave  the
             UK."

12.  The judge found the appellant to be an honest  witness.   She  accepted
    that he had arrived in the UK in 1998, that his family had disowned him
    owing to his relationship with his former partner and the fact that  he
    had had a child outside marriage.  She also accepted  that  his  father
    had died and that his mother in Bangladesh now had no contact with him.
     She recorded in [14] that the appellant described his family as  "non-
    existent to me."  She set out in [16] that  the  appellant  would  face
    significant obstacles on return to Bangladesh.  We  are  not  satisfied
    that this indicated that the judge was applying the  wrong  test.   She
    had referred to "very significant obstacles"  in  [7],  [11]  and  when
    setting out her decision in [18].  The respondent does not  satisfy  us
    that the judge either applied the wrong test or  that  she  reached  an
    irrational  decision.   She  took  into  account  all  the  appellant's
    circumstances.  She noted that he spoke "a bit  of  Bengali"  [17]  but
    said that this alone was not enough to enable him to reintegrate into a
    country which he had left seventeen years previously.

13.  In summary, we are satisfied that the judge reached a conclusion  which
    was properly open to her on the evidence in the light of  her  findings
    of primary fact.  She was entitled to  find  that  in  the  appellant's
    circumstances  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   him
    reintegrating into Bangladesh.

14.  As we have found that the judge did not err in law  in  her  assessment
    of the application made within the rules, we  need  only  deal  briefly
    with the  challenge  to  the  decision  made  outside  the  rules.   In
    substance the challenge is that  the  judge  failed  to  take  adequate
    account of the provisions of s.117B and proceeded on a  misapprehension
    that the appellant would be able to  make  an  application  either  for
    custody or further contact to his child.  Firstly, we are not satisfied
    there is any substance in the point relating to s.117B.  The  judge  at
    [22]-[25] took these factors  into  account.   She  noted  that  little
    weight should be given to private life but was equally entitled to note
    that the appellant had had leave following  his  application  in  2011.
    She was entitled to take into account the fact that the  appellant  had
    been a minor when he came to the UK and could not be  held  responsible
    for the manner in which he arrived.  Secondly, the judge  recorded  the
    fact that the appellant said he wanted to fight for custody of his  son
    but her comments in [26] were primarily based her finding that it would
    not be in the best interests of the appellant's son to have his  father
    removed so far away so as to extinguish all  hope  of  contact  in  the
    future.  We are not satisfied that the criticisms made of the  way  the
    judge carried out the proportionality exercise indicate that she  erred
    in law or proceeded on a mistaken view of the facts.

Decision

15.  We are not satisfied that the judge erred in law and  it  follows  that
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  stands.   There  has  been  no
    application to vary or discharge the anonymity order made by the First-
    tier Tribunal and this remains in force.




Signed   H J E Latter

H J E Latter                                          Date: 12 January 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter















