
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38131/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14th May 2015                             |On 20th May 2015              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                       THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE EDIS
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       wafaa mahmood shukur al-obaidi
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms. E. Savage, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms. L. Targett-Parker, Counsel instructed by Farani
                    Javid Taylor, Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State (SSHD) against a decision
       of the First-tier Tribunal, Judge Paul of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
       which was promulgated on 23rd December 2014, following a  hearing  on
       18th December 2014.  By that  decision,  the  FTT  Judge  allowed  an
       appeal by Mrs. Al-Obaidi on human rights grounds against  a  decision
       of the SSHD dated 3rd September 2013 to refuse  her  application  for
       Leave to Remain (LTR).

    2. A preliminary issue arises as to whether the appeal is  in  time,  or
       whether  an  extension  of  time  is  required.   The  decision   was
       promulgated on the on the 23rd December 2014 and received by the SSHD
       on the 24th, Christmas Eve. Rule 33 of  The Tribunal Procedure (First-
       tier Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules  2014/2604
       provides in relation to  the  giving  of  written  notice  of  appeal
       against a decision on the First Tier Tribunal:

             "(2) Subject to paragraph (3), an application under  paragraph
             (1) must be provided to the Tribunal so that it is received no
             later than 14 days after the date on which  the  party  making
             the application was provided  with  written  reasons  for  the
             decision."

    3. Rule 11 deals with calculating time under the Rules and says

             '11.- Calculating time


             (1) An act required or permitted to be done on or by a
             particular day by these Rules, a practice direction or a
             direction must, unless otherwise directed, be done by midnight
             on that day.'

    4. The SSHD gave notice of appeal on 7th January 2015, and time  expired
       at midnight on that day.  Accordingly the SSHD was not  out  of  time
       and the application for extension made on her behalf out of excessive
       caution is unnecessary.

  The Facts

    5. Mrs. Al-Obaidi is a citizen of Iraq who originates from Falujah.   On
       12th November 2010 she married a  British  national  in  Syria.   Her
       husband is employed by the University  of  Bedford  as  an  academic.
       From 2006 until the Summer of 2012 he was working in that capacity in
       Oman and lived with his wife in that country  after  their  marriage.
       He then returned to the UK.

    6. On the 5th November 2012 she applied for LTR  on  the  basis  of  her
       relationship with her partner and on the basis of her  private  life.
       She had arrived in the United Kingdom on the on 9th  July  2012  from
       Oman on a family visit visa.  She had not  made  an  out  of  country
       application for a spousal visa because that could only be made in her
       country of origin, Iraq, and she was in Oman.  She told  the  FTT  in
       her witness statement that she could not return to Iraq to make  that
       application because it was not safe for her to do so.  Her family  in
       Iraq will kill her if they can,  she  says,  because  she  married  a
       British citizen and they now regard her as a traitor and an enemy  to
       the Iraqi people.  She says that the last time she visited her family
       she was subjected to beating and tortured by being burnt on her  back
       with cigarettes.  On the 16th October 2012  she  was  examined  by  a
       doctor in the United Kingdom who found marks  which  were  consistent
       with having been caused in this way.

    7. The chronology is important.  At the time  of  the  decision  of  the
       SSHD, Mrs. Al-Obaidi was not pregnant and the couple had no children.
        In the 15 months between the date of the decision of  the  SSHD  and
       the FTT hearing, a child was born.  He was born on the 7th July  2014
       very prematurely at 27 weeks gestation.  He was not  discharged  from
       hospital until the 9th December 2014, still very much  under  weight.
       Therefore, by the time of the hearing of her appeal, the  whole  case
       had changed.  The FTT had to take into account  the  interests  of  a
       child, who is a British citizen and  who  is  dependent  on  the  NHS
       because of his continuing vulnerability.  He is entitled to care from
       the NHS.  Because this is an in country appeal, the FTT was  required
       to consider the position as it was at the date of the hearing and was
       not limited to considering the circumstances appertaining at the date
       of the decision of the SSHD.

    8. The decision of the SSHD was that Mrs. Al-Obaidi could not be granted
       LTR as a partner because she was in the United Kingdom as a  visitor,
       and is thus excluded by Appendix FM R-LTRP 1.1 and  E-LTRP.2.1.   The
       SSHD then considered whether she could be granted LTR under paragraph
       EX.1 of Appendix FM and found that she could not.  This  was  because
       first she had no children in the UK, and secondly because there  were
       no insurmountable obstacles preventing Mrs. Al-Obaidi and her husband
       from continuing their relationship in Iraq.   The  application  under
       Appendix FM therefore was refused.  The claim based on  private  life
       was determined under Rule 276ADE and rejected because  she  had  only
       been in the United Kingdom for a matter of weeks at the date  of  her
       application, rather than 20 years as required by the Rule.   The  SHD
       decided that no exceptional  circumstances  existed  and  refused  to
       grant LTR under Article 8 of the EHCR without giving reasons.

    9. It is unnecessary  to  consider  the  initial  refusal  of  the  SSHD
       further, because, as we have said, the case has changed utterly since
       then.

  Mrs. Al-Obaidi's case as advanced before the FTT

   10. The case was argued on the basis of a concession that Mrs.  Al-Obaidi
       did not qualify under the partner route for the reasons given by  the
       SSHD in the original decision which are summarised  above.   It  was,
       however, now submitted that the usual consequence  of  that  failure,
       namely removal to the country of  origin  where  an  out  of  country
       application as the wife of one British citizen and mother of  another
       might be made,  should  not  follow  because  there  are  exceptional
       circumstances and further, that it would be disproportionate  to  the
       public interest in the maintenance of effective immigration  controls
       and therefore would violate her right to a family and  private  life.
       The matters relied upon were the fact that the  child  could  not  be
       expected to travel to Iraq and needs his mother; that she  should  be
       expected to travel to Iraq because of the dangerous state of  affairs
       in that country generally and the specific hostility for  her  family
       to her; and the fact that he husband is well  able  to  maintain  his
       family financially.




  The submissions of the SSHD at the FTT

   11. It is worth setting out the  extract  of  the  Decision  of  the  FTT
       dealing with this in full:-

           "15.   Mr. Clarke submitted  that,  essentially,  deception  had
           been used in this case and  that  that  was  a  highly  material
           factor in the proportionality assessment having  regard  to  the
           need to maintain firmer and proper immigration control.  It  was
           also submitted that, as the baby could not be breast-fed and was
           relying on a formula,  it  would  not  be  impractical  for  the
           appellant to return to either Oman, Syria/Iraq and make an  out-
           of country application to be admitted  back  into  the  UK.   It
           appeared  that,  on  the  basis  of   the   husband's   personal
           circumstances, that application would be successful.

           "16.   Mr. Clarke referred to the case of Harrison at  paragraph
           63 and also to the Human Rights case of Omoregie  at  paragraphs
           62-68.  He submitted that these all  went  to  the  question  of
           whether or not the manner in which the  appellant  had  come  to
           this country was something that should be taken into account  in
           the proportionality assessment.

The Decision

   12. The FTT Judge accepted the evidence of Mrs. Al-Obaidi's  husband  and
       found that it was plain that circumstances conspired to mean that  he
       had to come back to the UK  in  2012  and  that  presented  immediate
       difficulties as far as his  wife  concerned,  having  regard  to  the
       circumstances that existed in Iraq. By this  finding,  he  sought  to
       place in context the "deception" which led Mrs.  Al-Obaidi  to  enter
       the UK as a visitor when in fact she intended to stay here  with  her
       husband.   The finding means that the Judge accepted that  she  would
       have been in danger if she had returned to Iraq which  was  the  only
       place  where  she   could   make   the   appropriate   out-of-country
       application.  This was not because of the danger posed by her family,
       because the Judge made no finding about the  allegation  of  torture,
       noting that this was not an asylum case.  The finding rested  on  the
       general dangers in that country.

   13. The Judge then said this:-

           "21.   The trump card in this case is that the family has a baby
           and all the medical evidence suggests that this baby is in  need
           of special care.  The medical evidence provided  shows  this  in
           some detail.  It would be utterly impractical, having regard  to
           the baby's age and health, to expect the mother to go to another
           country to make an application which (it is plain to  me)  would
           succeed.  The reason for that is that the new provisions  of  FM
           provide financial thresholds and other requirements for such  an
           application to succeed which, in my view, it is plain -given the
           right advice - the appellant would be able to make successfully.
            Having regard to that, and indeed to the general principles set
           out the case of Chikwamba, I do not consider it proportionate in
           this case to require the appellant to leave  the  country.   All
           the evidence suggests that this family's baby will need  careful
           treatment for the foreseeable  future  and  that  would  be  put
           severely at risk if the appellant were  to  have  to  leave  the
           country at this stage."

The SSHD's Grounds of Appeal

   14. The SSHD puts forward two grounds:-

        a. Trump Card It is submitted that the FTT Judge erred  in  law  by
           finding that the child was a trump card, which  is  contrary  to
           the decision of the Supreme  Court  in  ZH  (Tanzania)  v.  SSHD
           [2011] which contains the following paragraph

                "41 The first error may well have been due to  the  way  the
                mother's case was presented to the Court of Appeal.  It  was
                submitted that the  fact  that  the  children  were  British
                citizens who had never been to Tanzania  trumped  all  other
                considerations: para 16. That was, as the court  recognised,
                to press the point too  far.  But  there  is  much  more  to
                British citizenship than the status it gives to the children
                in immigration law. It carries  with  it  a  host  of  other
                benefits and advantages, all of which Baroness Hale JSC  has
                drawn attention to and carefully analysed. They ought  never
                to be left out of account, but they were nowhere  considered
                in the Court of  Appeal's  judgment.  The  fact  of  British
                citizenship does not trump  everything  else.  But  it  will
                hardly ever be less than  a  very  significant  and  weighty
                factor against moving  children  who  have  that  status  to
                another country with a parent who has  no  right  to  remain
                here, especially if the effect of doing this  is  that  they
                will inevitably lose those benefits and advantages  for  the
                rest of their childhood."

        b. Public Interest

        i. It is contended that the decision of the FTT Judge contained  no
           proper balancing of the public interest, and no  recognition  of
           the weight to be afforded to section 117B(1) of the Nationality,
           Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 which by amendment  with  effect
           from 28th July 2014 contains the following  relevant provisions

                117A Application of this Part

                (1)    This Part  applies  where  a  court  or  tribunal  is
                required to determine whether  a  decision  made  under  the
                Immigration Acts-

                   (a) breaches a person's right to respect for private  and
                   family life under Article 8, and

                   (b) as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of  the
                   Human Rights Act 1998.

                (2)    In considering  the  public  interest  question,  the
                court or tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

                   (a) in all cases, to the considerations listed in section
                   117B, and

                   (b)  in  cases  concerning  the  deportation  of  foreign
                   criminals, to the considerations listed in section 117C.

                (3)    In subsection (2),  "the  public  interest  question"
                means  the  question  of  whether  an  interference  with  a
                person's right to respect for private  and  family  life  is
                justified under Article 8(2).

                117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in
                all cases

                (1)    The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is
                in the public interest.

                (2)    It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in
                the interests of  the  economic  well-being  of  the  United
                Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter  or  remain  in  the
                United Kingdom are able to speak  English,  because  persons
                who can speak English-

                   (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                   (b) are better able to integrate into society.

                (3)    It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in
                the interests of  the  economic  well-being  of  the  United
                Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter  or  remain  in  the
                United Kingdom are  financially  independent,  because  such
                persons-

                   (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

                   (b) are better able to integrate into society.

                (4)    Little weight should be given to-

                   (a) a private life, or

                   (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

                   that is established by a person at a time when the person
                   is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

                (5)    Little weight should  be  given  to  a  private  life
                established  by  a  person  at  time   when   the   person's
                immigration status is precarious.

                (6)    In the  case  of  a  person  who  is  not  liable  to
                deportation,  the  public  interest  does  not  require  the
                person's removal where-

                   (a) the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                   relationship with a qualifying child, and

                   (b) it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                   leave the United Kingdom.

       Reliance is also placed  on  Sabir  (Appendix  FM  -  EX.1  not  free
       standing) [2014] UKUT 63 at paragraph 33  where  the  Upper  Tribunal
       said

           "33.   The public policy of requiring a person  to  apply  under
           the Immigration  Rules  from  abroad  is  not  the  only  matter
           weighing in the SSHD's side of the  balance.  There  are  cogent
           reasons for requiring the claimant to return to Pakistan to make
           an application for entry clearance and I conclude  it  would  be
           proportionate for her to dos so. The claimant arrived in the  UK
           as a visitor. She does not meet the requirements  of  the  Rules
           and it was clear at the time of the marriage that she could  not
           do so; she would be expected to  leave  the  UK  and  return  to
           Pakistan to make  an  application  for  entry  clearance  absent
           circumstances such  that  such  a  course  of  action  would  be
           unreasonable or harsh, contrary to her right to respect for  her
           family and private life. The  likelihood  or  otherwise  of  her
           being able to meet the  requirements  of  the  Rules  for  entry
           clearance is not a relevant consideration - see SB  (Bangladesh)
           v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 28."

Oral Submissions of SSHD.

   15. Ms. Savage, who appeared before us on behalf of the  SSHD,  submitted
       in addition to the two substantive grounds that  the  FFT  Judge  had
       failed to give adequate reasons for the decision not  to  prefer  the
       public  interest  in  the  proportionality  exercise.   She   further
       submitted that the family life in the UK was developed while Mrs. Al-
       Obaidi's immigration status was precarious, although  we  noted  that
       section 117B(5) places  particular  weight  on  this  aspect  in  the
       context of private life claims, and family life claims are not  given
       this statutory weight.  She submitted that  the  whole  family  could
       return to Iraq and submitted that this distinguished  the  case  from
       Chikwamba v. SSHD [2008] 1 WLR 1420 where that was not an option.  We
       expressed at the hearing a little surprise at that submission, on the
       facts of this case, but we do not doubt that it may  in  other  cases
       have significant traction.

Oral Submissions on behalf of Mrs. Obaidi

   16. These were substantially based on a helpful skeleton argument by  Ms.
       Targett-Parker which is on the  file  and  we  will  not  repeat  its
       contents here.  In brief, she submitted

        a. That the "trump card" was not the child's nationality, as in  ZH
           (Tanzania) but his state of health.  It is  submitted  that  the
           Judge made this quite clear in the first sentence  of  paragraph
           35, quoted above.

        b. That the Judge made a reasoned decision and  applied  the  well-
           known dictum of Baroness Hale in ZH (Tanzania) at paragraph 34:-

                "Further, it is clear from the recent jurisprudence that the
                Strasbourg court will expect national authorities  to  apply
                article 3.1 of UNCRC and treat the best interests of a child
                as  "a  primary  consideration".  Of  course,  despite   the
                looseness with which these  terms  are  sometimes  used,  "a
                primary consideration" is  not  the  same  as  "the  primary
                consideration", still less as "the paramount consideration".

        c. That in regarding the prospects of success in the out-of-country
           application from Iraq as relevant, the Judge was doing  no  more
           than accepting the submission made on behalf of the SSHD by  Mr.
           Clarke recorded at paragraph 15 of the decision, which  we  have
           set out at paragraph 11 above.

        d. In the event that the decision is to be re-made, it is submitted
           that  there  are  no  factual  issues  and  the  matter  can  be
           determined on the basis of the  FTT's  findings  of  fact.   The
           claim continues to be advanced outside the Rules on the basis of
           Article 8.

Discussion and Decision

  Trump Card

   17. We agree with Ms. Targett-Parker that the first sentence of paragraph
       21, which we repeat here for convenience, shows that  the  Judge  did
       not mean that the existence or nationality of the child was a  "trump
       card" (the prohibited reasoning), but  that  the  exceptional  factor
       which merited this description was his need for  special  care.   The
       Judge said

           "The trump card in this case is that the family has a  baby  and
           all the medical evidence suggests that this baby is in  need  of
           special care."

       which could hardly be plainer.

   18. We respectfully suggest that the use of the phrase  "trump  card"  is
       shorthand which might  give  a  misleading  impression  and  is  best
       avoided.  In any proportionality assessment  there  will  be  factors
       going in both directions and the tribunal must assess the  weight  of
       each on the facts of the particular case and decide where the balance
       lies.  A trump card, in a game, is  one  which  defeats  all  others,
       whatever their value, because it has a special power under the  rules
       of the game.  There is no  equivalent  in  a  proper  proportionality
       assessment.  What the Judge clearly meant by this expression was that
       he had considered the relevant factors and decided that the needs  of
       the vulnerable child were decisive because he gave  them  significant
       weight.

  Public interest

   19. It appears to us that no magic formula  is  required  to  demonstrate
       that the  Judge  has  addressed  the  public  interest  in  effective
       immigration control.  Having said that, it will  avoid  reasons-based
       challenges if the Judge  does  identify  the  factors  in  favour  of
       refusing an application in the wider  public  interest  and  explains
       why, in a particular case, they do or do not outweigh  the  right  to
       family and/or private life relied  upon.   An  express  reference  to
       section 117B of the 2002 is not  mandatory,  but  is  good  practice.
       Here, there was no such reference and we have  therefore  scrutinised
       the decision with particular care to ensure that the public  interest
       was  properly  balanced.   As  will  appear,  that  section  actually
       provides the answer to this case although not in the way suggested by
       the SSHD.

   20. The Judge relied upon Chikwamba [2008] 1 WLR 1420 which is a decision
       all about proportionality and  the  public  interest.   The  headnote
       reads as follows:

           "On the claimant's appeal-

           Held , allowing the appeal,  that,  while  the  maintenance  and
           enforcement of immigration control was a legitimate aim  of  the
           Secretary of State's policy in relation to article 8 family life
           claims, an article 8 appeal should not be dismissed routinely on
           the basis that it would be proportionate  and  more  appropriate
           for the applicant to apply for leave from abroad;  and  that  to
           remove the claimant to Zimbabwe where conditions were harsh  and
           unpalatable and disrupt her family life would  violate  her  and
           her family's article 8 rights and was not justified by the  need
           for effective immigration control."

   21. That simple proposition has  been  explained  most  recently  in  the
       decision of the Upper Tribunal in R (Chen) v. SSHD  [2015]  UKUT  189
       whose headnote, so far as relevant reads:-

           "(i) Appendix FM does not include consideration of the  question
           whether it would be disproportionate to expect an individual  to
           return  to  his  home  country  to  make  an   entry   clearance
           application to re-join family members in the U.K. There  may  be
           cases in which there are no insurmountable obstacles  to  family
           life  being  enjoyed  outside  the  U.K.  but  where   temporary
           separation to enable an individual to make  an  application  for
           entry clearance may be disproportionate. In all cases,  it  will
           be for the individual to place before  the  Secretary  of  State
           evidence  that  such   temporary   separation   will   interfere
           disproportionately with protected rights. It will not be  enough
           to rely solely upon the case-law  concerning  Chikwamba  v  SSHD
           [2008] UKHL 40 .

           (ii) Lord Brown was  not  laying  down  a  legal  test  when  he
           suggested in Chikwamba that requiring  a  claimant  to  make  an
           application  for  entry  clearance  would  only   "comparatively
           rarely" be proportionate  in  a  case  involving  children  (per
           Burnett J, as he then was, in R (Kotecha and Das v  SSHD  [2011]
           EWHC 2070 (Admin)).

           (iii) In an application for leave on the basis of an  Article  8
           claim, the Secretary of State is not obliged to consider whether
           an application for entry clearance (if one were to be made) will
           be successful. Accordingly, her silence on this issue  does  not
           mean that  it  is  accepted  that  the  requirements  for  entry
           clearance to be granted are satisfied."

   22. It is inconceivable that the Judge could have had in  mind  Chikwamba
       without appreciating that the proportionality exercise under  Article
       8 required a balance between the public interest and the rights of an
       applicant who was being required to return to the country  of  origin
       to make an out-of country  application.   The  SSHD's  representative
       asserted that the application in  Iraq  was  likely  to  succeed  and
       relied upon that fact which was, therefore, common ground both as  to
       its relevance and accuracy.   If,  as  is  now  contended,  the  SSHD
       thereby invited the FTT to err, she cannot now rely on the  error  on
       appeal.  That is not conducive to the  maintenance  of  an  effective
       immigration control system which requires a consistency of  approach.
       An appellate tribunal has power  to  allow  a  party  to  change  its
       approach and to  make  points  on  appeal  which  are  precisely  the
       opposite of those made below, but it is to be exercised only for good
       reason.  No such reason exists here.

   23. The Judge then went on to conclude  that  it  was  not  practical  to
       expect the mother to go to Iraq, where she would be in danger, and to
       leave her frail baby behind.  Given that it was agreed that the  trip
       would probably be pointless because she would  succeed  in  obtaining
       her spousal visa if she applied properly for it,  this  was  a  valid
       consideration.  The belated reliance of the SSHD before us on  appeal
       on SB (Bangladesh) v. SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 28  does  not  change  the
       matter, and not only because we would not allow the SHHD to  withdraw
       the concession made below that the  prospects  of  success  were  (a)
       relevant and (b) strong.  That decision was cited with approval as to
       part of its reasoning in Chikwamba where the House  of  Lords  agreed
       with the Court of Appeal that it would be  bizarre  if  an  applicant
       with a weak claim to re-entry might more readily be granted LTR  than
       one whose claim was strong.  However, the  House  of  Lords  did  not
       exclude the prospects of success on the re-entry application from its
       decision in the  case.   To  that  extent  SB  (Bangladesh)  was  not
       applied.  Lord Brown, with whom all other members  of  the  committee
       agreed, said this in deciding the  case  at  paragraph  46  (we  have
       emphasised the sentence which, if the  SSHD's  submission  is  right,
       contains the prohibited reasoning):-

           "46 Let me now return to the facts of  the  present  case.  This
           claimant came to the United Kingdom to seek asylum, met  an  old
           friend from Zimbabwe, married him and had a  child.  He  is  now
           settled here as a refugee and cannot return. No  one  apparently
           doubts that, in the longer term, this family  will  have  to  be
           allowed to live together here. Is it  really  to  be  said  that
           effective immigration control requires that the claimant and her
           child must first travel back (perhaps at the taxpayer's expense)
           to Zimbabwe, a country to which the enforced  return  of  failed
           asylum seekers remained suspended for more than two years  after
           the claimant's marriage and  where  conditions  are  "harsh  and
           unpalatable", and remain there for some months  obtaining  entry
           clearance, before finally she can return (at her own expense) to
           the United Kingdom to resume her family life which meantime will
           have been gravely disrupted? Surely one  has  only  to  ask  the
           question to recognise the right answer."

   24. It appears to us that the evidence in the  present  case  shows  that
       precisely the same considerations apply, with the  additional  factor
       of the existence of the vulnerable child to  which  we  will  return.
       The present case is to  that  extent  stronger  than  Chikwamba.   In
       Khizar Hayat v The Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2011]
       UKUT 00444 (IAC), the Court of Appeal at paragraph 30 considered  the
       relevance of a failure by an applicant to  make  an  application  for
       entry clearance in his home state to the Article  8  assessment.   It
       held that where the Secretary of State had  no  sensible  reason  for
       insisting on the application  of  the  policy  on  the  facts  of  an
       individual case, the failure to make the out-of  country  application
       for  Entry  Clearance  should  cease  to  be  a  relevant  Article  8
       consideration.   Circumstances  which  would  be  relevant  to   this
       assessment  would  include  the  prospective  length  and  degree  of
       disruption of family life.  The length of the disruption is  governed
       by  the  prospects  of  success  in   the   supposed   out-of-country
       application.  It is not  necessary  for  us  to  decide  whether  the
       authorities mean that it is not possible to contend that an applicant
       with a weak case for re-entry should be granted LTR on  that  ground,
       but that an applicant with a clear case may  rely  on  that  fact  as
       relevant to the Article 8 assessment.  It means that  the  length  of
       the disruption will be short, but pointless.

   25. We accept  without  hesitation  that  the  maintenance  of  effective
       immigration controls is  in  the  public  interest.   We  would  have
       accepted this with equal certainty even if Parliament had not put the
       matter beyond doubt in section 117B of the 2002 Act.   Part  of  that
       interest is served by removing people to their country of  origin  if
       the Rules require their  applications  for  LTE  to  be  made  there.
       Otherwise, those who obtain entry to the UK by ruse, or at least  who
       enter under one route and are seeking to remain  under  another,  are
       advantaged over those who  seek  to  comply  with  their  obligations
       properly.  This is not in the interests of a fair system  and  unfair
       systems are likely to be ineffective  which  is  not  in  the  public
       interest.  Further, the policy has the effect of providing a powerful
       incentive to those wishing to come here to  comply  with  the  Rules.
       However, Chikwamba as subsequently explained, shows that where  there
       is evidence in a particular case  that  insisting  on  applying  that
       policy will cause hardship without any corresponding benefit, then it
       can and should be relaxed.

   26. The SSHD was, of course, not able to have regard to  her  duty  under
       section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009  when
       making the original decision, although she has been  able  to  do  so
       when deciding what submissions  to  make  to  the  FTT,  in  deciding
       whether to appeal and in deciding what submissions  to  make  to  us.
       This provides:-

           '55 Duty regarding the welfare of children


           (1) The Secretary of State must make arrangements for ensuring
           that-

                (a) the functions mentioned in subsection (2) are discharged
                having regard to the need to safeguard and promote the
                welfare of children who are in the United Kingdom'

   27. Finally, and importantly when weighing the public interest we  recall
       the terms of section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act:-

           '(6) In the case of a person who is not liable  to  deportation,
           the public interest does not require the person's removal where-

                (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                relationship with a qualifying child, and

                (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to  leave
                the United Kingdom.'

   28. This child is a "qualifying child" because he is a  British  citizen,
       see the definition in section 117D.  This appeal would not have  been
       given permission, in our judgment, if the Judge had referred to  this
       provision, and added the italicised words below to the last  sentence
       of his decision.  This is an illustration of the salutary practice of
       specifically  considering  sections  117A-D  wherever   they   apply.
       Sometimes they contain the answer, which can be clearly  and  briefly
       stated by reference to the will of Parliament.

           "All the evidence suggests that this  family's  baby  will  need
           careful treatment for the foreseeable future and that  would  be
           severely at risk if the appellant were  to  have  to  leave  the
           country at this stage.  It is obviously not reasonable to expect
           this vulnerable child who is entitled to care from  the  NHS  to
           leave  the  United  Kingdom  and  take  his  chances  in   Iraq.
           Accordingly, the public interest, by statute, does  not  require
           the removal of his mother either, see  section  117B(6)  of  the
           2002 Act."

   29. No doubt the Judge thought that, on his findings of  fact,  the  need
       for the child to remain went without saying.   For  this  reason,  we
       consider that there is no error of law in the decision which  applied
       the correct principles.  In fact, it is a stronger case than he  said
       it was because of the 2002 Act as amended and section 55 of the  2009
       Act.  Additional reasons would not have illustrated any  weakness  of
       the decision, rather the reverse.  We accept that it might have  been
       better phrased in the respects we have identified,  but  that  is  no
       reason for setting it aside.  The function of reasons  is  to  enable
       the parties, and the public, to know why one party won and the  other
       lost.  The SSHD lost in this case because after her initial  decision
       was taken a very premature baby was born in the UK  and  it  was  not
       reasonable to expect the child (and therefore the mother)  to  go  to
       Iraq while his mother made an out-of-country  application  which,  by
       agreement would have very strong  prospects  of  success  which  were
       relevant.  This appeal is dismissed.

   30. We add that if we had set aside the decision for want of  reasons  or
       other legal error we would ourselves have re-made  the  decision  and
       upheld the result.  Our reasoning sufficiently appears above.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date

Mr Justice Edis



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed   Date

Mr Justice Edis
