
IAC-HX-MH/11-V1
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/38493/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 4 December 2014                |On 18 December 2014               |
|                                  |                                  |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE E B GRANT


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             miss lilian agyeman
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Holmes, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Dhanji, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Background to this Appeal

 1. The respondent Miss Agyeman appealed a decision  of  the  Secretary  of
    State to remove her as a person subject to administrative removal under
    Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 and to  refuse  leave
    to remain on human rights grounds.  Her appeal against that refusal was
    heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lingham on 16 July  2014  and  in  a
    decision promulgated on 26 August 2014 the judge allowed her appeal.

 2. By an application made on 2  September  2014  the  Secretary  of  State
    sought permission to appeal on the basis that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge had made a material error  of  law  in  allowing  the  appeal  on
    Article 8 grounds.  The grounds went on to submit that the judge made a
    material misdirection of law in finding it was  unduly  harsh  for  the
    respondent to return to Ghana.

 3. On 4  November  2014  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Colyer  granted  the
    respondent permission to appeal and thus the matter came before me.

 4. At the outset of the appeal hearing Ms  Holmes  for  the  Secretary  of
    State sought  permission  to  amend  the  grounds  of  appeal  properly
    pointing out to me that the judge had also allowed the appeal under the
    Immigration Rules and that she would  be  in  difficulty  pursuing  the
    application solely challenging the Article 8 findings.   Mr  Dhanji  of
    Counsel opposed the application to amend the grounds  at  such  a  late
    stage.  He had received notification  of  the  proposed  amendment  the
    night before the hearing.  The Secretary of State  had  overlooked  the
    fact that the appeal had been allowed under the Immigration Rules  when
    drafting the grounds challenging the Article 8 findings.  The Secretary
    of State had not indicated there was any failure to give findings on  a
    material matter and the judge in the First-tier Tribunal had approached
    the undue hardship test correctly.  The application to add a new ground
    of appeal is severely out of time.  Counsel understood  why  Ms  Holmes
    had taken the view that she had because the appeal was allowed  on  two
    grounds namely  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  under  Article  8.
    Without challenging the decision made in the appeal on the  Immigration
    Rules, the Secretary of State's application could not possibly succeed.



 5. Ms Holmes indicated that she agreed with Mr Dhanji  and  had  made  her
    application in alarm when she saw that the decision had  been  appealed
    on Article 8 grounds only.  This is  her  attempt  to  plug  the  hole.
    There was nothing more she could say.

 6. I refused the application for leave to amend.  To permit  such  a  late
    amendment would cause unfairness to the appellant who had succeeded  in
    her appeal.  The time limits were there to be adhered to  unless  there
    were  good  reasons  why  time  should  be  extended.   There  was   no
    explanation for the delay other than an oversight  by  the  person  who
    drafted the grounds.  I was satisfied there were  no  good  reasons  to
    extend time and I refused the  application  to  amend  the  grounds  of
    appeal.

 7. Having refused the application to amend the grounds it  became  readily
    apparent that the application  made  by  the  Secretary  of  State  for
    permission to appeal must be dismissed.  The judge allowed  the  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules and it could not possibly be argued that he
    was wrong to allow the Article 8 appeal when he had already found  that
    the respondent met the requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  under
    paragraph 276ADE.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge stands.



Signed        15 December 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge E B Grant

