
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38317/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 April 2016                              |On 7 June 2016                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                TARIK ADDECHE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     no appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    Tier Tribunal Judge Behan, dismissing his appeal against  the  decision
    of the respondent made on 29 August 2013 to refuse him leave to  remain
    on the basis of 14 years' residence in the United Kingdom.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Algeria who entered the United Kingdom on
    1 September 1995, illegally; he claimed asylum on  22  September  1995,
    but his application was refused on 19 March 1996  when  he  was  served
    with form IS 151A. His appeal was unsuccessful.

 3. In 1999 the appellant began a relationship with Ms Reicher, an Austrian
    citizen; they were married on 20 May 2000, and an  application  for  an
    EEA Residence card was made. The card was  issued  on  25  March  2002,
    valid until October 2005. The marriage ran into  difficulties  and  the
    couple separated in April 2005. Ms Reicher then, at some point returned
    to Austria. The couple were not divorced until 30 January 2012.

 4. Although the appellant's residence card had expired in 2005 he remained
    in the United Kingdom, and continued to work.

 5. On 5 July 2012, the appellant made an application for leave  to  remain
    under the 14 year residence rule. His application  was  refused  on  28
    August 2013; a few days earlier, on 15 August 2013, the respondent  was
    informed the appellant that the outcome of the legacy review  was  that
    he had no basis of stay in the United Kingdom.

 6. The respondent refused the application  for  leave  to  remain  on  the
    grounds that:

      a) He  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph  276B  of  the
         Immigration Rules as he had not accrued 14 years' residence  as  he
         had been served with Form IS 151A in March 1996, which "stopped the
         clock";

      b) He did not meet the  requirements  of  paragraph  276  ADE  of  the
         Immigration Rules as he had not, at that point, lived in the United
         Kingdom for 20 years, and had not shown he had no ties to Algeria;

      c) There were no reasons  to  grant  the  appellant  leave  to  remain
         outside the Immigration rules.

 7. The appellant appealed on the grounds that:

      a) The service of the IS 151A notice did not prevent him from accruing
         time thereafter, and that he had resided  here  for  more  than  14
         years after that notice had been served;

      b) His stay in the United Kingdom had been regularised at the date  of
         his marriage to an EEA national on 9 June 2000,  not  on  25  March
         2002, the date of issue of the residence card;

      c) His removal would be in breach of his article 8 rights.

 8. In light of later developments in this case, it is notable that  it  is
    not argued in the grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal that  he
    had  acquired  permanent  residence  under  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the EEA  Regulations"),  or  that  he
    currently had any other  right  of  residence,  derived  or  otherwise,
    pursuant to European law.

 9. Judge Behan heard evidence from the appellant and another witness.  She
    found:

      a) The fact that the appellant had spent time in the United Kingdom as
         the spouse of an EEA national  exercising  Treaty  rights  did  not
         affect the application of paragraph 276B of the  Immigration  Rules
         to the appellant; the  fact  that  the  respondent  treated,  on  a
         discretionary basis, time so spent  as  lawful  residence  for  the
         purposes of the 10 year rule was not of assistance [44];

      b) The applicant had not shown that he has "no ties" to  Algeria,  and
         thus did not meet the requirements of paragraphs 276  ADE  (vi)  of
         the Immigration Rules [47]-[49];

      c) the removal of the applicant would, having had  regard  to  section
         17B of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  be
         proportionate [50]-[57].

10. The appellant was granted permission  to  appeal  on  the  grounds,  as
    amended, that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law in that:

      a) The  appellant  had  acquired  the  permanent  right  of  residence
         pursuant to the EEA Regulations, as he had lived in the UK  as  the
         family member of an EEA national for  at  least  five  years,  that
         period commencing either:

          i) When  the  appellant  his  wife  had  begun  cohabiting,  thus
             entering a  durable  relationship,  that  status  counting  as
             membership of a family for the purposes of article 16  of  the
             Citizenship Directive; or,

         ii) On 20 May 2000, the date of marriage

      b) At all material times during the relevant  five  year  period,  the
         appellant's wife had been exercising Treaty rights either:

          i) As a worker, including as a job-seeker, the basis on which she
             entered the United Kingdom; or,

         ii) As a self-sufficient person, relying as she was entitled to do
             on her husband's earnings (see Singh [2015] EUECJ C-218/14  at
             [76])

      c) As the appellant had acquired permanent residence in  2005  at  the
         latest, he did not need to show that his wife had  been  exercising
         Treaty rights at the date of divorce, or to demonstrate that he had
         retained rights of residence;

      d) The appellant had retained his  rights  of  residence  due  to  his
         personal circumstances including and pursuant to articles 7 and  15
         of the Charter of Fundamental Rights;

      e) As the appellant's residence had been lawful  since  his  marriage,
         the conclusion that he had been here without  leave  was  wrong  in
         law;

      f) The appellant had established that he had been here  lawfully  from
         the date of his marriage for a period of ten years (that is, having
         acquired permanent  residence  and/or  having  retained  rights  of
         residence) in 2010, and so was  entitled  to  Indefinite  Leave  to
         Remain;

      g) The judge had erred in concluding [44] that the respondent had only
         a discretion to accept residence under EU law when calculating  the
         14 year period; the respondent was in fact under a duty to  do  so;
         and, in consequence, the conclusion that  the applicant had not met
         the 14 year rule was perverse;

      h) The judge had erred in applying the 20 year rule and in  concluding
         that the appellant did not meet the requirements of  paragraph  276
         ADE of the Immigration Rules; and, in concluding that  his  removal
         was proportionate.

11. The appeal first came before the Upper Tribunal on 12 May 2015 when  it
    was adjourned after permission had been granted to amend the grounds of
    appeal, and pending the resolution of the reference to the CJEU  in  NA
    (Pakistan) [2015] EWCA 140. Subsequent to that, and  in  the  light  of
    Singh (C-218/14), the following direction were given:

      1. It is considered that, given the apparent absence of findings about
         the appellant's  right of permanent residence under the Immigration
         (European Economic Area) Regulations and/or European law,  that  it
         would be appropriate to list the matter for the  issue  of  whether
         the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  an
         error of law to be determined.

      2. The parties are directed to address in  submissions  what  evidence
         there was before the  First-tier Tribunal of the appellant's former
         wife's economic activity as a worker or otherwise.
  12. The parties were also directed to provide skeleton arguments  14  days
      prior to the hearing.


  13. Neither party has complied with the directions given, and on 26  April
      2016, the appellant's solicitors wrote to the Upper Tribunal stating:

         We write to inform you that the Appellant would request the  appeal
         be considered based on the documents already provided without  oral
         submissions.

         In the circumstances, the Appellant and his  legal  representatives
         will not attend the court on 28 April 2016.

    The law


  14. Paragraphs 276A and 276B of the Immigration Rule which, by  virtue  of
      the transitional provisions, applied to the  appellant's  application,
      provided so far as is relevant:

      276A. For the purposes of paragraphs 276B to 276D:

      (a) "continuous residence" means residence in the United  Kingdom  for
      an unbroken period, and for these  purposes  a  period  shall  not  be
      considered to have been broken where an applicant is absent  from  the
      United Kingdom for a period of 6 months  or  less  at  any  one  time,
      provided that the applicant in question has existing limited leave  to
      enter or  remain  upon  their  departure  and  return,  but  shall  be
      considered to have been broken if the applicant:

         (i) has been removed under Schedule 2 of the 1971 Act,  Section  10
         of the 1999 Act, has been deported or has left the  United  Kingdom
         having been refused leave to enter or remain here; or

         (ii) has left the United Kingdom and,  on  doing  so,  evidenced  a
         clear intention not to return; or

         (iii) left the United Kingdom in circumstances in  which  he  could
         have had no reasonable expectation at the time of leaving  that  he
         would lawfully be able to return; or

         (iv) has been convicted of an offence and was sentenced to a period
         of imprisonment or was directed to be detained  in  an  institution
         other than a prison (including, in particular,  a  hospital  or  an
         institution for young offenders), provided  that  the  sentence  in
         question was not a suspended sentence; or

         (v) has spent a total of more than 18 months absent from the United
         Kingdom during the period in question.

      (b) "lawful residence" means residence which is  continuous  residence
      pursuant to:

         (i) existing leave to enter or remain; or

         (ii) temporary admission within section 11 of the  1971  Act  where
         leave to enter or remain is subsequently granted; or

         (iii) an exemption from immigration  control,  including  where  an
         exemption ceases to apply if it is immediately followed by a  grant
         of leave to enter or remain."

      276B. The requirements to be met by an applicant for indefinite  leave
      to remain on the ground of long residence in the  United  Kingdom  are
      that:

      (i)

         (a) he has had at least 10 years continuous lawful residence in the
      United Kingdom; or

         (b) he has had at least 14 years continuous residence in the United
         Kingdom, excluding any period spent in the United Kingdom following
         service of notice of liability to removal or notice of  a  decision
         to remove by way of directions under paragraphs 8 to 10A, or 12  to
         14, of Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971 or section 10 of  the
         Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 Act, or of a notice of intention to
         deport him from the United Kingdom; and


  15. The appellant, through the grounds of appeal, is advancing an entirely
      different case from that put to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  As  noted
      above, at no stage prior  to  the  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal was it his case that he has acquired permanent residence.  It
      cannot therefore have been an error on the part of the  judge  not  to
      make  findings  in  respect  of  whether  he  had  acquired  permanent
      residence.


  16. The submission in the grounds that the appellant had formed a  durable
      relationship with Ms Reicher prior to marriage is untenable. There  is
      insufficient evidence to show when they started cohabiting or when the
      relationship became durable.  Further, the submission that being in  a
      durable relationship with and EEA  national  means  that  the  non-EEA
      national, in this case the appellant, is a  "family  member"  of  that
      person as defined, is without foundation, and ignores  the  consistent
      jurisprudence of the CJEU which demonstrates that  there  is  a  clear
      difference between those who are family  members  as  defined  in  the
      Directive 2004/38/EC ("the Citizenship Directive") at art. 2 and those
      who are not but fall within art. 3, not least as in this case, it  had
      never been put to the respondent that the couple  were  in  a  durable
      relationship  and  for  the  relevant  checks  and  enquiries  to   be
      undertaken as mandated  by  the  Citizenship  Directive  and  the  EEA
      Regulations. Moreover, the Directives in place at  the  relevant  time
      did not provide for durable relationships,  and  while  there  was  in
      place a policy of giving residence rights to the unmarried partners of
      EEA nationals, that policy was aligned to the Immigration  Rules  then
      in force which permitted a grant of leave to an unmarried partner only
      after 2 years' cohabitation and only then  after  an  application  had
      been made.


  17. There is, I accept, merit in the submission that the appellant  became
      the family member of an EEA national at the date of marriage. The fact
      that the residence card was issued some 2 years later is not relevant;
      the card is declaratory of the right or residence,  not  constitutive.
      But being a family member of an EEA national  is  not  sufficient  for
      there to be rights  of  residence;  the  EEA  national  must  also  be
      exercising Treaty rights or have acquired permanent residence.   There
      is,  however,  no  documentary  evidence  of  the  appellant's  wife's
      employment, self-employment, or of her having  comprehensive  sickness
      insurance a necessary precondition to her  right  of  residence  as  a
      student or a self-sufficient person.  The oral  evidence  is  at  best
      limited and indirect, and there has been no attempt by  the  appellant
      to identify evidence relating to his ex-wife's  economic  activity  in
      the United Kingdom, despite the clear directions made  and  which  are
      set out above.


  18. That said, it can be inferred from the issue of a residence card  that
      she had been satisfied at some point that Ms Reicher was  a  qualified
      person.  When, and for how long is equally unclear, given the lack  of
      evidence. It follows that the respondent may have erred in calculating
      the earliest day from which the appellant's lawful residence  started;
      it may have been the date of marriage, but again, it could have been a
      later date, and it is for the appellant to prove his case.


  19. Further, it is unclear when  the  appellant's  ex-wife  ceased  to  be
      resident in the United Kingdom. There is no  indication  that  divorce
      proceedings were started prior to that point, and indeed they were not
      concluded until several years later in 2012.  It is evident  that,  in
      these circumstances, even assuming  that  Ms  Reicher  was  exercising
      Treaty rights and was entitled to residence here  up  until  she  left
      (and there is, as is noted above, insufficient evidence of that),  the
      appellant's right to remain which was dependent on his  wife,  ceased.
      Given the decision in Singh, it is not arguable that the appellant had
      retained any rights; those rights had ceased to exist with his  wife's
      departure. The facts here are different from those in  NA  (Pakistan);
      there is no allegation of domestic violence, or submission that  there
      are rights retained on account of  children.  The  submission  in  the
      grounds that rights have been retained, either under  the  Citizenship
      Directive or, fancifully, under the Charter of Fundamental Rights  and
      Freedoms, is without foundation.


  20. It is simply not arguable that on the material before the  judge  that
      the appellant had acquired the right  of  permanent  residence  either
      while his wife was here or on the basis of  taking  into  account  any
      retained rights.


  21. Turning to the Immigration Rules, the  natural  meaning  of  paragraph
      276B is that once a notice of the class referred to has  been  served,
      no time accrued after that event can be counted to  accrue  14  years'
      residence; that does not, however, mean that lawful residence up to 10
      years cannot be taken into account,  as  paragraph  276B  (1)  (a)  is
      expressed as an alternative.


  22. There is a degree of ambiguity in the refusal letter at page 2:

         Although you were granted a residence document on  25  March  2002,
         the period from the service of the IS151A until the  issue  of  the
         residence document cannot be counted as continuous leave to remain.


  23. Although there is an evident error here in referring to a "grant" of a
      residence  card,  implying  that  it  is  constitutive   rather   than
      declaratory, compounded by the assumption that lawful residence  flows
      from the date of issue, it cannot be inferred that the respondent  has
      accepted that the resumption  of  lawful  status  "starts  the  clock"
      again, contrary to the clear language of the rule. Rather,  it  is  an
      acceptance that a person in such  a  situation  can  start  to  accrue
      periods of lawful residence leading to a possible grant of  settlement
      after 10 years' lawful residence. There  is  no  suggestion  that  the
      decision by the respondent to serve the notice on  the  appellant  was
      unlawful at the time.


  24. While the judge errs in her assessment of the respondent's  discretion
      at [44], given that the policy says  caseworkers  must  treat  periods
      spent as lawful residence under the EEA  Regulations,  that  does  not
      constitute a material error. Even starting at the  date  of  marriage,
      the applicant would not have acquired 10 years' lawful residence until
      2010, by which point Ms Reicher was no longer resident here and he had
      thus lost his right of residence well before  that  point.   There  is
      simply no basis for the submission  that  the  judge's  reasoning  was
      infected by any consideration of the 20 year rule, contrary to what is
      averred in the grounds.


  25. Contrary to what is averred, the judge gave adequate  and  sustainable
      reasons for concluding that the appellant had not shown he had no ties
      to Algeria. As she noted at [48], he had lived there until  he  was  a
      young adult, had returned for holidays, spoke the language,  and  that
      he has  some  friends  and  family  there.   The  judge  was,  in  the
      circumstances, manifestly entitled to conclude that the appellant  had
      not met the requirements of paragraphs 276 ADE (vi).


  26.  The challenges to the judge's  approach  to  article  8  outside  the
      parameters of the Immigration Rules are hopeless. The  judge  properly
      applied the relevant test set out in Razgar.  The  submission  in  the
      grounds at [21] is in substance a near miss case, and takes no account
      of the effect of section 117B of the 2002 Act and that the applicant's
      private life had been developed for the most part when his status here
      was precarious  and  in  any  event,  the  length  of  time  here  was
      considered as a material  factor  [54].   There  is  simply  no  merit
      whatsoever in the challenges put forward in the  grounds  at  [21]  to
      [24] and they fail to identify how the conclusion was  one  which  the
      judge was not entitled to reach.


  27. In conclusion, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not,  for
      the reasons set out above, involve the making of an error of law,  and
      I uphold it.


SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
    an error of law and I uphold it.



Signed                                  Date:  29 April 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
