
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38723/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 13th June 2014                             |On 27th June 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                          mr Nana Bayin Ekow Maani

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Bhanji of Counsel, instructed by Nasim & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Ghana born on 16th April 1984.

2.   He seeks to appeal against a decision by the  respondent,  refusing  to
    issue a permanent residence card pursuant to the Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006.  It is the claim of the appellant that
    he is the spouse or extended family member of an  EEA  national  namely
    Frederica Pierannunzio, who is herself an Italian citizen.

3.   The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Hillis on 8th  January
    2014 to be determined upon the papers.  The Judge did not find that the
    marriage was conducted in the proper form  or  that  the  documents  as
    submitted supported the validity of the marriage.  Little evidence  was
    provided as to any durable relationship.  Accordingly  the  appeal  was
    dismissed.

4.   Grounds of appeal were lodged against that decision and  permission  to
    appeal was granted.  Thus the matter came before me on 14th March 2014.



5.   The marriage was a customary marriage by proxy.  A number of  documents
    were submitted  in  support  of  it  having  taken  place  including  a
    statutory declaration and the certificate of marriage.   The  statutory
    declaration was signed before a notary of  the  public  Alexander  Kofi
    Baah on 10th April 2012.  He confirmed that with the expressed  consent
    of approval of both families the appellant was customarily  married  on
    the 5th day  of  April  2012  in  Accra  in  accordance  with  Ghanaian
    customary laws and usages.  The statutory declaration was the necessary
    document to  lead  to  the  registration  of  marriage.   There  was  a
    statement or certificate from  the  second  deputy  judicial  secretary
    recognising the signature of Alexander Baah.  A third document was  the
    extract from the register of customary  marriage  duly  signed  by  the
    registrar of the Metropolitan Assembly.

6.   As highlighted in the grant  of  permission  to  appeal,  the  approach
    taken  by  the  Judge  in  relation  to  the  documents  was   somewhat
    complicated and difficult to follow.   The  Judge  concluded  that  the
    marriage was not valid but it  is  difficult  to  understand  from  the
    determination  how  that  conclusion  had  been  come  to  in  all  the
    circumstances.  The Judge was of the opinion that both parents  had  to
    be present. Little  weight  was  given  to  the  statutory  declaration
    because that it did not state that fact.

7.   Given the lack of clarity as to the reasoning behind  the  decision  to
    reject the appeal I found that to be an error of law  such  as  to  set
    aside the decision to be remade.

8.   I gave various directions as  to  the  nature  of  the  evidence  which
    should be presented.

9.   The leading authority in the area of proxy  marriage  is  that  of  the
    Tribunal in Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT 0024.

10.  That decision stressed that in determining whether or  not  a  marriage
    was valid by customary law, it was necessary not only to  look  at  the
    documentation but also the circumstances as  set  out  in  any  further
    evidence.

11.  Kareem also stressed that not only was the marriage  to  be  recognised
    by the laws of the country in which the marriage  was  celebrated,  but
    also, in order to reflect the rights of free movement,  it  was  to  be
    recognised by the country of nationality of the EEA citizen seeking  to
    exercise EEA rights.

12.  The matter finally came before me for hearing.   A  number  of  further
    documents had been submitted in accordance with  the  directions.   One
    such document was the statement of Marcio Daniella who was a witness to
    the marriage in Ghana.  He was cousin  to  the  sponsor  Frederica  and
    represented her family at the ceremony.  He  has  provided  a  detailed
    statement as to what transpired at that meeting and what was  said  and
    what was exchanged.  He works for  World  Vision  Organisation  in  the
    Ghana western region and has produced a letter to  confirm  that  fact.
    It is a detailed statement and for my part it has  the  ring  of  truth
    about it.  Both the appellant and the  sponsor  have  provided  further
    statements as to their situation and circumstances.

13.  Mr Deller, who represents the respondent, most  fairly  indicated  that
    having had the opportunity of examining the documentation in detail and
    in particular placing that  within  the  context  of  the  evidence  as
    provided by the sponsor, appellant and witness, he had no issue  as  to
    the truthfulness of what was said and of the accuracy of the  documents
    that were presented.  He  therefore  was  happy  to  concede  that  the
    marriage by proxy was indeed one that had  taken  place  and  was  duly
    recognised by the laws of Ghana  as  shown  by  the  extract  from  the
    register.  In those circumstances it is unnecessary for me to deal with
    those documents in any detail.  I indicate that I have  considered  the
    documents and have come to the same view as to their  authenticity  and
    reliability as has Mr Deller.

14.  In support of the contention that the marriage in Ghana  was  one  that
    is recognised in by the  Italian  authorities,  there  was  produced  a
    certificate from the province in Rome from the civil state  authorities
    confirming that the marriage as conducted between the appellant and the
    sponsor has been recognised by  the  appropriate  Italian  authorities.
    The document bears a stamp as well as a hologram  and  Mr  Deller  most
    fairly concedes that he has no doubt as  to  its  authenticity  and  is
    readily happy to accept that the marriage as conducted by proxy is  one
    that is recognised by the Italian authorities.

15.  That being so it is clear that the ingredients as set out in  the  case
    of Kareem have been met in this case.  Not only is the  marriage  valid
    according to the laws of Ghana but also  recognised  according  to  the
    country of nationality of the EEA national  namely  Italy.   Mr  Deller
    indicates therefore that from his perspective there is no impediment to
    the issuing of the residence card as sought.

16.  In those circumstances it is unnecessary to  consider  the  alternative
    matter of  disposal  namely  a  durable  relationship.   For  my  part,
    however, having read the statements of the appellant  and  the  sponsor
    and having regard to the totality of the evidence I would have  allowed
    the appeal on the alternative basis had it been necessary so to do.

17.  In all the circumstances therefore I find that the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor are legally married according to the customary law in Ghana.  I
    find that that marriage is recognised both in Ghana and  by  the  civil
    authorities in Italy.

18.  I find therefore that there  is  no  reason  at  all  why  a  permanent
    residence card should not be issued to the appellant as he seeks.

19.  In the circumstances therefore the appeal under the  Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations 2006 is allowed.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
