
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38803/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 September 2015                 |On 5 October 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MUHAMMAD REHMAN ASLAM
                           (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr P. Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms F. Shan, Counsel instructed by Adam Bernard
                    Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent (hereinafter "the claimant") is a national  of  Pakistan
    born on 21 March 1985. He arrived in the UK in September 2011 on a Tier
    4 (General) Student visa valid until 2 February 2013. Thereafter  leave
    to remain was granted until 15 October 2016.

 2. On 8 October 2014 the appellant (hereinafter "the Secretary of  State")
    notified the claimant that his continuing  leave  was  cancelled  under
    Paragraph 321A of the Immigration Rules  on  the  ground  that  he  had
    obtained an English Language Test Certificate, that was used  to  apply
    for leave to remain, through deception. On this basis, a  decision  was
    made  to  remove  him  from  the  UK  under  section  10(1)(b)  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

 3. The claimant appealed and his appeal was heard by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Lingam ("the judge") who, in a decision promulgated on  10  March
    2015, allowed the appeal under both the Immigration Rules and Article 8
    of the ECHR.

 4. The Secretary of State's case was based on witness statements of  Peter
    Millington, an assistant director  at  the  Home  Office,  and  Rebecca
    Collins,  a  Civil  Servant  at  the  Home  Office  (hereinafter   "the
    Statements").  The Statements describe the  way  in  which  Educational
    Testing  Services  (ETS)  has  investigated  the  validity  of  English
    language test results in light of widespread abuse. The Statements  are
    not specific to the case against the claimant and have been used by the
    Secretary  of  State  in  many  appeals.  They   were   given   careful
    consideration recently by the Upper Tribunal in R (on  the  application
    of Gazi) v Secretary of State for the Home Department (ETS  -  judicial
    review) IJR [2015] UKUT 327 (IAC).

First-tier Tribunal Decision

 5. The judge found that the Secretary of State  had  failed  to  establish
    that the claimant had used deception. The reasons  she  gave  for  this
    finding were:

      a. Having heard the claimant give oral evidence, she was satisfied  he
         was able to give a detailed account of taking the test.

      b. The methodology used by ETS could  have  resulted  in  errors.  The
         judge identified  references  in  the  Statements  to  there  being
         imperfections in the methodology used by  ETS  and  which  indicate
         there is room for error.

      c. The spreadsheet included within the  Secretary  of  State's  bundle
         purportedly identifying the claimant  as  a  person  identified  as
         using deception was not legible.  She  noted  that  the  Presenting
         Officer handed her a document purporting  to  show  the  claimant's
         results were invalid but she found this to be a  re-typed  document
         that did not indicate who had retyped it and that in any  event  it
         did not include any analysis to explain the findings.

 6. With respect to Article 8 of the ECHR,  the  judge  followed  the  well
    established Razgar approach. She was  satisfied  the  claimant  has  an
    established private life in  the  UK  and  that  interference  with  it
    engages Article 8. With respect to proportionality, having  found  that
    the claimant  spoke  English,  was  financially  self  sufficient,  had
    pursued lawful activities in the UK, had made satisfactory progress  in
    his studies and desired to successfully  complete  his  education,  the
    judge concluded that the claimant had made out his Article 8 claim "for
    the reasons set out in CDS."

 7. The grounds of appeal  submit  that  the  judge  erred  by  failing  to
    properly take into account the Secretary of  State's  evidence  showing
    deception had been used. The ETS invalidation of the test  results  was
    because of evidence of proxy  test  taking  and  judge  has  failed  to
    provide adequate reasons for finding to the contrary.

 8. With regard to Article  8,  the  grounds  submit  that  the  judge  has
    misdirected herself as to the scope and effect of CDS Brazil, and  that
    the finding with regard to Article 8 was not sustainable.

Submissions

 9. Mr Nath relied on the grounds of appeal, which he said clearly set  out
    the Secretary of State's position.

10. Ms Shan argued that the judge's reasoning shows that  she  gave  proper
    consideration to whether the Secretary of State's evidence, in the form
    of the Statements, supports a finding that the claimant used deception.
    The judge noted the acknowledged imperfections in  the  technology  and
    that there was 'room for error'. Ms Shan highlighted that the judge had
    found a crucial piece of evidence,  which  purportedly  identified  the
    claimant, to not be legible. Having considered the evidence, the  judge
    was entitled to reach the conclusion she did.

11. With regard to Article 8, Ms Shan argued that the judge  had  correctly
    identified and weighed relevant factors in considering  proportionality
    and reached a decision that was open to her.

Consideration

12. The judge states at paragraph 27 of her decision that  the  spreadsheet
    purportedly identifying  the  claimant  as  a  person  whose  test  was
    invalidated was not legible. She explains that the  Presenting  Officer
    handed her a re-typed document but that she found  this  to  not  be  a
    satisfactory replacement of the actual spreadsheet because it  did  not
    indicate who had retyped it and was not supported by any analysis.

13. This spreadsheet, described by the judge as  a  "crucial  document"  is
    what linked the claimant to the  group  of  individuals  identified  as
    having used deception and whose tests were invalidated. In the  absence
    of this spreadsheet or any equivalent evidence before  her,  the  judge
    was entitled to  conclude,  as  she  did  at  paragraph  28,  that  the
    Secretary of State's evidence did not stand  up  to  scrutiny.  However
    strong ETS's methodology might have been in uncovering test takers  who
    cheated, in light of the spreadsheet not being legible, it was open  to
    the judge to find that the evidence before her was  not  sufficient  to
    show that the claimant was amongst them.

14. The Secretary of State's grounds focus on whether the judge gave proper
    weight to the Statements, and it is arguable that the judge's  approach
    to  them  reveals  an  excessive  focus  on  shortcomings  in  the  ETS
    methodology  without  reasons  for  this  being  given.   However,   in
    considered the judge's approach, I keep in mind that  the  evidence  in
    the Statements must be considered  in  the  specific  context  of  this
    particular appeal where the judge had the opportunity to hear  evidence
    from the claimant, and observe him being cross-examined. The judge  was
    therefore in a strong  position  to  form  a  view  on  the  claimant's
    credibility and the likelihood he would have cheated on the test. Given
    that ETS's methodology, as  acknowledged  in  the  Statements,  and  as
    highlighted by the  judge,  is  not  infallible,  these  are  important
    factors to be weighed when determining whether this particular claimant
    cheated.

15. As stated in Gazi [2015] UKUT 00372 (IAC) at paragraph 40:

         "Each litigant will put forward  his  or  her  individual  disputed
         assertions, agreed facts, considerations and  circumstances.  These
         will be evaluated by a fact finding tribunal, to be contrasted with
         a court or tribunal of supervisory jurisdiction. This analysis  is,
         in my view, amply confirmed by the growing number of FtT  decisions
         in this sphere. Within these one finds emphasis  on  self-evidently
         important issues such as the appellant's evident  English  language
         ability, demeanour and previous life  events.  Furthermore,  it  is
         trite  that  the  assessment  of  each  appellant's  demeanour  and
         credibility will be carried out on a case by case basis."

16. It is clear from the judge's  decision  that  she  had  regard  to  the
    claimant's  English  language  ability,  demeanour  and  previous  life
    events, factors described in Gazi as  "self  evidently  important",  as
    well as his recollection of sitting the test,  which  the  judge  found
    credible having heard cross-examination of the claimant.

17. Accordingly, it was open to the judge, for the  reasons  she  gave,  to
    find that the Secretary of State's evidence was  insufficient  to  show
    the claimant used deception.

18. Having allowed the claimant's appeal under the Immigration  Rules,  the
    judge proceeded to consider Article 8 and found that the appeal  should
    be allowed for the reasons set out in CDS (PBS  "available  Article  8)
    Brazil [2010] UKUT 305 (IAC).

19. In CDS the following was stated:

         "Article 8 does not  give  an  Immigration  Judge  a  free-standing
         liberty to depart from the Immigration Rules, and  it  is  unlikely
         that a person will be able to show an Article 8 right by coming  to
         the UK for temporary purposes.  But a person  who  is  admitted  to
         follow a course that has not yet ended may build up a private  life
         that deserves respect, and the public interest  in  removal  before
         the end of  the  course  may  be  reduced  where  there  are  ample
         financial resources available."

20.  Whilst  on  its  face  it  appears   that   the   claimant's   factual
    circumstances, as described by the judge, fall within the  category  of
    students who may benefit from Article 8 as set out in CDS, more  recent
    case law - none of which is referred to by the judge - sheds some doubt
    on this. In Nasim and others (Article 8) [2014] UKUT 25 (IAC) the above
    quoted paragraph was described as "obiter remarks" and  at paragraph 26
    of Nasim the Tribunal states:

         "It cannot rationally be contended that their Article 8 rights have
         been made stronger  merely  because,  during  their  time  in  this
         country, they have not sought public  funds,  have  refrained  from
         committing criminal offences and have paid  the  fees  required  in
         order to undertake their courses.  Similarly, a desire to undertake
         paid employment in the United Kingdom is not,  as  such,  a  matter
         that can enhance a person's right to remain  here  in  reliance  on
         Article 8.

21. Patel and others [2013] UKSC 72 at [57] states that

         "the opportunity for a promising student to complete his course  in
         this country, however desirable in the general  terms,  is  not  in
         itself a right protected under Article 8."

22. In considering the judge's approach to Article 8, I remind myself  that
    the issue before me is whether the judge made an error of law  and  not
    whether I, or a differently constituted Tribunal, might have reached  a
    different conclusion based on the same facts.

23. Although the judge has not taken into account case law which  qualifies
    and limits CDS, her assessment of Article 8, although  brief,  includes
    an appropriate consideration of the public interest and it is clear she
    has had regard to Sections 117A-D of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002. Under 117B(1) regard must be given to "the maintenance
    of effective immigration controls". In this case, as  the  claimant  is
    lawfully in the UK and his removal would not be in accordance with  the
    law or Immigration Rules, this consideration does not weigh  in  favour
    of removing the claimant from the UK. It was open to the judge to  find
    that the claimant's appeal should be allowed under Article 8 as well as
    under the Immigration Rules.

Decision

24. The appeal is dismissed.

25. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of a
    material error of law and shall stand.

26. No anonymity order is made.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |                                     |
|                                     |Dated                                |

