
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39418/2014
                                                               IA/39419/2014
                                                               IA/39422/2014
                                                               IA/39427/2014
                                                               IA/39437/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10th August 2015                  |On 18th August 2015                  |
|Prepared on 11th August 2015         |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between
     MS NANA YAA ADUMEA ADADE   1st Appellant
     MR LAWRENCE BOATENG   2nd Appellant
     K   3rd Appellant
     M   4th Appellant
     J   5th Appellant
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J. Wells, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellants

1.   The Appellants in this case are all  citizens  of  Ghana.  They  appeal
      against the decision of Judge  of  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  O'Hagan
      sitting at Birmingham on 12th of December  2014  who  dismissed  their
      appeals against the Respondent's decisions made on 16 September  2014.
      The Respondent's decisions were to  refuse  each  of  the  Appellants'
      applications for leave to remain and to remove them  from  the  United
      Kingdom. The first Appellant (who I shall refer to as  the  Appellant)
      and who was born on 11 August 1977 is the wife of  the  2nd  Appellant
      born on 5th of July 1978 and the  mother  of  the  3rd,  4th  and  5th
      Appellants. Her husband the 2nd Appellant is the father  of  the  3rd,
      4th and 5th Appellants who were born in the United Kingdom on the  9th
      of May 2005, 12th of December 2010 and 5th of June 2013  respectively.
      The 3rd Appellant is thus 10 years of age and I will refer to  him  as
      K.

2.   The Appellant entered the United Kingdom in 2000  having  been  granted
      entry clearance as a visitor from 25th of September 2000 until 25th of
      March 2001. She did not return to Ghana when her leave  as  a  visitor
      expired but remained in the United Kingdom. At some point in 2004  she
      met the 2nd Appellant in this country and in  late  2004  returned  to
      Ghana. She had by then  entered  into  a  relationship  with  the  2nd
      Appellant and was pregnant with the couple's first child.  She  wished
      to obtain the blessing of her family in  Ghana  for  her  relationship
      with the 2nd Appellant. Whilst in Ghana she applied for  and  obtained
      entry clearance to enter the United Kingdom once more  as  a  visitor.
      This was granted valid from 27th of January 2005 until 27th of January
      2006. She entered the United Kingdom on the 7th of February  2005  and
      has remained in this country ever since.

3.   The 2nd Appellant entered the United Kingdom in April 2004 having  been
      granted entry clearance as a visitor valid  from  7th  of  April  2004
      until October 2004. The Appellant separated from the 2nd Appellant  in
      2011 following difficulties in their relationship.  In  February  2012
      the Appellant made an application  for  a  residence  card  under  the
      Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006  on  the  basis
      that she was the spouse of a man called Kofi Alessou. She  married  Mr
      Alessou  by  way  of  a  Ghanaian  proxy  marriage.  The   Appellant's
      application for a residence card was refused in  August  2012  by  the
      Respondent because she did not accept the proxy  marriage  declaration
      as genuine proof of marriage. The relationship between  the  Appellant
      and Mr Alessou broke down shortly thereafter and the Appellant and 2nd
      Appellant had a reconciliation.

The Proceedings

4.   On 16th  of  October  2013  the  Appellants  solicitors  wrote  to  the
      Respondent making an application for further leave to  remain  on  the
      grounds that the Appellants had established a private and family  life
      in the United Kingdom pursuant to Article 8 of the European Convention
      of Human Rights (respect for private and family life) outside  and  as
      contained within the immigration rules. The Respondent  refused  these
      applications on 14th of December 2013 with no right of appeal. On 14th
      of January 2014 the solicitors wrote to the Respondent inviting her to
      review that decision. On 23rd of January 2014 the  Respondent  replied
      conceding that section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration
      Act 2009 should have been considered when refusing the application and
      that as a result the refusal would be reconsidered within a period  of
      3 months. That period elapsed without a fresh decision and a  reminder
      letter was sent by the solicitors on 26th of June 2014.  This  finally
      resulted in the substantive refusal dated 16th of September 2014 which
      considered the Appellants applications under  Article  8  taking  into
      account section 55 and the immigration rules put in place  on  9th  of
      July 2012. A one-stop warning was attached to the decision. It was the
      Appellant's appeal against the decisions of  16th  of  September  2014
      that has given rise to the present proceedings.

5.   The Respondent refused  the  applications  under  appendix  FM  of  the
      immigration rules as neither the Appellant nor the 2nd Appellant could
      fulfil the requirements of being a British citizen present and settled
      in  the  United  Kingdom.  There  were  not  considered  to   be   any
      insurmountable obstacles  to  the  Appellant  and  the  2nd  Appellant
      returning to Ghana as they  were  both  nationals  and  held  identity
      documents for that country. They were a healthy couple aged 37 and  46
      years of age respectively and the family would be removed as a  whole.
      The Appellants appealed that decision arguing that it was unduly harsh
      and not in accordance with the law.

The Determination at First Instance

6.   The Judge set out his analysis, findings and conclusions at  paragraphs
      33 to 53 of the determination. He did not find either the Appellant or
      the 2nd Appellant to be credible witnesses. The Appellant  had  worked
      illegally and the Judge found that they had lied to him about when the
      Appellant had last worked. The two adult Appellants  were  "worryingly
      vague and evasive" about their own financial affairs. The Judge  found
      that the family was receiving money  about  which  the  Appellant  had
      failed to give a full and candid account. There was evidence  of  past
      dishonesty on the part of the Appellant in relation to her immigration
      affairs. The Appellant had returned to  the  United  Kingdom  in  2005
      using a visitor's visa which  was  obtained  on  the  basis  of  false
      representations that she intended to return to Ghana when she did not.

7.   As I have indicated there were 3 child Appellants to  this  appeal  the
      oldest of whom K was 9 years old at the date of the hearing before the
      first-tier Judge and is now 10 years of age. The other 2 children were
      at the date of hearing and are still, under  the  age  of  7.  It  was
      argued at first  instance  that  K  could  bring  himself  within  the
      provisions of paragraph 276 ADE of the immigration  rules  as  he  was
      under the age of 18 years and had lived  continuously  in  the  United
      Kingdom for at least 7 years and it would not be reasonable to  expect
      him to leave the United Kingdom. At paragraph 37 of the  determination
      the Judge wrote: "there are I recognise significant factors to support
      the argument that it would not be reasonable to expect K to leave  the
      United Kingdom. He has lived here all of his life and this is the only
      country that he has ever known. I accepted that he would  have  formed
      friendships and achieve that degree of integration into school and his
      wider community that one would expect of any child of his age. However
      there were also weighty countervailing factors.  In  particular  K  is
      still of an age where the main focus of his life lies with his parents
      and siblings. For a child of his age, it may  well  not  be  the  only
      focus, but it will be the main focus.... I was satisfied that K's best
      interests lay with his parents and siblings".

8.   The Judge noted that the family as a whole would be  returning  to  the
      country of K's parents'  birth  where  they  were  familiar  with  the
      culture  and  society.  There  would  not  be  significant  linguistic
      difficulties since English was spoken in  Ghana  alongside  indigenous
      languages. There were family members in  Ghana  in  the  form  of  the
      maternal grandparents. K had spoken to  his  maternal  grandmother  by
      telephone. He could be removed to Ghana without serious  detriment  to
      his well-being. Although his  removal  would  be  detrimental  to  his
      education the Judge cited the case of EV Philippines [2014]  EWCA  Civ
      874 that the desirability of being educated at public expense  in  the
      United Kingdom could not outweigh the benefit to children of remaining
      with their parents. Just as  the  United  Kingdom  could  not  provide
      medical treatment to the world so it  could  not  educate  the  world.
      Furthermore there were no significant obstacles to  the  reintegration
      of the Appellant and the 2nd Appellant back into Ghana.

9.    The  Judge  considered  whether  the  Appellants  could  benefit  from
      paragraph EX. 1 of appendix FM. EX. 1 was not a freestanding provision
      (see the case of Sabir [2014] UKUT  00063).  Insurmountable  obstacles
      meant very significant difficulties which would be faced by  a  member
      of the family continuing their family life outside the United  Kingdom
      but that was not the case here. The family could  not  succeed  within
      the immigration rules the  issue  therefore  was  whether  they  could
      succeed outside the immigration  rules  under  Article  8.  The  Judge
      directed himself in accordance with the step-by-step approach required
      by the case of Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 and at paragraph 52 set  out  his
      conclusions.

10.   The  Judge  took  into  account  the  Appellant  and  2nd  Appellant's
      violations of immigration laws and reminded himself of the  provisions
      of section 55 in the guidance given in ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4  by
      the Supreme Court. Whilst  the  welfare  of  a  child  was  a  primary
      consideration it was not the paramount consideration and certainly not
      a trump card that overrode all other considerations. The impact on the
      2 younger children would be relatively slight because their engagement
      with the world outside of their family  was  relatively  nascent.  The
      Judge acknowledged at paragraph 52 (3)  that  it  was  a  more  potent
      factor in the case of K. However for the reasons that he  had  already
      set out above (which I have summarised above at paragraph  7)  he  did
      not consider the decision to be an unreasonable one in  K's  case  and
      did not consider that K's interest in remaining in the United  Kingdom
      to pursue his education and to maintain the social ties  that  he  had
      formed was sufficient to outweigh  the  other  considerations  in  the
      Respondent's favour. The Judge described as unattractive the  argument
      that the  Appellant  and  2nd  Appellant  should  benefit  from  their
      prolonged unlawful and precarious residence in this country  by  being
      allowed to remain because of the impact  of  their  actions  on  their
      children. He dismissed the appeal.

The Onward Appeal

11.  The Appellants appealed against that decision arguing  that  there  had
      been no full and proper assessment of K's best interests under section
      55 in particular his wish to remain in the United Kingdom. He would be
      entitled to be registered as a British citizen on the 9th of May  2015
      on account of his residence in the United Kingdom  for  the  first  10
      years of his life. He spoke fluent English and considered  himself  to
      be British. He had family ties in the United Kingdom.  There  was  not
      the support network available in Ghana which the Judge  had  indicated
      because the K's maternal grandparents had extensive health problems of
      their own. K had learning  needs  and  required  educational  support.
      There was a public interest in favour  of  permitting  him  to  settle
      after seven years  as  resources  had  gone  into  his  education  and
      welfare.

12.  The application for permission to  appeal  came  before  Judge  of  the
      First-Tier Tribunal Hollingworth on the papers on 20th February  2015.
      In granting permission to appeal he wrote that an  arguable  error  of
      law had arisen in relation to the extent of the analysis by the  Judge
      as to the available evidence in  respect  of  K.  This  included  "the
      relationship between the factors  identified  and  those  factors  not
      specifically referred to on the basis of the available evidence".

13.  The Respondent submitted a reply to the grant  of  permission  pursuant
      to rule 24 on 23rd of March 2015. The Respondent argued  that  it  was
      not necessary for  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  to  identify  and
      explain  every  factor  in  his  determination.  He  had  given   full
      consideration to K's age and its impact upon the  reasonableness  test
      inherent in paragraph 276 ADE and section 117B (6) of the  Nationality
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. There had been a full Razgar analysis
      and exhaustive section 55 and proportionality considerations.

The Hearing before Me

14.  In consequence of the grant of permission the matter came before me  to
      determine whether in the first place there was an error of law in  the
      Judge's determination such that it fell to be set aside. If there  was
      then the matter would have to be reheard. If there was  not  then  the
      decision at first instance would stand.

15.   The  Appellant's   solicitor   relied   on   his   skeleton   argument
      (supplemented by some observations) which quoted from a  statement  of
      compatibility made by the Respondent at the time that the  immigration
      rules contained in Appendix FM and paragraph 276 ADE  were  introduced
      in July 2012. There was subsequently an amendment  made  to  paragraph
      276 ADE to introduce the additional criterion that  to  succeed  under
      the paragraph it had to be shown that it was  unreasonable  to  expect
      the child in question  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom.  The  skeleton
      argument submitted that the Respondent had given no  consideration  to
      the effect of the decision to remove K other than to say in  a  simple
      somewhat simplistic way that as K's parents and younger siblings could
      be removed it was reasonable that K also was removed.

16.  The Judge's consideration  of  the  duty  imposed  by  section  55  was
      similarly flawed for the same reasons. K had not  chosen  to  come  to
      United Kingdom he was born here. The key decisions were taken  by  his
      parents. The Judge had not placed  K's  length  of  residence  at  the
      centre of his consideration. Nor  was  it  considered  other  than  in
      passing that the length of residence fell only a few months  short  of
      the 10 year threshold which would have enabled K to apply  for  United
      Kingdom citizenship. He had crossed the seven-year threshold  and  was
      within reaching distance of the 10 year threshold. The  focus  of  the
      Judge's consideration was on the Appellant and 2nd Appellant as  could
      be seen by the closing observation that the Appellant's argument  that
      they should remain in this  country  because  of  the  impact  on  the
      children was an unattractive one.

17.  In oral submissions the solicitor argued that the none of the  children
      had ever been to their parents home country and the Judge  had  failed
      to  recognise  the  sliding  scale  of  importance  attached  to  long
      residence of a  child.  The  Presenting  Officer  submitted  that  the
      Judge's conclusions were open to him on the facts of the case.

Findings

18.  The focus in this appeal was on the impact upon the 3rd Appellant K  of
      the family's removal to Ghana. It was not argued before  me  that  the
      Judge's reasoning in relation to the adults was  legally  flawed.  The
      case rests entirely on their  argument  that  it  is  unreasonable  to
      expect K to leave the United Kingdom and since it is unreasonable  (as
      even the Judge at first instance had found) that K should be left here
      on his own whilst the others returned to Ghana they should be  allowed
      to remain here. The issue before the Judge was the proportionality  of
      the interference with K's private and family life and the family  life
      of the other Appellants.

19.  The Judge was dealing with a case where none of  the  Appellants  could
      bring themselves within the immigration rules. The two adults had long
      since overstayed their visitors' visas and none of  the  children  had
      acquired British citizenship. It was argued on the Appellant's  behalf
      that K was very close to being entitled to United Kingdom  citizenship
      by reason of the length of time he had been in this  country.  However
      the plain fact of the matter is that he  had  not  acquired  10  years
      residence in this country at the date of the hearing (with which I  am
      concerned). Even if the decision to remove him on  17  September  2014
      did not stop the clock from running in relation to the acquisition  of
      British citizenship as at the date of hearing K was  not  entitled  to
      that citizenship. The Appellant's argument therefore in  this  respect
      is a near miss argument which cannot succeed.

20.  What the Appellants can show is that K has lived in  this  country  for
      more than seven years and is therefore  a  qualifying  child  for  the
      purposes of section 117C of the 2002 Act. Under  section  117B(6)  the
      public interest in maintaining immigration control is not met where it
      is unreasonable to expect a  qualifying  child  to  leave  the  United
      Kingdom. In effect the test under paragraph 276 ADE as amended and the
      provisions of section 117 B (6) are the same. The Judge considered the
      issue under 276 ADE and I  have  quoted  the  relevant  parts  of  his
      consideration above (see paragraph 7). It was a matter for  the  Judge
      on  the  basis  of  the  evidence  before   him   to   determine   the
      proportionality or otherwise of the interference with the  Appellant's
      family life and the reasonableness or otherwise of expecting  a  child
      to return to the country of which he is  a  citizen.  The  Judge  gave
      cogent reasons for his conclusion that it was reasonable to  expect  K
      to return with his parents to Ghana. To argue that the Judge  did  not
      give sufficient consideration to the length of time spent by K in this
      country and/or his education is a mere disagreement with  the  result.
      The Judge accepted that there were significant factors  which  weighed
      on the Appellant's side of the scale is  but  also  acknowledged  that
      there were weighty countervailing factors. The Judge's analysis  under
      the immigration  rules  paragraph  276  ADE  applied  equally  to  the
      proportionality consideration outside the  immigration  rules  in  the
      light of the statute.

21.  As well as criticising the  Judge's  treatment  of  the  issue  of  the
      welfare  of  the  children  the   Appellants   also   criticised   the
      Respondent's consideration of the issue. The refusal letter dated 16th
      of September 2014 is a lengthy one in  which  the  Respondent  directs
      herself as to her duty under section  55  and  notes  there  would  be
      nothing to prevent the three children and their father from relocating
      to live with the Appellant in Ghana. It is specifically noted  that  K
      was enrolled in school but he was of an age young enough to be able to
      adapt upon relocation to Ghana with his  parents.  Country  background
      information about the educational system in Ghana was then set out  in
      the refusal letter and it was noted that K would be able to enter  the
      education system in Ghana whilst the Appellant and the  2nd  Appellant
      provided financial support to their family. It cannot be argued in  my
      view that the Respondent has failed to consider her duty under section
      55 in relation to K. This point too is a mere  disagreement  with  the
      result.

22.  It is correct to say that the  Judge  was  concerned  about  the  adult
      Appellants' poor immigration history. The Judge had  to  consider  the
      impact of the Respondent's decision on each member of the  family.  It
      is also reasonable to say that a child should not be punished for  the
      sins of his parents. In finding the adult  Appellants'  argument  that
      they should be allowed to remain because of the impact on the children
      to be unattractive; the Judge was criticising  the  adult  Appellants'
      attitude towards immigration rules and their disregard of those rules.
      The Judge made it clear that the argument had been put  on  behalf  of
      the adult Appellants and he was dealing with it on that basis  not  as
      part of his consideration of K's best interests.

23.  The Judge was entitled to draw the conclusions that he did on the  best
      interests of the children. It is  clear  from  the  structure  of  the
      determination that the Judge very much had the best interests  of  the
      children generally and K in particular in the forefront of  his  mind.
      He  was  aware  that  the  welfare  of  the  children  was  a  primary
      consideration and had to be considered first. He dealt with the  issue
      under paragraph 276 ADE at the beginning of his conclusions but  as  I
      have indicated his conclusions applied equally  when  considering  the
      matter outside the Rules at which point the section 117B(6) provisions
      applied. I do not consider therefore that there was any error  of  law
      in this case. The Judge made findings which were open to  him  on  the
      evidence and he considered the welfare of the children  adequately  at
      the date of hearing. As the Respondent pointed  out  in  the  Rule  24
      reply, it was not necessary for the Judge to identify each  and  every
      piece of evidence that was put  before  him.  The  Judge  gave  cogent
      reasons for his conclusions satisfying the test that the losing  party
      should reasonably be expected to understand from the judgment why they
      have lost. I should add for the sake of completeness that even if K is
      now entitled to apply  for  British  citizenship  the  effect  on  the
      Appellants' position would be a separate matter to  be  determined  at
      some future date.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-Tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and I uphold the decision to dismiss the Appellants' appeals.

Appeals dismissed

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Dated this 14th day of August 2015

..............................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As no fee was payable and the appeals have been dismissed there  can  be  no
fee award in this case.


Dated this 14th day of August 2015

..............................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft

