
[pic]
IAC-AH-pc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39470/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 November 2014                           |On 11 November 2014           |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                       Ms Zodiann Shantilou Shantilou
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Ben Hawkins, Counsel instructed by Arlington
Crown
     Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal to dismiss her appeal against  a  decision  by  the
    Secretary of State to remove her as a person subject to  administrative
    removal under Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum  Act  1999,  her
    human rights claim under Article 8 having been refused.  The First-tier
    Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction, and  I  do  not  consider
    that such a direction is required for these proceedings  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a national of  Jamaica,  whose  date  of  birth  is  8
    November 1993.  She entered the United Kingdom on  6  June  2007  on  a
    visit visa, which was valid from 21 May 2007 until  21  November  2007.
    According to Home Office records she  came  to  join  her  mother,  Mrs
    Nelson.  Although this may have been the actual reason, it was not  the
    ostensible reason as her mother was present in the UK  illegally.   The
    ostensible reason was to visit her brother.  The family who she  joined
    in the United Kingdom in 2007 did not arrange  for  her  to  return  to
    Jamaica before the expiry of her visit visa.  Instead, she was put into
    school and she remained here.  On 6 April 2011 she applied for leave to
    remain outside the Rules on compassionate grounds as a dependant of her
    mother.  This application was rejected on 13 July 2011.  The  appellant
    made a further application as a dependant of her mother  for  leave  to
    remain outside the Rules on compassionate grounds on 4  November  2011,
    and this was refused with no right of appeal on 21 February 2012.  On 6
    March 2012 her solicitors submitted a request for reconsideration,  and
    on 13 September 2012  further  information  was  provided  pursuant  to
    requests by the Home Office.

 3. On 13 June 2013 the appellant was served with a form  IS151A  informing
    her of her immigration  status  and  her  liability  to  detention  and
    removal.  On 10 September 2013 the Secretary of State gave her  reasons
    for being satisfied that the appellant's removal did not breach Article
    8 ECHR.  As had been previously stated, the appellant was now over  the
    age of 18.  So she could not be  dealt  with  as  a  dependant  on  her
    mother's claim.  She was treated as having made an application  in  her
    own right.  She had arrived in the United Kingdom on 6 June  2007  aged
    13 years old.  At the date of application she was 18 years old, and  as
    such had spent nearly five years in the United Kingdom.   But  she  did
    not meet the requirements of Rule 276ADE(v) as she had spent less  than
    half her life in the United Kingdom.  She  had  also  spent  the  first
    thirteen years of her life in Jamaica, and spoke the language which  is
    spoken in Jamaica.  So she had not demonstrated that she had  not  ties
    to Jamaica.

 4. The respondent decided to remove the appellant's  mother  at  the  same
    time, and both of  them  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    appellant's mother had entered the UK on 7 February 2001 as  a  visitor
    for two weeks.  She applied for further leave to remain as a visitor on
    18 February 2001, but this had been refused on 30  November  2001.   Ms
    Nelson overstayed, and did not seek  to  regularise  her  status  until
    applying for further leave to remain  on  compassionate  grounds  on  6
    April 2011.

 5. In her grounds of appeal, the appellant contended that the Secretary of
    State had not properly exercised discretion in reaching  her  decision.
    She had arrived in the UK when she was just  13  years  old.   She  had
    spent her formative years here.  She had attended school  and  college,
    and she had established strong and significant ties.  She had  excelled
    in her GCSEs and if given the  opportunity  would  make  a  significant
    contribution to society.  She wished to pursue a career in  nursing  or
    midwifery.  All her family members resided in the UK.   She  considered
    the UK her home, and wished to be given the opportunity to continue her
    life with her family members around her.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The appeals of mother and daughter came  before  Judge  Callender-Smith
    sitting in the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor House on  5  August  2014.
    The judge received oral evidence from both appellants, and  from  Peta-
    Gay Annemarie Linton and Kevin Carlton Weller.  Ms Linton  was  another
    daughter of Mrs Nelson.  She had discretionary leave to be  in  the  UK
    until October 2015 as the parent of a  British  citizen  child.   Kevin
    Weller was the appellant's older brother.  He had first arrived in  the
    UK on 4 October 2001 as a visitor, and had remained here ever since.

 7.  In  his  subsequent  determination,  Judge  Callender-Smith  held   at
    paragraph  60  that  family  and  private  life  were  engaged  in  the
    appellant's case because of the length of time that  she  had  been  in
    this country and the fact that her other siblings  were  here  and  had
    lawful status.  Removing her to Jamaica would  clearly  interfere  with
    her private and family life  and  the  consequences  were  sufficiently
    grave to require full consideration of those rights.

 8. On the issue of proportionality, the judge said at paragraph [61]  that
    he did not impute any blame to the appellant for her presence in the UK
    or anything that had occurred while she was under the age of 18.  Until
    her 18th birthday she was a minor and it was her mother who was clearly
    making all the important decisions in relation to her life.

 9. The judge continued in paragraph [62] as follows:

         In terms of her private life,  however,  the  interference  of  her
         removal to Jamaica would be proportionate in a democratic  society.
         The respect to be given to the maintenance of effective immigration
         control is clearly something that is in the public  interest.   She
         is now a well-educated young woman who is in a position to work and
         train for the career she wants in Jamaica.  She has  the  advantage
         of thirteen GCSEs and a BTEC national diploma in health and  social
         care.  The private life that she has acquired in the UK has  always
         been under the shadow of the fact that she has had no status  here.
         She did not  realise  that  as  a  child  but  she  must  certainly
         appreciate that now she is an adult.

10. The judge went on in paragraph  [63]  to  address  the  impact  of  the
    appellant's removal on the family life which she  enjoyed  with  family
    members in this  country.   At  paragraph  [66]  he  said:  "There  is,
    however, the background reality that these are two adult appellants who
    - on return to Jamaica - will be  able  to  co-support  each  other  as
    mother and daughter as they have in the past." The judge dismissed both
    appeals under the Rules and under Article 8 ECHR.





The Application for Permission to Appeal

11. Mr Hawkins settled applications for permission to appeal on  behalf  of
    both appellants.  The main ground of appeal  was  that  the  judge  had
    erred in law in applying Sections 117A and  117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, which had come into force on  28  July
    2014.  His reasoning was that as  the  decisions  had  been  made  long
    before these provisions had come  into  force,  the  appellants  had  a
    legitimate expectation that they would not apply in their appeals.  But
    if that was wrong, Sections 117A to 117D were  unlawful  in  that  they
    infringed  the  separation  of  powers  between  Parliament   and   the
    judiciary, in purporting to require courts  and  tribunals  determining
    Article 8 appeals to take into account certain factors.

12. Ground 3 was that the  judge's  determination  of  the  appeal  of  the
    daughter was flawed for a number of reasons.  Firstly,  the  judge  had
    applied Section 117B, and had determined the appeal only  by  reference
    to the factors in that Section.  Secondly, the judge's consideration of
    her case was brief and superficial in the extreme.  Thirdly, the  judge
    had not confronted the issue of what was fair to the daughter in  these
    particular circumstances.  Fourthly, there was no proper or  meaningful
    consideration of her family ties with her sister Ms Linton, her brother
    Kevin Weller, who was a British citizen,  and  her  three  nephews  and
    nieces.  Fifthly, the judge had failed to consider that the appellant's
    thirteen GCSEs and her BTEC national diploma in health and social  care
    was strong evidence of her undoubted integration and had failed to  ask
    himself whether this  thereby  lessened  the  public  interest  in  her
    removal, particularly given that she had lived in the UK from  the  age
    of 13 to the age of 21.

The Limited Grant of Permission to Appeal

13. On 7 October 2014 Designated Judge Zucker granted permission to  appeal
    on ground 3 only:

         As to the grounds dealing specifically with the  second  appellant,
         it is submitted in essence that insufficient consideration has been
         given to the eight years that  this  appellant  has  spent  in  the
         United Kingdom, of which about five were during her minority.   The
         ground is arguable.  The grounds point to a material error  of  law
         in respect of the second appellant only.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

14. At the hearing before me, Mr Hawkins developed the  arguments  advanced
    by him in ground 3.  In reply, Mr Melvin submitted that  the  challenge
    was in essence no more than an expression of disagreement with findings
    that were reasonably open to the judge.

Discussion

15. The judge set out the five point Razgar test at paragraph  [5]  of  his
    determination.  Mr Hawkins submitted that the judge's assessment of the
    appellant's  Article  8  claim  outside  the  Rules  was  not  properly
    structured in accordance with the  five  point  Razgar  test.   But  on
    analysis, in paragraph [60] the judge is answering questions 1 to 4  of
    the Razgar test, and in  the  remaining  paragraphs  he  is  addressing
    proportionality.

16. Mr Hawkins complained about the first sentence of paragraph  [62].   He
    submitted that this showed that the judge had reached a  conclusion  on
    the proportionality of the interference with  the  appellant's  private
    life without having weighed in the balance the relevant  factors.   But
    this criticism does not stand up to scrutiny.  What the judge is  doing
    in the remainder of paragraph [62] is explaining why he has reached the
    conclusion set out in the first sentence.   It  is  true  that  in  the
    explanation given in paragraph [62] the judge does  not  reiterate  the
    fact that the appellant arrived as a young  teenager,  and  spent  five
    years as a minor in the UK; nor that she has spent eight years  in  the
    United Kingdom altogether.  But the judge has alluded to these  matters
    in paragraph [61], and so it cannot reasonably be  contended  that  the
    judge has failed to take these  matters  into  account  when  assessing
    proportionality.

17. Mr Hawkins takes issue with  the  final  sentence  of  paragraph  [62],
    submitting that it is unclear what the judge means by saying  that  the
    appellant must now appreciate her lack of status; and  submitting  that
    the judge has asked himself the wrong question.  What  he  should  have
    been asking himself was whether, now that she  had  been  schooled  and
    become integrated into this country, it would be  disproportionate  for
    her to be removed.

18. I consider that the  judge's  observation  in  the  final  sentence  of
    paragraph [62] is entirely legitimate and relevant to the assessment of
    proportionality.  As  an  adult,  the  appellant  can  be  expected  to
    appreciate that her status here is precarious, by virtue  of  the  fact
    that she is an overstayer.

19. While, as the judge acknowledged, she was not personally to  blame  for
    the fact that she was an overstayer, this did not change the fact  that
    she was present in the country illegally.  Accordingly, as she now knew
    or ought to know (being an adult), she had no legitimate expectation of
    being allowed to stay here, rather than being required to return to her
    home country where she would have her mother's company  and  where  she
    had spent the first thirteen years of her life.

20. Earlier in his determination, the judge set  out  at  some  length  the
    evidence of the various witnesses, and at paragraphs [48]  to  [59]  he
    made detailed findings on  the  Article  8  claim  of  the  appellant's
    mother.  While the appellant said in her oral evidence that they were a
    close-knit family, who depended heavily upon each other, it was not her
    case that her relationship with other members of her family went beyond
    normal emotional ties, or that her removal would  impact  adversely  on
    the best interests of minor children.  In contrast, this was  the  case
    which was advanced on behalf of her mother, and which was dismissed  by
    the judge for reasons which are adequate  and  sustainable.  Hence  the
    mother's application for permission to appeal was rejected.

21. Against this background, I consider that the judge's  brief  discussion
    of the family life issues pertaining specifically to the appellant  (as
    distinct from her  mother)  was  adequate,  and  no  error  of  law  is
    disclosed.

22. Viewed holistically, the judge's finding on proportionality is entirely
    in line with the current jurisprudence.  The appellant had not  accrued
    seven years' residence as a child in the United Kingdom, and  therefore
    could not benefit from the seven year policy concession formerly  known
    as DP5/96, and now codified in Rule 276ADE.  The appellant was  a  long
    way short of satisfying the fourteen  year  Rule  that  was  applicable
    prior to the introduction of the  new  Rules  in  2012,  and  following
    Gulshan there were no compelling or compassionate  factors  which  gave
    her an arguably good claim outside the Rules.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson      5 November 2014



