
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/39821/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 30 July 2015                      |On 5 August 2015                      |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                             Mrs MYRTLE COTHILL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Doerfel, Counsel (instructed by International
Care Network)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      Introduction

      1.    The Appellant appealed to the  Upper  Tribunal  with  permission
          granted by First-tier Tribunal Heynes on 22 May 2015  against  the
          decision and reasons of First-tier Tribunal Judge Burnett who  had
          dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  refusal  on  25
          September 2014 of her application for further leave to  remain  on
          human rights grounds (Article 8 ECHR).  The decision  and  reasons
          was promulgated on 11 March 2015.

      2.    The Appellant is a national of South Africa, born on 11 November
          1923 and so is now 91 years of age.   The  Appellant  had  entered
          the United Kingdom as a visitor in February  2014  with  leave  to
          enter valid until 14 July 2014.  On 11 July 2014,  i.e.,  just  as
          that nominal leave to enter  was  due  to  expire,  the  Appellant
          sought the variation of leave which is the subject of this onwards
          appeal.  The application was refused  by  reference  to  paragraph
          276ADE of the Immigration Rules.  The Appellant had  always  lived
          in South Africa and had not lost her ties.  Medical treatment  was
          available in South Africa, the Appellant  was  able  to  care  for
          herself and there were no exceptional  circumstances.   The  judge
          found that the Appellant had brought about any situation  of  loss
          of accommodation, that she retained ties  with  South  Africa  and
          could not meet paragraph 276ADE.  The Appellant  could  return  to
          South Africa and could make an entry clearance  application  under
          Appendix FM if her circumstances changed.  Any  interference  with
          the respect due to her private and family life pursuant to Article
          8 ECHR was proportionate.

      3.    Permission to appeal was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
          Heynes because he considered that it was arguable that  the  judge
          had applied the wrong tests in relation  to  integration  and  the
          requirement to return to make an entry clearance application,  had
          failed to apply the provisions of section 117B of the Nationality,
          Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and had failed to assess Article 8
          ECHR considerations fully or at all in relation to the sponsor and
          her husband.  It was further arguable that inadequate reasons were
          given in relation to the Article 8 ECHR assessment.

      4.    Standard directions were made by the tribunal,  indicating  that
          the appeal would be re-decided immediately if a material error  of
          law were found.  A rule 24 notice in the form of a letter dated 25
          June 2015 had been filed on the Respondent's behalf  opposing  the
          onwards appeal.

      Submissions

      5.    Mr Doerfel for the Appellant relied on the  grounds  of  appeal.
          The judge had applied the wrong test to  paragraph  276ADE(vi)  of
          the  Immigration  Rules.   It  was  not  "inability"   but   "very
          significant obstacles to integration".  The Appellant had no  home
          and  no  relatives  left  in  South   Africa.    The   Appellant's
          circumstances had not been  properly  or  fully  considered.   The
          judge had failed to apply Chikwamba [2008] UKHL  40  in  the  same
          context.  This was a family case and the purpose of a  return  for
          entry clearance needed to be assessed but was not.   Nor  had  the
          judge applied section 117B of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
          Asylum  Act  2002.   This  had  been  shown  by  Forman  (ss117A-C
          considerations) [2015] UKUT 412 (IAC) and AM (s117B) Malawi [2015]
          UKUT 260 (IAC) to be a statutory duty,  not  simply  a  formality.
          While both Upper Tribunal decisions  had  been  promulgated  after
          Judge Burnett's decision, the  law  had  been  clarified  and  his
          approach was erroneous.

      6.     Counsel  submitted  that  the  judge  had  further   erred   by
          classifying access to NHS treatment as "public funds".  There  had
          been no access by the Appellant to United  Kingdom  public  funds.
          Home Office Guidance "Public Funds" (version  12,  valid  from  21
          February 2014) stated at page 8: "National  Health  Service  (NHS)
          treatment and Local Educational Authority (LEA) schooling are  not
          considered to be public funds".  The judge's error was significant
          given the fact that the judge  had  reached  his  Article  8  ECHR
          conclusions "with some hesitation".

      7.    Counsel concluded by submitting that the  judge  had  failed  to
          follow and apply Huang [2007] UKHL 11.  The facts  of  Huang  were
          far less compelling than those of the present case.   The  judge's
          evaluation was defective  by  failing  to  weigh  the  health  and
          vulnerability of the Appellant.  Nor had the judge  taken  account
          of the sponsor and her husband's Article 8 ECHR  rights,  contrary
          to Beoku-Betts v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008]
          UKHL 39.  The decision and reasons should be  set  aside  and  the
          appeal reheard by another judge.

      8.    Mr Whitwell for the Respondent relied on the rule 24 notice.  He
          submitted that there was no error of  law  and  the  determination
          should stand.  The submissions  made  on  the  Appellant's  behalf
          ignored  the  underlying  deception  of  the  Appellant  and   her
          sponsor's conduct: the Appellant had  admitted  that  she  had  no
          intention of returning to South Africa when she entered the United
          Kingdom as  a  visitor.   That  was  a  powerful  public  interest
          consideration which  the  judge  had  rightly  factored  into  his
          Article 8 ECHR assessment.  Any error of approach to section  117B
          of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  was  not
          material.   The  relevance  of  Huang  lay  not  in  any   factual
          comparison, but in the broad principles expressed.  The judge  had
          been correct to  find  that  there  was  no  exceptionality.   The
          onwards appeal should be dismissed.

      9.    The tribunal indicated at the conclusion of submissions that  it
          reserved its determination, which now follows.

      No material error of law finding

      10.   The tribunal agrees with Mr Whitwell  that  the  facts  of  this
          appeal need to be placed into  their  proper  context.   As  Judge
          Burnett recorded at [18] and [19] of his decision and reasons,  on
          her own admission the Appellant entered the United  Kingdom  as  a
          visitor with the intention of remaining in the United Kingdom.  It
          is implicit in his findings that the  Appellant  and  her  sponsor
          conspired in the Appellant's entry  as  a  visitor  by  deception,
          inter alia by disposing  of  the  Appellant's  property  in  South
          Africa before she came  to  the  United  Kingdom.   There  was  no
          challenge to those findings.  The inescapable  inference  is  that
          the Appellant and her sponsor sought to circumvent United  Kingdom
          immigration law, because it suited their purposes to do  so.   Had
          the  Appellant  been  eligible  for  settlement  as  a   dependant
          relative, she could and should have applied for entry clearance on
          that basis.  Judge Burnett addressed Appendix FM at  [47]  of  his
          determination and found that the Appellant did not meet  the  high
          threshold requirements.   Again there was  no  challenge  to  that
          finding.  Judge Burnett chose not to spell out the Appellant's and
          her sponsor's  deception  and  dishonesty,  no  doubt  because  he
          considered  that  his  findings  spoke  for  themselves,  but  the
          tribunal considers it right to make that more explicit in the face
          of the attack on the judge's decision.

      11.   The implication from the application for permission  to  appeal,
          and from the submissions made on the Appellant's behalf  was  that
          the judge had not  considered  the  case  with  the  sympathy  and
          respect due to a person of advanced years.  That was not so:  see,
          e.g. [49] and [55] of his decision and reasons.  His  findings  in
          relation to family life were in the tribunal's view very  generous
          indeed.  The Appellant entered the United Kingdom for the declared
          purpose of a visit, from which no  variation  of  leave  to  adult
          dependency is permitted within the Immigration  Rules.   It  would
          have been open to  the  judge  to  have  found  that  the  refusal
          decision in fact caused no interference with the  family  life  of
          adult persons, as it had been lived for many years in a  condition
          of  separation  with   contact   maintained   by   telephone   and
          correspondence, if not occasional visits.  The tribunal  considers
          that the Appellant's case  was  more  accurately  described  as  a
          private life claim, as no emotional dependency was found.

      12.   The relevant part of the text of  paragraph  276ADE(vi)  of  the
          Immigration Rules is that "but there  would  be  very  significant
          obstacles to the applicant's re-integration into  the  country  to
          which he would have to go if required to leave the UK."  Paragraph
          276ADE is directed towards persons who claim to have established a
          private life  in  the  United  Kingdom  by  virtue  of  length  of
          residence.  The Appellant had  been  in  the  United  Kingdom  for
          barely a year, having gained entry by deception.   It  was  argued
          that Judge Burnett had used the wrong test at [45] of his decision
          and reasons by  stating  "unable  to  return",  but  the  tribunal
          considers that the submission to such  effect  was  a  misreading.
          The judge found that the Appellant retained various important ties
          in South  Africa  above  and  beyond  her  nationality,  including
          friends, her church and the medical  staff  she  had  used  there.
          Other ties she had cut voluntarily but so recently that they could
          be reinstated in some form or other.  It was  obvious  that  there
          was no "reintegration" issue at all as the Appellant had lived  in
          South Africa for the whole of her long life and  had  been  absent
          for a tiny fraction of that period.

      13.   Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40 must now be read  with  the  assistance
          provided by Upper Tribunal Judge Gill in Chen  [2015]  UKUT  00189
          (IAC).   Chikwamba  lays  down  no  rule   that   it   is   always
          disproportionate to expect an individual to  return  to  his  home
          country to make an entry clearance application  to  rejoin  family
          members in the United Kingdom where the requirements  of  Appendix
          FM would otherwise be satisfied.  In any event, as already  noted,
          Judge Burnett found that the applicable requirements  of  Appendix
          FM, adult dependant relatives, were not satisfied.

      14.   The tribunal considers that there  was  nothing  at  all  in  Mr
          Doerfel's section 117B point.  He accepted that the only parts  of
          that section which could be considered  to  assist  the  Appellant
          were section  117B(2),  ability  to  speak  English,  and  section
          117B(3), financial independence.  While  the  Appellant's  English
          was not in issue, her  financial  independence  was  by  no  means
          proved: see [22] of the decision and reasons.   Moreover,  section
          117B(1)  refers  to  the  maintenance  of  effective   immigration
          control, which the Appellant and sponsor have  breached  seriously
          by their  deception  over  the  Appellant's  visit  visa,  section
          117B(4) refers to the requirement  to  give  little  weight  to  a
          person's private life established when  that  person  was  in  the
          United Kingdom unlawfully (i.e., having gained entry by deception)
          and section 117B(5) refers  to  the  requirement  to  give  little
          weight to a person's private life established when  that  person's
          immigration status was  precarious.   The  Appellant  fails  those
          tests, so obviously that it hardly need have been spelt out.  Thus
          if Judge Burnett's statement that he had had "regard"  to  section
          177B were considered insufficient in the light of Forman (ss117A-C
          considerations) [2015] UKUT 412 (IAC) and AM (s117B) Malawi [2015]
          UKUT 260 (IAC), any error of law was immaterial.

      15.   "Public funds" are defined in the Immigration Rules at paragraph
          6, and do not include recourse to the NHS.  However,  recourse  to
          the  NHS  is  addressed   in   the   Suitability-entry   clearance
          requirements in Appendix FM: see, e.g., S-EC.2.3., as perhaps  the
          judge had in mind.  It should at the same time be noted that there
          is no reference to recourse to the  NHS  in  the  adult  dependant
          requirements of Appendix FM, for  the  obvious  reason  that  such
          applications can only be made from abroad: see EC-DR.1.1.

      16.   At [61] Judge Burnett found that the Appellant had "had recourse
          to public funds and  access  to  the  NHS  to  which  she  is  not
          entitled".  The finding of access to the NHS was secure as it  was
          based on the Appellant's own admission: see [21] of  the  decision
          and reasons.  There was, however, no  evidence  before  the  judge
          which showed that the Appellant had received any public  funds  as
          defined in paragraph 6 of the Immigration Rules.   Any  conflation
          by the judge of unlawful access to NHS services  as  amounting  to
          receipt of public funds was ultimately  a  correct  expression  of
          principle: the Appellant was receiving costly public  services  to
          which she had no entitlement.  (There was no evidence  before  the
          judge that the Appellant  as  a  South  African  citizen  had  any
          reciprocal rights above and beyond emergency health  care.)   Thus
          there was no material error of law.

      17.   The attempt to draw  comparisons  between  the  facts  of  Huang
          [2007] UKHL 11  and  those  of  the  present  appeal  was  in  the
          tribunal's view  a  misconceived  and  barren  exercise,  as  will
          invariably be the situation  when  Article  8  ECHR  is  in  issue
          because each appeal is fact sensitive.  In the  first  place,  the
          legal landscape has changed since 9 July 2012 when the Immigration
          Rules were extensively re-written.  Article 8 ECHR is no longer  a
          legal vacuum.  That is not, of course, to suggest that the general
          principles of Huang have ceased to be relevant.  In the tribunal's
          view, Judge Burnett applied those principles correctly.  No  error
          has been shown in his findings  of  fact.   His  approach  to  the
          Appellant's family life was generous, perhaps excessively  so,  as
          the tribunal has explained above.  The judge correctly  identified
          proportionality as the live issue on those findings.  He addressed
          the position of the sponsor and her husband: see,  e.g.,  [56]  of
          the decision and reasons, and thus applied Beoku-Betts.   He  gave
          clear and sustainable reasons for finding that the proportionality
          balance was against the Appellant and in favour of the  legitimate
          objectives of Article 8.2 ECHR.

      18.   The tribunal accordingly holds that there was no material  error
          of law in the decision and reasons  and  there  is  no  basis  for
          interfering with the experienced judge's decision.

      DECISION

      The making of the previous decision did not involve the making  of  an
      error on a point of law and stands unchanged






      Signed      Dated


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
