
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39187/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 September 2015                  |On 4 November 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                 AMNA ISLAM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     The appellant did not appear and was not represented
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by a citizen of  Pakistan  born  in  1986  against  a
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing  her  appeal  against  a
    decision of the respondent to remove by way of directions under Section
    10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.  There was a  dispute  about
    her ability to satisfy  the  requirements  for  continued  leave  as  a
    student.  The decision to give removal directions under Section 10  had
    the effect of bringing to an end any existing leave.  It is a  decision
    that the appellant can appeal but not from within the United Kingdom.

 2. For reasons that are not clear the appellant made an application to the
    First-tier Tribunal and the case was listed before First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Paul who dismissed the  appeal.   The  reason  he  dismissed  the
    appeal was that there was no jurisdiction to entertain the appeal,  the
    appellant's only right of appeal has to be exercised out of the  United
    Kingdom.

 3. Permission to appeal was given.  I do not find the  grant  particularly
    illuminating.

 4. Be that as it may, the  appellant  did  not  attend  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal today. We received a letter from her new solicitors,  A  Bajwa
    and Company, indicating that she had  been  admitted  to  hospital  for
    emergency treatment and was unable to attend the court today  and  they
    requested an adjournment.   That  application  for  an  adjournment  is
    refused.  I take no pleasure in hearing that the appellant  had  to  be
    admitted to hospital but there is no  reason  for  her  to  attend  the
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal in person at least until an error  of
    law has been established.  Her absence is irrelevant.  It may  be  that
    her solicitors are aware of that but for whatever reason  she  did  not
    attend and I do not see her absence as  a  reason  for  adjourning  the
    appeal.

 5. What I have before me is an appeal against a hearing that should  never
    have taken place. There is nothing before me to suggest that the First-
    tier Tribunal had any jurisdiction to entertain the appeal.

 6. I see no merit whatsoever in the appeal before me  and  I  dismiss  the
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

Decision

The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.



|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 3 November 2015                |

