
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA391842014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11th May 2016                     |On 8th June 2016                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
                                     and

                             MR MD RIAZUL MAHMUD
                                                                   Appellant


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr M Hasan, Solicitor; Kalam Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal however I  will  refer  to  the
    parties according to their status before the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
    ease of comprehension.

 2. The Respondent appeals with permission against the decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Row (promulgated on 27 August  2015)  allowing  the
    Appellant's appeal against the  Respondent's  decision  to  cancel  his
    leave and issue directions for his removal.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Goldstein  on
    the Respondent's two grounds.

 4. Submissions were made by both parties which I have taken  into  account
    and are set out in full in my record of proceedings.

Error of Law

 5. Having heard from both parties I pronounce my decision as  follows.   I
    do not find that there is an error of law such that  the  determination
    should be set aside.

 6. At the outset of the hearing, I made clear my preliminary  view  to  Mr
    Walker which  was  that  the  analysis  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    assessment seems to fit in my view with the self-described  "boomerang"
    of proof that appeared in the  decision  of  Muhandiramge  (section  S-
    LTR.1.7) [2015] UKUT 675 (IAC), itself referred to  and  approved  most
    recently in SM and Qadir (ETS - Evidence - Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT
    229 (IAC).  Neither party objected to my consideration of SM and  Qadir
    (nor Muhandiramge).  In terms of the burden  of  proof,  as  stated  in
    those decisions, it was made clear that the burden of  proof  does  lie
    with the Respondent in appeals concerning the allegation  of  deception
    in relation to some  individuals  whom  have  obtained  an  "ETS/TOEIC"
    English language certificate.  The reported headnote in  SM  and  Qadir
    states as follows in harmony with that view:

         (i)  The Secretary of State's generic evidence, combined  with  her
         evidence particular to these two appellants, sufficed to  discharge
         the evidential burden of proving that their TOEIC certificates  had
         been procured by dishonesty.

         (ii) However, given the multiple frailties from which this  generic
         evidence was considered to suffer and, in the light of the evidence
         adduced by  the  appellants,  the  Secretary  of  State  failed  to
         discharge the legal burden of proving dishonesty on their part.

 7. Turning to the determination itself, the First-tier Tribunal considered
    the burden of proof and the evidence put forward by the  Respondent  at
    paragraphs 7 to 15 of the First-tier Tribunal's determination.  It does
    not appear that a conclusion was  ultimately  reached  on  whether  the
    initial burden was discharged by the  Respondent.   This  is  something
    incidentally that the Appellant may have had cause to criticise but  at
    any rate the First-tier Tribunal, despite not finding that  the  burden
    was discharged by the Respondent, went on to consider the second  stage
    of the boomerang of proof, namely, the Appellant's rebuttal evidence.

 8. In that respect the Appellant's rebuttal evidence at paragraphs  16  to
    21 is scrutinised in some great detail.  The rebuttal evidence included
    a letter from ETS Global, an assessment of the Appellant's English  but
    also consideration of his  qualifications  in  having  achieved  a  BSc
    honours degree in Finance and Accounting.  The First-tier  Judge  quite
    rightly acknowledged that there was a passage of time and it  would  be
    expected that the Appellant would speak English better today than  2012
    but that the achievement of the BSc degree must have  involved  a  high
    level of English language skill.  In my view it is right that the First-
    tier Judge made this qualification of his  assessment  of  the  English
    language and also observed that the English language will have improved
    in the interim, particularly given the findings in SM and Qadir on this
    concept.  This did not give me cause for concern however, as  in  light
    of the judge's findings on other matters and the  documentary  evidence
    produced by the Appellant, nothing turns on that point.  Ultimately the
    judge did find that the analysis of the evidence did not show that  the
    Appellant's English language test was not taken by him and  importantly
    the judge accepted that the Appellant was telling the truth and that he
    did take the exam.  Those findings, as Mr Walker said  in  reply,  were
    such that the judge was open to reach  and  entitled  to  make.   I  am
    grateful to Mr Walker for his observations on the First-tier Tribunal's
    determination.  Mr Walker did not pursue  the  appeal  beyond  reliance
    beyond the grounds as pled.

 9. In my  view  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  determination  is  sound  and
    entirely in keeping with the decision in SM and Qadir which  stands  as
    the latest and most authoritative stance on these ETS/TOIEC appeals.

10. In respect of the second issue  raised  saliently  in  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal, there was complaint at paragraph 10 by the  Presenting  Officer
    that the Appellant and his representatives had failed in their "duty of
    honesty" to the Tribunal as they failed to disclose the fact that there
    is objective evidence available which  reveals  that  Synergy  Business
    College of London is the subject  of  a  criminal  enquiry  because  of
    cheating on the TOEIC test that took place there.  A copy is said to be
    attached of that objective evidence  however  nothing  appears  in  the
    bundles before me and nothing has reached the Upper  Tribunal's  files.
    Mr Walker rightly acknowledged that there was no  evidence  to  support
    this serious assertion and Mr Hasan, who also appeared before the First-
    tier Tribunal, confirmed that there  was  no  evidence  or  mention  of
    Synergy Business College of London being subject of a criminal  enquiry
    due to cheating on the TOEIC test such that he was  in  a  position  to
    disclose and he was equally unaware of any investigation.

11. In that light I find that there is no material error that  is  revealed
    by paragraph 10 of the grounds  in  respect  of  any  allegation  of  a
    failure to disclose objective evidence available.  It  is  questionable
    whether the evidence in fact was available.  From my previous  sittings
    I have seen evidence of Synergy Business  College  but  this  has  been
    habitually produced by the Respondent,  not  the  Appellant,  and  that
    material was not produced in the bundles that I have seen.  At any rate
    it  does  not  appear   to   be   something   which   the   Appellant's
    representatives were aware of anyhow.

12. I should also say, in my view, this is a fairly serious accusation that
    the Secretary of State has levelled at the Appellant's representatives.
     I would normally expect there to  be  a  witness  statement  from  the
    individual that drafted the grounds of complaint along with a statement
    of truth and supporting evidence going towards the allegation made that
    the representatives were  in  fact  aware  of  the  objective  evidence
    available and that they had failed in their duty to disclose  facts  to
    the Upper Tribunal.  There is no evidence whatsoever that supports this
    allegation and I consider it inappropriate that such an accusation  was
    made in the absence of any evidence and before an assessment  was  made
    as to whether such an assertion could reasonably be  made  against  the
    Appellant's  representatives.   There  is  indeed  a  recent   reported
    decision on the duty of candour from the Upper Tribunal (see R (on  the
    application of Bilal  Mahmood)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department (candour/reassessment duties; ETS :alternative  remedy)  IJR
    [2014] UKUT 439 (IAC)) in which it is confirmed  that  there  exists  a
    duty  of  candour  from  an  Appellant's  representative  however  this
    statement was made in the context of judicial review  proceedings  (and
    particularly in the context of ex parte applications for  injunctions).
    I have no doubt that any solicitor or counsel, as officers of the court
    owe a duty towards the court to ensure it is not misled. I  should  add
    that, by custom and practice of this Tribunal, I view the same duty  as
    falling equally upon all presenting officers although not  strictly  or
    traditionally  officers  of  court.  However,  there  are  professional
    implications for any officer that misleads a court and cogent  evidence
    would be required to support such a serious allegation. At any rate, in
    my view, in light of recent  authority,  custom  and  practice  and  Mr
    Walker's sensible submissions, the Appellant's representatives have not
    failed in their "duty of honesty"  to  the  Tribunal  and  consequently
    there is no error of law such that the determination stands to  be  set
    aside.

13. I should also add as an addendum that it appears from the  letter  from
    ETS Global that there was an acknowledgement that  the  test  taken  by
    other sitters at the Synergy Business  College  test  centre  were  all
    cancelled due to invalidity which may or may not have been due  to  the
    investigation or potential fraud by a 'majority' of  other  applicants;
    but at any rate there is no subjective evidence that this applicant had
    committed fraud, as I have already stated.

14. Consequently I do not find that  there  is  an  error  of  law  in  the
    determination such that it should be set aside.

15. The appeal of the First-tier Tribunal is affirmed.


Signed   Date 01/06/2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini

