
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39964/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 4th August 2016                         |On 31st August 2016              |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                                    S M G
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Neale, instructed by Maya Linstrum-Newman
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria who appealed  the  Secretary  of
    State's refusal to grant her a residence  card  as  confirmation  of  a
    deriviative right of residence to reside here under Regulation  15A  of
    the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.  That appeal was  dismissed  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Mozolowski in a decision promulgated on  17th
    August 2015.

 2.  Grounds  of  Appeal  were  lodged  two  grounds.   Firstly  that   the
    interpretation of Zambrano (C-34/09) was divorced from reality  of  the
    Appellant's situation and secondly that there were  inadequate  reasons
    given by the judge for the findings and fact that  the  child's  father
    would be expected to look after her.  In particular it  was  said  that
    the judge had failed to give any adequate reasons for her  findings  of
    fact that the Appellant had cut  off  contact  with  S's  father  after
    learning that he was married and for then speculating that  the  father
    was willing to resume contact and  could  therefore  be  cared  by  the
    father.

 3. Permission to  appeal  was  initially  refused  but  granted  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Hanson who noted that the only issue in the  appeal  was
    whether the Appellant's son S would be unable to reside in  the  UK  or
    another EEA state if the Appellant was required to leave the UK. It was
    also noted that the Respondent might care to consider ascertaining  the
    situation for themselves and obtaining  evidence  from  the  father  to
    assist the Tribunal at the forthcoming hearing.

 4. Thus the appeal came before me on the above date.

 5. Mr Neale for the Appellant submitted that there had to be  a  practical
    not hypothetical standard which was  the  thread  running  through  the
    various case law including DH (Jamaica) v SSHD [2012]  EWCA  Civ  1736.
    The judge had engaged  in  extremely  speculative  factors.   The  past
    contact between the father and the child was  of  considerable  vintage
    and went back to  September  2013.   It  was  notable  that  the  local
    authority were seeking payment from the Appellant's father and  he  was
    not cooperating.  While the  judge  was  of  course  entitled  to  make
    credibility findings against the mother it  did  not  follow  that  the
    judge could then speculate upon the possibility of the  father  looking
    after the child.  I was invited either to set the  decision  aside  and
    remit it to the First-tier, or to allow  the  appeal  outright  on  the
    evidence already given.

 6. For the Home Office Mr Tarlow said he had nothing to say on  the  point
    taken by Judge Hanson that the Respondent might  obtain  evidence  from
    the father to assist the Tribunal.  Reliance was placed on the Rule  24
    notice and to paragraph 30 of the judge's decision where it  was  noted
    that there had been a substantial amount  of  contact  being  exercised
    between the father and the child.

 7. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

 8. The parties were agreed that whether or not the father could look after
    S had to be viewed not on a hypothetical  but  on  a  practical  basis.
    Inevitably, in this type of case, there is likely to be an  element  of
    uncertainty as to what the parent who does  not  have  custody  of  the
    child would do if the mother of the child is forced to go back  to  her
    country of nationality.  On the facts of this case  I  agree  with  the
    submission of Mr Neale that the judge acted speculatively.   There  was
    no evidence that the father would be prepared to look after  S  in  the
    event of the Appellant departing the country.  In my  view  this  could
    not reasonably be inferred from the facts as we know  them  as  at  the
    date of the hearing and it is at that date that the judge had  to  look
    at the position - see Boodhoo and Another (EEA Regs: Relevant Evidence)
    [2013] UKUT 00346 (IAC).  As at that date  contact  -  of  any  kind  -
    between the father and the child had ceased for a period of almost  two
    years.  On that factual basis the judge was not entitled to conclude as
    she did and made a material error in law in so doing.  It is  necessary
    to set the decision aside.

 9. The crucial and undisputed  fact  is  that  a  child's  mother  stopped
    contact between the child and his father when she found  out  that  the
    child's father was already married.  He is not  supporting  the  child.
    As at the date of the hearing the inescapable conclusion  is  that  the
    Appellant has shown on a balance of probabilities that the child  would
    be required to leave the EEA if the Appellant were to  be  returned  to
    Nigeria.  That being so the Appellant must succeed in this appeal.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it.

I shall make an anonymity direction having regard to the best  interests  of
the child.


Signed                              Date 30th August 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald
