
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39253/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 January 2016                   |On 15 January 2016                   |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                              MR. FARHAN AFZAL
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. T. Khan of Counsel, St. Paul's Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr. D. Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Ford promulgated  on  22  December  2014  in  which  she
    dismissed the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision to refuse to grant leave to remain as a Tier 1  (Entrepreneur)
    Migrant.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted  as  the  judge  had  found  that  the
    "flexibility rules" applied only to Companies  House  documents,  which
    was arguably  wrong.   Further,  the  judge  found  that  she  was  not
    satisfied that the discretion afforded to the Respondent  "should  have
    been exercised differently".  However no finding was made as to how the
    Respondent had exercised  her  discretion  under  paragraph  245AA,  or
    whether the Respondent had even  engaged  with  the  existence  of  the
    discretion.

 3. Prior to the hearing, Mr. Khan provided a copy of  a  decision  of  the
    Upper Tribunal in the case  of  the  Appellant's  Tier  1  Entrepreneur
    Partner, Mudahhar Shafique.  The application of the Appellant was  made
    jointly with  that  of  Mr.  Shafique,  and  the  same  documents  were
    submitted in support.  The reasons for the appeal going  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal were not exactly the same, but the outstanding  issue  in  the
    Appellant's case was the same as that before the Upper Tribunal.  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Monson found as follows:

         "If the judge had upheld the case worker's other objections to  the
         specified documents provided with the application, this would  have
         been the end of the road for the claimant.  But as the judge  found
         that these other objections were ill-founded, the claimant  was  in
         retrospect deprived of  the  benefit  of  the  case  worker  giving
         consideration as to  whether  to  exercise  discretion  under  sub-
         paragraph (d) of paragraph 245AA.  As  Mr.  Kandola  accepted,  the
         case worker does not appear to have considered whether the  missing
         specified  information  from  the  third  party   declaration   was
         verifiable from other documents; and,  if  so,  whether  discretion
         should  exceptionally  be  exercised  in  the  applicant's  favour.
         Accordingly I allow the appeal on this ground."

 4. The Appellant's representative also provided a copy of a  letter  dated
    22 October 2015 from the Respondent  to  Mr.  Shafique,  approving  his
    application for leave to remain as a Tier 1 Entrepreneur.

 5. In the light of this decision and the subsequent grant of leave to  Mr.
    Shafique, Mr. Mills submitted that it would be hard to argue  that  the
    decision in respect of the Appellant should be made any other way  than
    to follow that made in respect of Mr. Shafique.

 6. At the hearing I set aside the decision and  remade  it,  allowing  the
    appeal to  the  extent  that  the  application  be  sent  back  to  the
    Respondent for the making of a lawful decision.  I set out  my  reasons
    below.

Error of law

 7. The judge resolved two of the three issues before her in favour of  the
    Appellant, so there was only one remaining reason  why  the  Respondent
    had refused the Appellant's  application.   This  concerned  the  third
    party declaration and the legal representative's  letter.   "Both  were
    deficient in this case because the  third  party  declaration  did  not
    contain the names of the entrepreneurs  or  their  signatures  and  the
    legal representative could not therefore confirm the  validity  of  the
    signatures" [11].

 8. Paragraph [12] of the decision states:

         "I do not accept that the flexibility rules  could  assist  because
         the Rules specify that it is only where Companies  House  documents
         have not been provided under paragraph 41SD(b) that the ECO  or  IO
         reserves the right to request the specified original  documents  in
         the correct format.  Even if I am wrong on  this  and  there  is  a
         discretion to call for substitute  documents  rather  than  missing
         documents, I am not  satisfied  that  this  is  a  case  where  the
         discretion should have been exercised differently."

 9. In relation to the finding that the flexibility  rules  only  apply  to
    Companies House documents, this is not the  case.   There  is  no  such
    restriction imposed by the rules.

10.  In  relation  to   the   discretion   under   the   rules,   paragraph
    245AA(d)(iii)(1) provides that  where  an  applicant  has  submitted  a
    specified document  "which  does  not  contain  all  of  the  specified
    information, but the  missing  information  is  verifiable  from  other
    documents submitted  with  the  application"  the  application  may  be
    granted exceptionally, providing that the Respondent is satisfied  that
    the specified documents are genuine, and the other requirements are all
    met.

11. The third party declaration did  not  contain  the  signatures  of  the
    Appellant and his team member, but  their  signatures  were  verifiable
    from other documents submitted with the application,  as  there  was  a
    separate document accompanying the application in which the  signatures
    were verified by a solicitor.  The judge decided  that  the  Respondent
    was wrong to have dismissed the application on the  other  two  issues.
    Therefore, this was a case where, had the Respondent  not  refused  the
    application for these other reasons, which she was not entitled to  do,
    she should have considered the  exercise  of  her  discretionary  power
    under 245AA(d).

12. Paragraph [12] refers to the  discretion  under  paragraph  245AA,  and
    indicates that the judge is satisfied that discretion should  not  have
    been  exercised  differently.   However  it  is  not  clear  from   the
    Respondent's decision that she considered the exercise of discretion at
    all, given that she was refusing the application for  other  additional
    reasons, which the judge found that she was not entitled to do.  I find
    that the appeal should therefore have been  allowed  as  not  being  in
    accordance  with  the  law,  and  the  application  sent  back  to  the
    Respondent for her to make a lawful decision.

Remaking

13. The only reason outstanding for the refusal of the application was that
    the third party declaration did  not  contain  the  signatures  of  the
    Appellant and his team  member.   I  find  that  this  information  was
    verifiable from other documents  submitted  with  the  application.   I
    therefore find that the Appellant's application falls within  paragraph
    245AA(d)(iii), and that the Respondent should exercise  her  discretion
    under this paragraph, which she has not done.

Notice of decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involves the making of an  error  on
a point of law.  The decision is set aside.

I remake the decision allowing the Appellant's appeal  as  the  Respondent's
decision was not in accordance with the law.  The application is  sent  back
to the Respondent for a lawful decision to be made.


Signed   Date 14 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
