
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39670/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On the 5th October 2015                       |On the 14th October 2015      |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before


                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       Miss Ibilola Francesca Shodipo
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr V Adeniyi, Solicitor, A & A Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of
    Judge Aziz when he was sitting at Richmond on the 7th April 2015.  The
    Appellant, Ibilola Shodipo, applied for indefinite leave to remain
    under the long residence provisions but that had been refused on the
    basis that there was an extensive gap in her time in the UK of more
    than 28 days in 2005.

 2. The issue of the Appellant's time in the UK without leave was raised in
    the refusal letter and in the Grounds of Appeal. The Appellant stated
    that she denied that the application was out of time 75 days in 2005.
    At the time her leave had expired on the 28 September of that year and
    in the course of giving evidence to the First-tier Tribunal she
    maintained that she had made an application on the 24th October.

 3. The Judge took the view when dealing with the Home Office application
    to adjourn that more than sufficient time had been available for them
    to provide the paperwork that they relied on.  As it happens Mr Tarlow
    very fairly has obtained a copy of the application in question made by
    the Appellant at the time.

 4. The application is clearly dated and signed as the Appellant had said
    the 24th October 2005. That supports oral evidence that she had given
    the best part of nine years after the events in question, so clearly
    she was right about the date.

 5. The Immigration Rules mandate that an application is made on the date
    that it is posted.  There is no evidence of posting but she maintains
    that she posted it the day that she signed it and that of course would
    make sense.  The document itself contains a number of stamps.  The one
    that the Home Office rely on to prove that it is out of time appears at
    the top of the front of the page, a Home Office Immigration and
    Nationality Department IND stamp for the 8th December 2005.

 6. There are, however, two other stamps.  One is effectively illegible and
    the other, another IND stamp, clearly in 2005 but with the day 15.  It
    is not clear at all what month that refers to.  One would assume it
    must be November because it cannot be October and it would not postdate
    the December stamp.

 7. That document provides significant support for the Appellant's case and
    if I were to have found that the adjournment should have been granted I
    would inevitably have been remaking the decision in the Appellant's
    favour in any event.

 8. However, the fact is that the Home Office were clearly put on notice in
    the Grounds of Appeal that the central part of their case was disputed
    by the Appellant.  Anybody who had read those Grounds of Appeal would
    know that they would have to show that the application was made late.

 9. The date of the hearing was far too late to make an application to
    obtain further evidence and the judge was entirely justified in firstly
    refusing the application and secondly in making the findings that he
    did about the Appellant's length of residence.

10. Accordingly I find that the judge was entirely right to find a) that he
    should have proceeded with the hearing, b) that he was right to allow
    the Appellant's appeal.  Therefore I find that there is no error of law
    in the decision and that decision shall stand and the Secretary of
    State's appeal is dismissed.



NOTICE OF DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain an error of law.
The decision of Judge Aziz stands as the disposal of the Appellant's
appeal.

I make no anonymity direction.

I make a fee order in the full amount as appropriate.

Signed                              Date 13th October 2015
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Parkes

