
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39028/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 19 September 2016                |On: 20 September 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                            MARYAM MOHAMED SHEIKH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr O Idemudia of Obaseki Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Following a grant of permission to appeal against the decision  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  the  appellant's  appeal  against   the
    respondent's decision of 17 September 2014 to  refuse  her  application
    for a residence card under the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 (the "EEA Regulations"), it was found, at an error  of
    law hearing on 6 June 2016,  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  made
    errors of law in its decision. The decision was accordingly set aside.



Background to the Appeal

 2. The appellant, a national of Somalia born on 27 July  1995,  claims  to
    have entered the United Kingdom in January 2014  after  having  married
    her husband, an Italian national of Somali origin,  in  Somalia  on  18
    January 2013. On 17 July 2014 she applied for an EEA residence card  as
    the family member of an EEA national. Her application  was  refused  by
    the respondent on 17 September 2014. Since the refusal,  the  appellant
    has given birth to a child on 22 February 2015.

 3. The respondent,  in  refusing  the  appellant's  application,  was  not
    satisfied with the evidence produced in relation to  the  EEA  national
    sponsor's employment in the UK and therefore did not accept that he was
    a  qualified  person  exercising  treaty  rights,  as   defined   under
    Regulation 6 of the EEA Regulations. The respondent,  furthermore,  was
    not satisfied with the evidence produced in regard to the  relationship
    between the  appellant  and  the  sponsor,  since  the  documents  were
    photocopied, and therefore did not accept that the  appellant  was  the
    family of an EEA national. In addition, the respondent did  not  accept
    that there was sufficient documentation to suggest that  the  appellant
    was in a durable relationship with the  sponsor  for  the  purposes  of
    Regulation 8(5) of the EEA Regulations and  therefore  considered  that
    she had failed to demonstrate that she was an extended family member of
    an EEA national. The respondent  accordingly  refused  the  appellant's
    application.

Appeal before the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The appellant appealed that decision and her  appeal  was  heard  on  6
    November 2015 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Mozolowski. Judge Mozolowski
    noted that there had been a change in  the  sponsor's  employment  and,
    whilst she was not satisfied with the reliability of  the  evidence  of
    his previous employment, she accepted that he  was  currently  employed
    and that he was therefore a qualified person for the  purposes  of  the
    EEA Regulations. She also accepted that the appellant and sponsor  were
    married and that  the  appellant  was  therefore  entitled  to  an  EEA
    residence card. She accordingly allowed the appeal.

 5. The respondent sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on the
    grounds that the judge had  failed  to  provide  adequate  reasons  for
    accepting that the  appellant  and  sponsor  were  married,  given  her
    otherwise  adverse  credibility  findings.  The  respondent  no  longer
    disputed that the sponsor was exercising Treaty rights.  Permission  to
    appeal was granted to the respondent.

Appeal in the Upper Tribunal

 6. At a hearing on 6 June 2016 there was no appearance by or on behalf  of
    the appellant. I found errors of law in the judge's decision and set it
    aside, as follows:

                        "DECISION ON THE ERROR OF LAW

      1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department
         against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  Ms
         Sheikh's appeal against the decision to refuse to issue her with  a
         residence card  under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
         Regulations 2006 as the family member of an EEA national.

      2. For the purposes of this decision, I shall hereinafter refer to the
         Secretary  of  State  as  the  respondent  and  Ms  Sheikh  as  the
         appellant, reflecting their positions as they were  in  the  appeal
         before the First-tier Tribunal.

      3. The appellant is a citizen of Somalia, born on 27 July 1995. On  17
         July 2014 she applied for a residence card as the  spouse  of  Abdi
         Fatah Sheikh Mohamed, an Italian national, whom she claimed to have
         married in Somalia on 18 January 2013. It is claimed that she  came
         to the UK in January 2014.

      4. The respondent refused the application on 17 September 2014, on two
         main grounds: firstly, that the appellant  had  failed  to  provide
         sufficient evidence to demonstrate that her EEA family member was a
         qualified person; and secondly, that  she  had  failed  to  provide
         sufficient  evidence  of  her  relationship  to  the  EEA  national
         sponsor. With regard to the first ground, the respondent  had  been
         unable  to  verify  the  sponsor's  claimed  employment  from   the
         documents submitted due to an inability to contact  or  locate  the
         company for which he claimed to work and due  to  discrepancies  in
         his wage slips. With regard to the second  ground,  the  respondent
         considered the application  on  the  basis  that  the  sponsor  was
         claiming to be an extended family  member  of  the  appellant,  but
         found insufficient evidence of a durable relationship.

      5. The appellant appealed against that decision. Her appeal was  heard
         in the First-tier  Tribunal  on  6  November  2015,  by  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Mozolowski. Judge Mozolowski noted  that  there  had
         been a change in the sponsor's employment from 1 January 2015  when
         he had started working for Mcdonald's. Whilst she was not satisfied
         with the reliability of the evidence of  his  previous  employment,
         she accepted that  he  was  currently  employed  and  that  he  was
         therefore  a  qualified  person  for  the  purposes  of   the   EEA
         Regulations. She also accepted that the appellant and sponsor  were
         married and that the appellant was therefore  entitled  to  an  EEA
         residence card. She accordingly allowed the appeal.

      6. The respondent sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on
         the grounds that the judge had failed to provide  adequate  reasons
         for accepting that the appellant and sponsor  were  married,  given
         her otherwise  adverse  credibility  findings.  The  respondent  no
         longer disputed that the sponsor was exercising Treaty rights.

      7. Permission to appeal was granted to  the  respondent  on  28  April
         2016.

      8. The appeal came before me, but there was no  appearance  by  or  on
         behalf of the appellant. The notice of  hearing  appeared  to  have
         been properly served on the appellant's representatives and on  the
         appellant at the address last  given  to  the  Tribunal.  Mr  Tufan
         confirmed that that was also the most recent address  held  by  the
         respondent. Accordingly there was no reason not to proceed with the
         appeal in the appellant's absence.

      9. Having heard submissions from Mr Tufan I agreed that the judge  had
         made errors of law in her decision such that it had to be set aside
         and re-made.

     10. The judge's reasoning in regard to  the  appellant's  marriage  and
         relationship is difficult to follow. The judge made various adverse
         findings against the appellant. At [3] she  found  that  a  durable
         relationship had not been  sufficiently  documented.  At  [11]  she
         noted that a council tax bill issued at a time when  the  appellant
         and sponsor claimed to be living  together  referred  to  a  single
         person discount, albeit that there was a subsequent  joint  council
         tax demand. At [18] she  found  that  the  appellant  had  provided
         unreliable  documentary  evidence  in  relation  to  the  sponsor's
         previous employment. At [16]  she  found  several  aspects  of  the
         appellant's  evidence  to  be   unsatisfactory   and   lacking   in
         credibility, in particular in regard to  the  marriage  certificate
         that had been produced, including how it was obtained and  concerns
         about its contents. However, on the basis that  the  appellant  and
         sponsor both attended the hearing, that  a  birth  certificate  had
         been produced showing that they had a child together and that there
         was a joint council tax demand, the judge accepted that they  lived
         together and were probably likely to be married.

     11. In view of the various concerns the judge had about the reliability
         of the evidence, including in particular the marriage  certificate,
         I would agree  with  the  respondent  that  she  has  not  provided
         adequate reasons as  to  why  she  ultimately  concluded  that  the
         appellant and sponsor were married. Accordingly, I  set  aside  her
         decision.

     12. Mr Tufan suggested that, in the interests of fairness,  given  that
         the appellant and sponsor were not  present  at  the  hearing,  the
         decision should be re-made at a further hearing  where  they  would
         have an opportunity to attend and explain  their  absence,  and  to
         provide any further oral and documentary evidence.

     13. The appellant's appeal will  therefore  be  listed  for  a  resumed
         hearing in the Upper Tribunal in order for the decision to  be  re-
         made on the question of whether or not the  appellant  and  sponsor
         are genuinely married or in a durable relationship."

Resumed Hearing

 7. The appeal then  came  before  me  again  on  19  September  2016.  The
    appellant and sponsor were in attendance and were legally  represented.
    They both gave oral evidence.

 8. The sponsor explained that he had obtained his Italian citizenship when
    he was 18 years of age, when his father applied for citizenship for the
    whole family. He lived in Italy for several years until he came to  the
    UK in 2013. His daughter, through a previous relationship, was born  in
    Italy. He was related to the appellant as  a  first  cousin,  as  their
    fathers were brothers. They met when he was visiting Mogadishu  at  the
    end of 2012 and the marriage was arranged and took place a month or two
    later at his wife's father's house. He remained in  Somalia  after  the
    marriage for a few days and then returned to Italy. He did not have any
    evidence of the wedding, although  he  had  given  photographs  to  his
    previous solicitors which he had expected them to send on to  the  Home
    Office. He had a video of the wedding. His wife joined him in Italy, on
    a Schengen visit visa, and stayed there with him for a few weeks  until
    they moved to the UK. The visa was obtained at the Italian  Embassy  in
    Kenya and was stamped in her passport.  With  regard  to  the  marriage
    certificate, there were two different ones. The  first  one  which  was
    submitted with the application was a copy,  although  he  had  believed
    that it was an original. He then produced the original at the  previous
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal. When it  was  not  accepted  as
    being sufficient he obtained another copy, but this  time  bearing  all
    the correct government stamps. His uncle obtained the certificates  and
    he contributed to the cost.

 9. The  appellant  gave  similar  evidence  and  both  parties  then  made
    submissions.

10. Mr Melvin submitted that there was insufficient evidence to  show  that
    the couple had genuinely contracted a marriage. He  accepted  that  the
    appellant and the sponsor had a child together and that they  lived  at
    the same address but he submitted that that was not sufficient to point
    to a genuine and subsisting relationship. There was no marriage for the
    purposes of Regulation 7. There was no right of appeal in  relation  to
    Regulation 8, as held in the new decision of the Upper Tribunal in Sala
    (EFMs: Right of Appeal) [2016] UKUT 00411.

11. Mr Idemudia submitted that there was a genuine marriage, which had been
    contracted in accordance with tradition, and a genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship.

Consideration and findings

12. Having now had the benefit of hearing from the appellant and sponsor, I
    have no hesitation in concluding that there is a genuine and subsisting
    relationship between them. Their evidence was entirely consistent as to
    the circumstances  of  how  they  met,  the  details  of  the  marriage
    ceremony, the evidence of their marriage, where  they  went  after  the
    marriage (for a day trip to Jazira), when they left Somalia, where they
    went from Somalia, how the appellant entered Italy and how they came to
    the UK. The sponsor gave what I considered to be  an  honest  and  open
    explanation as to why the appellant had applied for a visitor visa  for
    Italy rather than a spouse visa, as it was expected to be  the  quicker
    route, and he admitted that that was  why  they  were  now  facing  the
    current situation of having to undergo an appeal. Mr  Melvin  submitted
    that the fact that the couple had a baby together, as proved by the DNA
    evidence, and that they lived at the same address, did not  necessarily
    mean that they were in a genuine relationship.  However,  having  heard
    from both parties, I do not agree with that. On the basis of  the  oral
    evidence and the documentary evidence I accept that the  appellant  and
    sponsor have lived together since the appellant's arrival in the UK and
    that they do so in a relationship as a couple.

13. Whilst Judge Mozolowsi was unable to find  that  there  was  a  durable
    relationship, and rightly so since there had been less than  two  years
    from the sponsor's entry  to  the  UK  to  the  date  of  the  hearing,
    circumstances have moved on and the couple have been together  now  for
    over two years. I therefore have no hesitation in concluding  that  the
    couple are in a durable relationship for  the  purposes  of  Regulation
    8(5) of the EEA Regulations. However, as Mr Idemudia accepted,  if  the
    Upper Tribunal's decision in Sala is to be followed, the  appellant  is
    precluded from relying upon that  as  a  basis  for  the  appeal  being
    allowed. The appeal can be  allowed  only  if  it  is  found  that  the
    appellant is a family  member  of  the  sponsor  for  the  purposes  of
    Regulation 7.

14. The relevant question, therefore, is whether the appellant and  sponsor
    are in fact married.  It is relevant  to  note  that  the  respondent's
    reason, in refusing the appellant's application, for not being able  to
    accept that she was related as claimed to an EEA national, was that the
    evidence of the relationship, including the marriage  certificate,  was
    insufficient as  it  was  photocopied.  Furthermore,  the  respondent's
    grounds of appeal challenging  Judge  Mozolowski's  acceptance  of  the
    marriage include the fact that there was no evidence  of  paternity  of
    the appellant's child. However I now have the benefit of  DNA  evidence
    confirming the paternity of the child, which  Mr  Melvin  accepted,  as
    well as the original marriage certificate, which was produced  only  on
    the day of the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal. I have also had  the
    benefit of hearing from the appellant and sponsor.

15. With regard to the marriage certificate, I note that the reliability of
    the document was questioned  by  the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer
    before Judge Mozolowki and is also questioned by Mr Melvin. However,  I
    found the explanation given by the sponsor about the document to  be  a
    plausible one. He explained that his marriage  was  a  traditional  one
    and, as such, occurred  without  the  routine  issuing  of  a  marriage
    certificate, as would occur in Europe. Accordingly, practical steps had
    to be taken to obtain a certificate as proof of the  marriage  for  the
    purposes of making an application and, as it was to be presented in the
    UK, it was considered appropriate for it to contain  a  translation  in
    English. As for why there were two marriage certificates,  the  sponsor
    explained that a second one was obtained by his uncle, the  appellant's
    father, when it became apparent that  the  previous  document  was  not
    considered to be satisfactory, and his uncle ensured  that  the  second
    one had all the relevant official stamps from the Somali authorities. I
    find nothing inherently implausible about that explanation. When  taken
    together with the consistent account given by the appellant and sponsor
    about the marriage itself, including the identity of the witnesses, the
    dowry, the place where it took place, and the fact that the couple have
    a baby together and have been, and continue to, live  together  in  the
    UK, I accept that the couple contracted a genuine  marriage  which  was
    accepted as valid in Somalia and would thus be considered as  valid  in
    the UK.

16. Accordingly, I reach the same conclusions as Judge Mozolowsi and accept
    that the appellant is married to, and the  family  member  of,  an  EEA
    national exercising Treaty rights in the UK and that she  is  therefore
    entitled to an EEA Residence Card as such.



DECISION

17. The original Tribunal was found to have made an error of law. I re-make
    the decision by allowing the appeal under the EEA Regulations.


Signed   Date 20 Sep 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
