
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/39126/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                     |                  Decision & Reasons  |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 10th June 2015                     |                  On 26th June 2015   |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                stella mordi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Salmon of Bradford Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  Hillis
    made following a decision at Bradford on 6th January 2014.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria (wrongly stated to  be  Egypt  in
    the determination) born on 8th May 1971.  She has a son  born  on  21st
    September 2005 who is her dependant.

 3. The appellant arrived in the UK with her son on 14th March 2007 with  a
    six month family visit visa and overstayed.  She subsequently  made  an
    application for an EEA residence card which was refused and she  became
    appeal rights exhausted on 28th  June  2011.   She  submitted  a  human
    rights application on 23rd March 2012 which was refused with  no  right
    of appeal, since she had  no  leave  to  remain  at  the  time  of  the
    application, but on 15th September 2014 the respondent agreed to  issue
    an appealable decision.

 4. The appellant did not meet the requirements for leave to  remain  as  a
    parent  under  the  Immigration  Rules  because,  as  at  the  date  of
    application, her son had not been living in the UK for seven years  and
    she therefore  failed  to  meet  the  eligibility  requirements  of  E-
    LTRPT.2.2(c).  She  was  also  refused  under  paragraph  276ADE,  with
    respect to private life and with  respect  to  Article  8  outside  the
    Rules.

 5. The judge said that he had taken into account the guidance set  out  in
    ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2010] UKSC 4 and had regard to the  child's  best
    interests as a primary consideration.  He took into  account  the  fact
    that he had made good progress at school and that he had now spent over
    seven years in the UK.  However he was not a British citizen and had no
    lawful right to be here.  There was no persuasive evidence that he  had
    particularly strong relationships with his  uncle  or  with  anyone  at
    school which went beyond those normally associated with a child of nine
    years in full-time education in the UK.

 6. So far as proportionality was concerned he said that the appellant  was
    wholly  dependent  on  public  funds  for  accommodation,  maintenance,
    educational and medical care which  was  a  significant  drain  on  the
    finite resources of the UK.  The significant financial  burden  on  the
    public purse had to be weighted  against  the  best  interests  of  the
    child.

 7. He wrote:

         "The  UK  Government  has  done  no  more  than  apply  its   valid
         Immigration Rules and Law to the Appellant's application and in  my
         judgment correctly conclude that it  is  not  compatible  with  the
         economic wellbeing of the UK, its citizens and lawful residents for
         the Appellant and her son to be given leave to remain in the UK and
         that it was in the best interests of D to accompany his mother with
         whom he has  lived  his  whole  life,  to  Nigeria.   There  is  no
         submission before me that the Appellant's son will not be  able  to
         receive education commensurate with local standards on  removal  to
         Nigeria with his mother.

         The Appellant on her own account is educated to  degree  level  and
         had two  jobs  in  Nigeria  before  setting  up  her  own  computer
         business.  She lost both  jobs  due  to  the  economic  climate  in
         Nigeria prior to 2007.  She lost her business due to an  accidental
         fire that destroyed her stock.  I find the Appellant is an educated
         and resourceful woman with employment and business  experience  who
         is likely to be able  to  be  financially  independent  in  Nigeria
         within a reasonable timescale."

 8. On that basis he dismissed the appeal.

 9. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had misrepresented the law in respect of  the  best  interests  of  the
    child. Where the best interests clearly favoured a certain course, that
    course should be followed unless countervailing reasons of considerable
    force displaced them (ZH (Tanzania)).  Had the judge  directed  himself
    properly he would have come to a different conclusion.

10. It was accepted that the Rules provided, under  EX.1  of  Appendix  FM,
    that an applicant with a subsisting parental relationship with a child,
    who had  lived  in  the  UK  continuously  for  at  least  seven  years
    immediately preceding the application, should  be  given  leave  if  it
    would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the  UK.   However
    the judge accepted that the matter should be considered as at the  time
    of hearing rather than at the date of application.   The  Rule  was  an
    attempt to formulate a response  to  ZH  and  there  was  at  least  an
    implication that normally, if a child has been  in  the  UK  for  seven
    years, the parent should be allowed to stay, subject to there being  no
    countervailing factors of weight.   The  judge  did  not  consider  the
    considerable hardship to the child  if  returned  to  Nigeria  and  was
    unfair to hold it against them their recourse  to  public  funds.   The
    alternative would have been for the appellant to work illegally.

11. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Hollingworth  on  11th  March
    2015.

12. On 23rd  March  2015  the  respondent  served  a  reply  defending  the
    determination.

Submissions

13. Mr Salmon expanded on his grounds  and  whilst  he  accepted  that  the
    appellant could not meet the requirements of the Rules, since the child
    did not have seven years' leave at the time of application, he had been
    in the UK for over seven years as at the date of hearing and therefore,
    for the purposes of  Section  177B  should  have  been  regarded  as  a
    qualifying child.  Although the  appellant's  immigration  history  was
    poor there was no criminality and great hardship to the  child  by  the
    disruption of his education if he were to be removed

14. Mrs Pettersen submitted that this  was  a  sustainable  decision.   The
    judge had considered the best interests of the child in the  round  and
    it was open to him to  place  weight  upon  the  fact  that  there  was
    presently a financial burden on the state.  The judge was  entitled  to
    find that the child could accompany his mother to Nigeria and it  would
    be reasonable to expect him to do so.



Findings and Conclusions

15. There is no reference to Section 117B in  this  determination.   Judges
    are duty bound to have regard to the specific considerations set out in
    Sections 117A to 117D although it is not an error of  law  to  fail  to
    refer to those sections if the  judge  has  applied  the  test  he  was
    supposed to apply according to its terms.  What matters  is  substance,
    not form (Dube (Sections 117A - 117D) [2015] UKUT 00093). It  is  clear
    that in fact the judge did have regard to those  considerations  albeit
    that he did not cite them.

16. Section 117B states as follows:

         "Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all cases

                (1)    The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is
                    in the public interest.

                (2)    It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in
                    the interests of the economic wellbeing  of  the  United
                    Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain in the
                    United  Kingdom  are  able  to  speak  English,  because
                    persons who can speak English -

                    (a)    are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                    (b)    are better able to integrate into society.

                (3)    It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in
                    the interests of the economic wellbeing  of  the  United
                    Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain in the
                    United Kingdom are financially independent, because such
                    persons -

                    (a)    are not a burden on taxpayers, and

                    (b)    are better able to integrate into society.

                (4)    Little weight should be given to -

                    (a)    a private life, or

                    (b)    a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

                    that is established by a  person  at  a  time  when  the
                    person is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

                (5)    Little weight should  be  given  to  a  private  life
                    established by a person at  a  time  when  the  person's
                    immigration status is precarious.

                (6)    In the  case  of  a  person  who  is  not  liable  to
                    deportation, the public interest does  not  require  the
                    person's removal where -

                    (a)    the person has a genuine and subsisting  parental
                        relationship with a qualifying child, and

                    (b)    it would not be reasonable to expect the child to
                        leave the United Kingdom."

17. So far as the ability to speak  English  is  concerned,  this  was  not
    addressed.  However, in AM (Section 117B - Malawi) [2015] UKUT 0260 the
    Tribunal held that an appellant can obtain no positive right to a grant
    of leave to remain from either Sections 117B or 2  or  3  whatever  the
    degree of his fluency in English  or  the  strength  of  his  financial
    resources.  The failure to mention the  appellant's  ability  to  speak
    English is therefore immaterial.

18. So far as the judge's consideration of the drain on the public purse is
    concerned, that was plainly a matter which he was bound  to  take  into
    account by virtue of Section 117(iii).

19. The appellant has been in the UK unlawfully since  she  overstayed  her
    visa in 2007.  Little weight should therefore be given to  her  private
    life.

20. The real issue here is Section 117(vi) and the position of  the  child,
    and in this respect the judge clearly asked himself the right question.



21. He cited the Court of Appeal's decision in EV (Philippines) and  Others
    v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874, which considered the treatment of the  best
    interests of the child.

22. At paragraph 32 Christopher Clarke LJ said:

         "There is a danger in this field of moving from looseness of  terms
         to semantics. At the same time there could be said to be a  tension
         between (a) treating the best interests of the child as  a  primary
         consideration which could be outweighed by others provided that  no
         other consideration was treated as inherently more significant; and
         (b) treating the child's best interests as  a  consideration  which
         must rank  higher  than  any  other  which  could  nevertheless  be
         outweighed by others. It is material, however, to  note  that  Lord
         Kerr, as he made clear, was dealing with a  case  of  children  who
         were British citizens and where  there  were  very  powerful  other
         factors - see [41] below - in favour of not removing them (the best
         interests of the child  clearly  favour  a  certain  course  -  the
         outcome of cases such as the present).  He  also  agreed  with  the
         judgment of Lady Hale. In  those  circumstance  we  should,  in  my
         judgment, be guided by the formulation which she adopted."

23. And at paragraph 35:

         "A decision as to what is in the best interests  of  children  will
         depend on a number of factors such as (a) their age; (b) the length
         of time that they have been here; (c) how long they  have  been  in
         education; (c) what stage their education has reached; (d) to  what
         extent they have become distanced from the country to which  it  is
         proposed that they return; (e) how renewable their connection  with
         it may be; (f) to what extent they will have linguistic, medical or
         other difficulties in adapting to life in that country; and (g) the
         extent to which the  course  proposed  will  interfere  with  their
         family  life  or  their  rights  (if  they  have  any)  as  British
         citizens."

24. Lewison L J said at paragraph 58:

         "In my judgment, therefore, the assessment of the best interests of
         the children must be made on the basis that the facts are  as  they
         are in the real world. If one parent has no right  to  remain,  but
         the other parent does, that is the  background  against  which  the
         assessment is conducted. If neither parent has the right to remain,
         then that  is  the  background  against  which  the  assessment  is
         conducted. Thus the ultimate question will be - is it reasonable to
         expect the child to follow the parent with no right  to  remain  to
         the country of origin?"

25. He concluded:

         "In our case none of the family is a British citizen.  None has the
         right to remain in the UK.  If the mother is removed the father has
         no independent right to remain.  If the parents are removed then it
         is entirely reasonable to expect the children to go with them.   As
         the Immigration Judge found it is obviously in their best interests
         to remain with their parents.  Although it is of course a  question
         of fact for the Tribunal I cannot  see  that  the  desirability  of
         being educated at public expense in the UK can outweigh the benefit
         to the children of remaining with their parents.  Just as we cannot
         provide medical treatment for the world, so we cannot  educate  the
         world."

26. The judge made a clear finding that it was  reasonable  to  expect  the
    child to return to Nigeria, the country of his  nationality,  and  gave
    proper reasons for doing so.  He would be  able  to  receive  education
    commensurate with the local standards on removal and his  mother  would
    be able to  support  him  both  on  the  basis  of  her  previous  work
    experience and because she is educated to degree level.

27. The child has been in the UK for almost all of his life and appears  to
    have few ties with his country of nationality.  He has spent five years
    in education here, but, on the other hand his  education  has  not  yet
    reached a critical stage, and no medical grounds have been put  forward
    to suggest that there would be difficulties for him  in  relocating  to
    Nigeria - mention is made of asthma but it is  controlled  by  inhalers
    which are available there.  The appellant has a brother in Nigeria  and
    although she says that he is poor and unable to assist financially,  on
    the judge's unchallenged findings, she would be  able  to  provide  for
    herself.

28. No mention is made of the child's father.  It has to be assumed that he
    is in Nigeria.  The most important fact here is that  the  child  is  a
    Nigerian national.  There would be no deprivation of citizenship rights
    in the UK since he is not entitled to them.

29. The judge's conclusion is entirely consistent with the reasoning in EV,
    and the grounds disclose no error of law.

Notice of Decision

30. The original judge did not err in law.  His decision stands.

31. No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

