
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39990/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 1 April 2016                          |On 19 April 2016                    |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA

                                   Between

                             shiplu kumar barmon
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Bhulyam, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh and his date of  birth  is  18
    December 1978.  He appealed against  the  decision  of  the  respondent
    dated 25 September 2014 to refuse to grant him leave to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom as a person entitled to leave to  remain  as  a  Tier  4
    (General)  Student  Migrant  pursuant  to  paragraph   245ZX   of   the
    Immigration Rules as set out in HC 395 as amended.

2.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  P  J  M
    Hollingworth on 21 January 2016 stating that it is  arguable  that  the
    judge should have considered whether the respondent's decision  was  in
    breach of Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

3.   The grounds of appeal  essentially  state  that  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State is unlawful under Article 8 and  Article  2  of  the
    Protocol of the European Convention on Human Rights.  The appellant  is
    in the middle of his studies as  along  with  his  main  course  he  is
    pursuing a part-time course with Anglia Ruskin University and he cannot
    be removed at this particular moment of time.  The case of QY (China) v
    SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 680 was referred to for the proposition  that  his
    removal from the country would breach his rights under Article 8.

4.   The respondent in her Rule 54 response stated that it is  incumbent  on
    the  appellant  to  ensure  that  he  meets  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules on application.  The respondent further  states  that
    while it is accepted that the judge has not made findings on Article  8
    it would be argued that the appellant's application to the Secretary of
    State was not based on his private of family life.  It also notes  that
    the appellant asked for a paper appeal and he was not before the  judge
    to give any evidence in relation to what constitutes his private  life.



5.   At the hearing Mr Bhulyam on behalf of  the  appellant  relied  on  his
    skeleton  argument  which  I  have  pursued.   He   made   no   further
    submissions.

6.   Mr Avery in his submissions stated that the appellant  did  not  appear
    before the Immigration Judge and  there  was  no  evidence  before  the
    Immigration Judge that he can see from the determination that the judge
    did not take into account.  The appellant has been here  as  a  student
    for seven years and even then has not been able  to  pass  the  English
    language test which is a cause for concern.  He cannot see any material
    error of law in the determination.

My Findings

7.   I find that the appellant has been in this country for seven  years  as
    a student and now wishes to continue living in this country even though
    he cannot meet the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules  which  are
    Article 8 compliant.  While I accept that the judge has not  considered
    Article 8 in respect of the private life I find that the appellant  who
    has been in this country  on  a  temporary  basis  would  have  had  no
    expectation that he can continue to live in this country unless he  met
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  There is no dispute that he
    does not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules  and  therefore
    there is no private life in this country worthy of protection.  In  any
    event I find a differently constituted Tribunal would  not  come  to  a
    different conclusion.  There is no error of law  in  the  determination
    and I uphold the determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ian
    Howard.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.

OR

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                  Date this 4th day of April 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana




I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                                  Date 4th day of April 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana
