

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/39212/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal|                   Decision & Reasons |
|                                       |Promulgated                           |
|On 18 February 2016                    |                   On 29 February 2016|


                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SYMES


                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                 YUNSHAN PEI
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Bhachu (counsel instructed by Malik Law
Chambers)

                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. This is the appeal of the Secretary of State against the decision  of
       the First-tier Tribunal allowing the original appeal of Yunshan  Pei,
       a citizen of China born 6 March 1960, against the decision to  revoke
       his indefinite leave to remain on 8 October 2014 and to  set  removal
       directions against him.


    2. The basis for the Secretary of State's decision was information  that
       had come to light since Mr Pei had been  granted  settlement  (having
       completed the relevant residence period as a work  permit  holder  to
       qualify for indefinite leave to remain) which established that he had
       used false representations in support of his work permit grant of  20
       August 2012: he had put forward  evidence  of  his  English  language
       proficiency by way of a  certificate  from  the  Educational  Testing
       Service Limited (ETS), but as part of their ongoing survey  into  the
       integrity of their testing processes that organisation had  now  told
       the  Home  Office  that  they  believed  that  his  result  had  been
       fraudulently obtained.


    3. Mr Pei's case as summarised by the First-tier Tribunal  against  that
       decision was that removal to  China  would  contravene  his  family's
       collective Article 8 rights given the connections they had  built  up
       in this country, and would be unduly harsh because of the "one child"
       policy in force  there:  having  had  more  children  than  that  law
       allowed, he would face administrative penalties that would limit  his
       employability in China at the seniority at which he presently worked.




    4. Having directed itself that the burden of proof  lay  upon  the  Home
       Office to make good their allegation of  dishonesty,  the  First-tier
       Tribunal found that the witness statements from Peter Millington  and
       Rebecca Collings doubtless provided a factually accurate  account  of
       the matters described therein, but were in  no  way  specific  to  Mr
       Pei's case. The database described as the "ETS Lookup Tool" to  which
       the explanatory statement in this appeal referred might  well  equate
       to the output of the spreadsheets referenced in their statements. The
       only evidence that was specific  to  the  Appellant's  case  was  the
       printout apparently dated 20 June 2014, which identified the impugned
       test results as those from 29 February 2012, taken  at  the  European
       College for Higher Education. The only available material  to  ground
       the Home Office's case  as  to  Mr  Pei's  dishonesty  was  the  bare
       statement of invalidity from ETS combined with the  explanation  from
       the witness statements that took the case a step further  by  way  of
       generally describing the investigative process.


    5. Evaluating the witness statements, the First-tier Tribunal noted that
       the investigative process admitted the possibility of false positives
       being identified at the stage at which software was  used  to  search
       out possible proxy test  subjects,  which  was  the  reason  for  the
       subsequent employment of a human verification process. There  was  no
       evidence put forward as to who had conducted the  verification,  what
       analytical techniques they applied, or what findings ensued, in  this
       particular case.


    6. The First-tier Tribunal went  on  to  examine  the  interview  record
       relied upon by the Home Office, finding that it was readily  apparent
       that the interviewer and Mr Pei were at cross  purposes,  the  former
       asking questions about the  English  language  test  and  the  latter
       answering them as if they involved  his  Life  in  the  UK  test.  It
       concluded that the  Secretary  of  State  had  not  established  that
       deception had been used in when Mr Pei had  previously  been  granted
       leave to remain.


    7.  Grounds  of  appeal  contended  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
       overlooked the fact that the  witness  statement  evidence  from  the
       Secretary of State clearly described the  verification  process,  and
       that the ETS Lookup Tool was specific to the  Appellant.  Accordingly
       inadequate reasons had been given for  the  decision.  Judge  Clayton
       granted permission to appeal for the First-tier Tribunal on  3  March
       2015 on the basis that those grounds were  viable,  and  because  the
       evidence submitted by the Respondent did address the conduct,  result
       and techniques of the investigative process.


    8. Before me Mr Mills submitted that the First-tier Tribunal  was  wrong
       to state that there was no evidence backing  up  the  detail  of  the
       human verification process. Peter Millington's statement set out that
       two  experienced  analysts,  who  had  benefited  from  guidance  and
       information-sharing that consistently sought to hone their skills  as
       the process developed, looked at each sample, entering their opinions
       on a spreadsheet, and only where both agreed would the test result be
       impugned; some of the examples of positive matches  suggesting  proxy
       testing were played to the Home Office delegation, who concluded that
       it was very clear that it was the output of the same person speaking.
       Pressed from the bench as to whether his submission  was  essentially
       that no reasonable judge could ever depart from  the  ipse  dixit  of
       ETS, he maintained that that was the Secretary of  State's  essential
       submission, and that any decision to the contrary would inevitably be
       flawed for failure to apply the appropriate standard of proof,  which
       was  not  the  criminal  standard   but   merely   the   balance   of
       probabilities.


    9. Ms Bhachu submitted that there was no evidence in this case that  the
       two analysts had agreed on the appropriate response to this  enquiry.
       Human verification was critical in almost 20% of cases given the  80%
       figure given and its individual application to this case had not been
       explained.


   10. The cancellation of the Appellant's leave was done pursuant  to  Rule
       321A(1) of the Immigration Rules:


           "Grounds on which leave to enter or remain which is in force is
           to be cancelled at port or while the holder is outside the
           United Kingdom
           321A. The following grounds for the cancellation of a person's
           leave to enter or remain which is in force on his arrival in, or
           whilst he is outside, the United Kingdom apply;
           (1) there has been such a change in the circumstances of that
           person's case since the leave was given, that it should be
           cancelled; or
           (2) false representations were made or false documents were
           submitted (whether or not material to the application, and
           whether or not to the holder's knowledge), or material facts
           were not disclosed, in relation to the application for leave; or
           in order to obtain documents from the Secretary of State or a
           third party required in support of the application ..."


   11. The Upper Tribunal cites  expert  evidence  deployed  by  a  litigant
       seeking to cast doubt upon the validity testing process used  by  ETS
       in Gazi (IJR) [2015] UKUT 327 (IAC):


           "Dr Harrison  also  examines,  with  accompanying  critique  and
           commentary,   the   discrete   issues   of   factors   affecting
           performance; the typical performance of human verification;  the
           definition of thresholds; the explicit acknowledgement of  human
           errors; the lack of testing of the performance of analysts;  the
           dubious touchstone of "confidence" (see Mr Millington's  witness
           statement); the dearth of information about the actual  analysis
           methodology;  the  lack  of  detail  about  the  experience  and
           knowledge of both the recruited analysts and their  supervisors;
           the indication that any training of the newly recruited analysts
           was  hurried;  the  shortcomings  in  Mr   Millington's   speech
           recognition averments; and the clear acknowledgement on the part
           of ETS that false identifications (viz false  positive  results)
           have occurred. One passage relating to  the  human  verification
           process is especially noteworthy:
                 "... although the analysts only verified matches where they
                 had no doubt about their validity  -  ie  where  they  were
                 certain about their judgments - this should not be taken as
                 a reliable indicator of the accuracy  of  those  judgments.
                 This approach does not remove the risk  of  false  positive
                 results."
           Dr Harrison also highlights that both the automatic  system  and
           the human analysts are capable of  false  positive  errors.  The
           Secretary of State's  evidence  does  not  disclose  either  the
           percentage or the volume of such errors."


   12. No findings were made on  that  evidence  in  Gazi.  However,  it  is
       notable that the reasoning of the First-tier Tribunal in this  appeal
       was in line with those observations of Dr Harrison. It is clear  that
       there is a two-stage verification process  used  by  ETS,  with  test
       records that are electronically flagged as raising the possibility of
       the presence of a proxy tester being  put  forward  for  testing  via
       human  verification.  It  is  clear  that  those  methods   are   not
       necessarily guaranteed to avoid the occasional false positive whereby
       an innocent student is wrongly identified as having cheated in  their
       test.


   13. It would be perfectly open to the Secretary of State to  put  forward
       further evidence of the methods used by ETS in order  to  answer  the
       critique of Dr Harrison, but if she does not do so she runs the  risk
       that fact-finders will employ similar reasoning, where the  Appellant
       before them is considered to be generally  credible,  such  that  the
       mere conclusion of the ETS checks is found  not  to  undermine  their
       evidence of having been honest in all their dealings  with  the  Home
       Office. Whilst it is true that the generic  witness  statements  give
       some details of the processes, in this appeal  no  specific  evidence
       was put forwards as to the identity and expertise of  the  particular
       testers, in order to show that the possible problems with the process
       identified by Dr Harrison were absent from the way in which Mr  Pei's
       case had been approached. The First-tier Tribunal was  clearly  alive
       to the fact that the generic statements identified the processes at a
       general level, but its concern was with the  absence  of  information
       specific to the testing in this particular case.


   14. I cannot accept the submission made by Mr Mills that it is impossible
       for the First-tier Tribunal to rationally find against the  Secretary
       of State in any case  where  ETS  have  identified  test  results  as
       invalid. That appears fundamentally at odds with the judicial role of
       weighing the evidence before it as a whole  and  coming  to  its  own
       conclusions on the merits of an appeal.


   15. I conclude that the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  overlook  material
       evidence or take account of irrelevant considerations,  and  gave  an
       adequately reasoned decision that lawfully  disposed  of  the  issues
       before it.


          Decision:

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal was a lawful one.
    The appeal is dismissed.


[pic]
Signed:                                            Date: 18 February 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Symes

