
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/39959/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 30 July 2015                      |On 3 August 2015                      |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                               Mr SHARIF UDDIN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1.     The Appellant appealed with  permission  granted  by  First-tier
         Tribunal Kelly on 17 June 2015 against the decision and reasons  of
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Davda who had dismissed  the  Appellant's
         appeal against the refusal on 19 September 2014 of his  application
         made under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules for leave to remain
         as the spouse of a British Citizen and as the  parent  (i.e.,  step
         father) of her child and on human rights grounds  (Article  8  ECHR
         family life) in a decision and  reasons  promulgated  on  16  April
         2015.

    2.     The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh, born on 3 March 1991.
          The Appellant had entered the United Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General)
         Student Migrant on 19 January 2010, which leave was extended  until
         28 March 2015.  On 29 January 2014 the Appellant married a  British
         Citizen and he applied for leave to remain on that basis.  Part  of
         the reasons for  refusal  letter  stated  that  the  Appellant  had
         obtained his previous leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student
         Migrant by deception by providing a  false  English  language  test
         result.  The application  was  also  refused  because  it  was  not
         accepted  that  the  marriage  was  genuine  and  subsisting.   The
         Appellant did not have sole responsibility for his step  son.   The
         judge found that the Appellant had obtained his  Tier  4  (General)
         Student Migrant leave by deception and so  could  not  satisfy  the
         Suitability requirements of  Appendix  FM.  In  any  event  it  was
         reasonable for family life to continue in Bangladesh and there were
         no insurmountable obstacles.

    3.     Permission to appeal was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Kelly on limited grounds.  He considered that it was arguable  that
         the judge had provided an insufficient assessment of whether it was
         reasonable for  the  Appellant's  step  son  to  leave  the  United
         Kingdom, having regard  to  section  117B(6)  of  the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

    4.     Standard directions were made by the tribunal,  indicating  that
         the appeal would be re-decided immediately if a material  error  of
         law were found.  A rule 24 notice in the form of a letter dated  25
         June 2015 had been filed on the Respondent's  behalf  opposing  the
         onwards appeal.

    Submissions

    5.     There was no appearance at the Upper Tribunal hearing by  or  on
         behalf  of  the  Appellant.   By  letter  dated  27  July  205  his
         solicitors stated that that they were no  longer  representing  the
         Appellant and that he requested that the appeal be  dealt  with  on
         the papers.  No further  submissions  of  any  kind  were  made  in
         support of the onwards appeal.

    6.     Mr Whitwell for the Respondent relied on the rule 24 notice.  He
         submitted that there was no error  of  law  and  the  determination
         should stand.  By implication the judge had considered that it  was
         reasonable for the step son to leave the United  Kingdom  with  his
         mother and the Appellant, which was a sufficient  consideration  of
         section 117B(6) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
         2002.

    7.     The tribunal indicated at the conclusion of submissions that  it
         found no material error of law,  and  reserved  its  determination,
         which now follows.

    No material error of law finding

    8.     In the tribunal's view the grant of permission to appeal to  the
         Upper Tribunal was generous.  The grounds of  onwards  appeal  were
         little more than an attempt, as so often seen  in  the  Immigration
         and Asylum Chamber, to dress  up  a  difference  of  opinion  or  a
         disagreement with a First-tier Tribunal Judge's proper findings  as
         an error of law.

    9.     As noted above, the grant of permission to appeal was limited to
         Article 8 ECHR  and  section  117B(6)  issues.   The  decision  and
         reasons is detailed and set out fully the Appellant's evidence  and
         the submissions which had been made on  his  behalf.   It  was  now
         accepted by the Respondent that the Appellant had family life  with
         his British Citizen spouse (see [30] of the decision and  reasons),
         so the judge  considered  proportionality,  reasonableness  of  the
         child's leaving the United Kingdom and insurmountable obstacles  in
         that context.  At [43] of her decision, the judge explained why she
         found that relocation of the entire family group to Bangladesh  was
         possible and reasonable, a choice which was open to them  to  make,
         allowing for some degree of hardship and a  period  of  adjustment.
         The judge had already set out the contentions about  the  step  son
         (see, e.g., [34] and {43}), and considered that he was young enough
         to adapt and would have his mother and step father to  assist  him.
         His  education  would  continue  and  his  parents  could   support
         themselves.  There was no need for that to be repeated at  [45]  as
         the judge had already  discussed  the  relevant  evidence  and  the
         issues which arose.  That was a sufficient consideration of section
         117B(6) in relation to the step son.

    10.    The tribunal accordingly finds that there was no error of law in
         the  decision  and  reasons  and  there  is  no  proper  basis  for
         interfering with the experienced judge's decision.

    DECISION

    The making of the previous decision did not involve the  making  of  an
    error on a point of law and stands unchanged






    Signed Dated


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
