

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

Immigration and Asylum Chamber                   Appeal Number:
IA/39637/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                        |Promulgated on:           |
|On 2 October 2014                           |On 6 October 2014         |
|                                            |                          |

                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?

                                   Between

                   Abra Kafui Gadianku Stephanie Kenwright
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                  Appellant
                                     and

                         Secretary of State for the
                               Home Department
                                                           Respondent

                          Determination and Reasons

Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms G Ward, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer

Background

   1.       This appeal comes before me following the grant of permission to
      the Secretary of State by First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly  in  respect
      of the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Murray  who  allowed
      the appeal by way of a determination dated 8 April 2014.  For the sake
      of convenience, I continue to refer to the Secretary of State  as  the
      respond to the applicant as the appellant.

   2.       The appellant is a citizen of Ghana born on 16 August 1977.  She
      met her husband, Mark Kenwright, a British national, in May 2008  when
      he was working in Ghana. They married in May 2010 and lived  in  Mali,
      South Africa and Mozambique according  to  Mr  Kenwright's  employment
      commitments. They have two children; the first was born in Ghana on 24
      June 2009 and the second in South  Africa  on  18  November  2011.  In
      October 2011 they visited the UK. They then came from Ghana to the  UK
      in November 2012 and Mr Kenwright obtained work  here.  The  appellant
      travelled on a visit visa. They then travelled to South Africa for the
      appellant to make an entry clearance application but she  was  advised
      to submit the application in her country of  nationality;  Ghana.  The
      family decided against that course of action as Mr Kenwright had  work
      here and the older child (then aged three) was due to start school and
      they decided it would take too long to obtain a Ghanaian passport  for
      the younger child. They  therefore  re-entered  the  UK  on  18  April
      2013[1], the appellant still on her visit  visa,  and  an  in  country
      application was made on 28 August 2013 for leave  outside  the  rules.
      This was refused on 17 September 2013 on the basis that  she  did  not
      meet the requirements of paragraph R-LTRP.1.1 (d) and EX.1  (i.e.  she
      was not allowed to  switch  from  visitor  to  spouse  status)  and  a
      decision to remove her was made.

   3.       The appellant lodged an appeal and the matter came before  Judge
      Murray in Newport. Judge Murray found that  the  requirements  of  the
      rules were not met but went on to find that there were  arguably  good
      grounds for granting leave outside the rules as the best interests  of
      the children had not been considered. She then proceeded to  undertake
      a Razgar/Huang balancing exercise and allowed the appeal on the  basis
      that it would be  disproportionate  to  expect  the  appellant  to  be
      separated from her children or for them to have to live outside the UK
      or to insist the appellant should go  to  South  Africa  to  make  her
      application.

   4.       The respondent challenged the  decision  and  as  stated  above,
      permission to appeal was granted on 10 April 2014.  Although the judge
      raised an issue of his own in his grant, i.e. the free standing nature
      of EX.1, that is not pursued by the respondent on the  basis  that  is
      was an incorrect interpretation of the rules following Sabir (Appendix
      FM - EX.1 not free standing) [2014] UKUT 63 (IAC). There  is  no  need
      for me to say any more about that here.

   5.       Four criticisms were made. First, it was argued that  the  judge
      had failed to identify the circumstances which led her to undertake an
      assessment of Article 8 outside the rules and had therefore failed  to
      follow the approach set down in Gulshan  (Article  8  -  new  rules  -
      correct approach) [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC) and Nagre  [2013]  EWHC  720
      Admin. Secondly, it is maintained that the judge failed to have regard
      to specific circumstances of this case and did not  engage  adequately
      with the issue of why the appellant could not make an entry  clearance
      application to join her spouse which would have been the proper  means
      of entry. Third, it is argued that as there is relief available  under
      the rules, it was inappropriate to rely on Article 8.

Appeal hearing

   6.       The grounds were expanded at the hearing  and  clarified  in  Mr
      Wilding's skeleton argument. Mr Wilding put forward two  grounds.  The
      first was that the Tribunal failed to follow and apply the Gulshan and
      Nagre approach and secondly, that it failed to  engage  with  all  the
      material  evidence  and  facts.  He  submitted  that  the  appellant's
      inability to meet the requirements of the rules had not played a  part
      in the Article 8 assessment. That  was  important  because  the  rules
      reflect the Secretary of State's view on Article 8. As  the  appellant
      had entered the UK as a visitor, she was prohibited from switching. It
      was in the public interest  to  ensure  that  visitors  did  not  seek
      settlement through the back  door  without  any  assessment  of  their
      ability to meet the language and other requirements. He submitted that
      in a situation where  the  rules  were  not  met,  other  features  or
      arguably  good  grounds  had  to  be  shown  if  removal  was  to   be
      disproportionate (paragraphs 24c and 27 of Gulshan); there  should  be
      no free-wheeling Article 8 analysis (paragraph 27). Where  there  were
      no compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised by the  rules,
      there was no need to consider Article 8. The fact that the appellant's
      children were British  was  not  a  trump  card  and  the  success  or
      otherwise of an entry clearance application  was  irrelevant  for  the
      purposes of proportionality assessment (as per  SB  Bangladesh  [2007]
      EWCA Civ 28). Although the judge had cited Chikwamba [2008]  UKHL  40,
      that was a fact specific case where the  sponsor  was  a  refugee  and
      would be unable to accompany his wife to Zimbabwe  where  the  country
      situation itself was problematic. The bottom line was that  a  visitor
      was not allowed to switch categories and the judge did not  take  that
      into account. The Tribunal's comments in Sabir were relevant.  In  all
      the circumstances, the proportionality assessment was inadequate.

   7.       Ms Ward expressed surprise at the challenge, arguing that as the
      appellant  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship   with   two
      qualifying children, the only possible outcome was that she could  not
      be removed. She relied upon section 10.2.3 of the Home Office guidance
      which referred to it being unreasonable to expect British children  to
      leave the UK and to section 117 B (6)  of  the  2014  Act  which,  she
      submitted, made it clear  that  in  a  non  deport  case,  the  public
      interest did not require removal where the person had  a  genuine  and
      subsisting relationship with a qualifying child.  She  submitted  that
      even if the judge had made errors of law, there was only one  possible
      outcome; that the appeal had to be allowed.  She  submitted  that  the
      appellant had not sought to queue jump. She took advice  and  followed
      it.

   8.        Ms Ward submitted that  if  EX.1  applied  in  this  case,  the
      appellant would succeed.  With regard to Article 8, she submitted that
      the judge followed the Gulshan and Nagre approach in paragraphs 16 and
      17. She found that because the best interests of the children had  not
      been considered, there were grounds for  consideration  of  Article  8
      outside the rules.  The best interests of the children were to  remain
      with both parents in the UK. It was not reasonable to expect  them  to
      relocate. The option  of  making  an  entry  clearance  applicant  was
      considered and the judge acknowledged that the appellant met  all  the
      requirements of the rules save  for  her  visitor  status.  There  was
      primary legislation that made it clear that it was not in  the  public
      interest to require the appellant to leave.

   9.       Mr Wilding then replied. He relied upon Haleemudeen [2014]  EWCA
      Civ 558 (paragraphs 44 - 47) and submitted that section 117B  did  not
      dictate that the appeal had to be  allowed.  It  had  to  be  read  in
      conjunction with 117A-D. Whilst it set out the weight to be  given  to
      the public interest, it was not a trump card  over  riding  all  other
      factors and had  to  be  considered  along  with  those  factors.  The
      Tribunal should also have regard  to  the  rules  which  continued  to
      express the requirements to be met and the Secretary of State's  view.
      If Ms Ward's submission  was  accepted,  then  that  would  mean  that
      Tribunals could not undertake  any  other  proportionality  assessment
      where  children  were   involved,   regardless   of   other   factors.
      Additionally, as section 117B only applied to courts and Tribunals, it
      could lead to  an  inconsistent  approach  between  the  Secretary  of
      State's decision making and that undertaken by the  Tribunal.  If  the
      requirement to grant leave to a  parent  of  a  qualifying  child  was
      mandatory, the legislation would say so as, for example, under section
      32 of  the  2007  Act  where  the  Secretary  of  State  must  make  a
      deportation order in cases where a person had received a  sentence  of
      12 months or more.

  10.       Mr Wilding submitted that the public interest  factors  in  this
      case were  at  the  heart  of  maintaining  immigration  control.  The
      appellant had come here on a visit visa knowing it did not entitle her
      to stay. She had made  a  choice  to  do  so  and  despite  Ms  Ward's
      submissions, this was a clear and deliberate attempt  to  queue  jump.
      The requirements of visit visas were wholly  different  to  settlement
      categories   with   different   maintenance   requirements,   language
      requirements and other matters  which  had  not  been  assessed  here.
      Persons seeking settlement were required to apply in a particular way.
      That was properly reflected within the rules. Further, it was wrong to
      suggest  that  section  55  was  not  taken  into  account  as   those
      considerations  were  incorporated  in  GEN.1.1  of  the  rules.   The
      appellant had made a choice and she should not  be  rewarded  for  her
      attempt to evade the rules. There  was  no  question  of  forcing  the
      children  to  leave  the  UK.  The  judge  had  only  looked  at   the
      circumstances from one angle.

  11.       That completed the submissions. At the conclusion of the hearing
      I reserved my determination which I now give.

Findings and Conclusions

  12.       I am grateful to both sides for their helpful written  and  oral
      submissions. I have taken these into  account  along  with  the  other
      evidence including the determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
      have also had regard to the rules and the sections  of  the  2014  Act
      referred to.

  13.       Section 117 of the 2014 Act did not come into force until  after
      the hearing and the determination however it can  be  argued  that  it
      reflects the view of the Secretary  of  State  on  the  weight  to  be
      attached to certain  factors  when  Article  8  is  assessed.  Section
      117B(6) which was specifically relied on is not, in my view, the start
      and end point of the Article 8 assessment. It is certainly a  starting
      point but for the reasons given in Mr Wilding's submissions,  which  I
      have summarised above and shall not repeat,  it  cannot  be  the  only
      factor that a Tribunal  can  consider  in  an  Article  8  case  where
      children are involved.  It cannot be right that all other factors  are
      simply to be disregarded by what is presented as a trump card for this
      and indeed many other appellants. Plainly, more is required than  just
      the fact of qualifying children. Consideration needs to  be  given  to
      whether it would be  reasonable  to  expect  them  to  leave  the  UK,
      sometimes perhaps for a short period and sometimes when they are  very
      young and have not been in the UK  for  any  lengthy  period.  A  more
      detailed analysis of the impact of this legislation on Article 8 cases
      shall be given when this and other matters are further considered at a
      resumed hearing.  That makes it plain that I  have  decided  that  the
      determination is flawed and cannot stand. I now give  my  reasons  for
      that decision.

  14.       In this case, Judge Murray found that the appellant did not meet
      the requirements of the rules albeit she wrongly  observed  that  this
      was only because  of  her  immigration  status  at  the  time  of  the
      application. The language requirements do  not  appear  to  have  been
      taken into account. Nor is it clear that the specified documents  with
      regard to maintenance were submitted. However, whether  the  appellant
      was close to meeting the requirements or did not  even  remotely  come
      close to doing so, is irrelevant in  that  there  is  no  'near  miss'
      situation here.

  15.       The issue is that having found that the appellant could not meet
      the requirements of the Immigration  Rules,  the  judge  then  had  to
      decide whether there  were  arguably  good  grounds  not  sufficiently
      covered by the rules which warranted consideration of the appeal and a
      grant of leave outside the rules under Article 8. The only ground  put
      forward by the judge appears in paragraph 17;  it  is  that  the  best
      interests of the children had not been considered. In so finding,  the
      judge fell into error as the rules do indeed  incorporate  section  55
      considerations in GEN.1.1 which makes specific reference to this duty.
      In order to undertake an Article 8 assessment outside  the  rules  the
      judge was therefore required to identify features  of  the  case  that
      were not covered by the rules and she failed to  do  so.  That  is  an
      error of law.

  16.       It was also argued by Mr Wilding that when assessing whether  it
      was reasonable for the appellant to be removed given  that  she  would
      either be separated from her two children or that they would  have  to
      leave the UK in order to be with her and would therefore be  separated
      from their father, the  judge  failed  to  consider  several  relevant
      matters. That is indeed so. She assumed the appellant would have to go
      to South Africa to make an entry clearance but  that  is  clearly  not
      right as the appellant had already been advised she had  to  make  her
      application in the country of her  nationality.  She  would  therefore
      have to return to Ghana to make it. According to her application form,
      she has parents, siblings and other relatives there so there would  be
      no problems with accommodation or support.

  17.       It was maintained by the appellant that her South  African  born
      child would need a Ghanaian passport to go there but it is  not  clear
      why, as a British national, he would not be entitled  to  enter  as  a
      visitor whilst his mother made her entry clearance application, if  it
      were decided that he should accompany her. The judge did not  consider
      that the appellant may well only be away from the UK for a short time.
      Nor did she give any thought  to  the  fact  that  the  children  were
      extremely young, had only spent a relatively short period  in  the  UK
      and would not be  obliged  to  live  in  Ghana  indefinitely  (as  per
      paragraph 13 of Azimi-Moayed  (decisions  affecting  children;  onward
      appeals) [2013] UKUT 197).  The judge did  not  consider  whether  the
      appellant's husband might also be able to accompany his family  for  a
      temporary period.

  18.       Finally, the judge did  not  consider  that  the  appellant  and
      indeed her husband, had made the deliberate decision to come  here  to
      stay knowing she had no entitlement to remain, that she had  used  her
      visit visa to enter when it was unclear that she would leave and  that
      she deliberately chose not to make an entry clearance in Ghana because
      she considered it would take too long. As Mr Wilding argued,  that  is
      clear queue jumping.

  19.         The   public   interest   factors   involve   many   different
      considerations. In this case the presence of children is an  important
      factor, as exemplified by section 117B, however it is  also  important
      to assess whether in the particular circumstances of  the  appellant's
      case, the short period of residence, the young ages  of  the  children
      and the temporary  nature  of  the  absence  from  this  country,  the
      children could reasonably be expected to  go  with  the  appellant  to
      Ghana whilst she made her  entry  clearance  application,  if  it  was
      decided they would not stay here with their father. The  Secretary  of
      State's view that visitors should not be permitted to switch and  that
      those who seek to abuse and evade the rules should not be rewarded for
      such actions are  also  important  consideration.  All  these  matters
      should have factored into the judge's assessment but they did not.

  20.       In Sabir (op cit)  the  Tribunal  set  out  cogent  reasons  for
      requiring  an  applicant  to  return  to  make  an   entry   clearance
      application. Those are also relevant factors in this case.

  21.       For all these reasons I conclude that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge erred in law and I set  aside  her  determination  except  as  a
      Record of Proceedings.

Decision

  22.       The First-tier Tribunal Judge made errors of law such  that  her
      decision must be set aside  and  re-made  by  a  panel  of  the  Upper
      Tribunal at a future date.

Directions

  23.       No later than five working days prior to  the  resumed  hearing,
      the parties are to serve a skeleton argument which must include  their
      views on section 117.

  24.       The appellant is to  notify  the  Tribunal  and  the  respondent
      forthwith as to whether it is  intended  to  call  oral  evidence.  If
      evidence is to be called, full statements of  all  witnesses  must  be
      filed no later than five working days prior to the hearing.  Any other
      documentary  evidence  relied  on  and  which  has  not  already  been
      submitted must also be filed within the same time frame.

  25.       It is intended that the resumed hearing shall take place  before
      a panel of the Upper Tribunal so all evidence to the Tribunal must  be
      served in duplicate.

  26.       A hearing time of 2 � hours shall be allocated. If either  party
      considers that additional time  is  required,  the  Tribunal  must  be
      informed of the amended time estimate (with reasons) within five  days
      of the receipt of this determination.

      Signed:




      Dr R Keki?
      Judge           of            the            Upper            Tribunal


      2 October 2014
-----------------------
[1] Although the refusal letter refers to an entry date of 11 October 2012,
the appellant's passport shows that the last date of entry was April 2013.

