
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39286/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House               |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On : 6 October 2015                  |On : 12 October 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                ravinder pal
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Richardson, instructed by Louis Kennedy
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms H Murphy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The appellant is a citizen of India born on 6 May 1983. He  has  been  given
permission to appeal against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
Cooper who found that there was no valid appeal before her with  respect  to
the respondent's decision of 30 September 2014  to  refuse  his  application
for leave to remain in the United Kingdom as  a  Tier  4  (General)  Student
Migrant under the points- based system.

The appellant entered the United Kingdom in December 2009 as a  student  and
was granted periods of leave to remain in the same capacity, with  the  most
recent period of leave from 4 April 2013 to 14 July 2014.  On 14  July  2014
he submitted an application  for  further  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  4
(General) Student  Migrant.  That  application  was,  however,  rejected  as
invalid on 16 July 2014 on the basis that he had failed to pay  the  correct
fee, the fees for such application having increased on 6 April 2014.

On  13  August  2014  the  appellant  re-submitted  his   application.   His
application was refused on 30 September 2014, on the basis that he  was  not
in possession of a valid CAS (Confirmation of Acceptance  for  Studies)  and
that he had overstayed in the United Kingdom since his application had  been
made more than 28 days from the expiry of his previous leave. The  appellant
was advised that he had no  right  of  appeal  against  that  decision,  the
application having been made after the expiry of his leave.

The appellant, however, lodged a notice of appeal, asserting in his  grounds
of appeal that the second application was submitted during the  currency  of
section 3C leave and within 28 days and that  he  was  thus  entitled  to  a
right of appeal.

The appellant's "appeal" came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Cooper on  18
May 2015. There was no appearance by either party and  the  judge  therefore
determined the matter on the papers before her. The  judge  noted  that  the
appellant was relying upon the case of Basnet  (validity  of  application  -
respondent) Nepal [2012] UKUT 113 as authority for the fact that  he  should
be entitled to a full right of appeal and that his  second  application  was
made during a period of 3C leave. She noted that directions  had  previously
been issued to the  respondent  to  provide  evidence  of  the  correct  fee
payment not having been made, pursuant to the guidance in  Basnet,  but  the
respondent had not responded to those directions. She found,  however,  that
the respondent's failure to respond to the directions did not mean that  she
was unable to rely on the invalidity  of  the  application.  She  considered
that the circumstances were different to those in Basnet,  in  that  it  was
not a matter of the bank having  apparently  rejected  the  appellant's  fee
payment but that the appellant had paid the incorrect,  pre-April  2014  fee
and that the appellant had provided no information as to  what  fee  he  had
paid and how  he  had  paid  it.  The  judge  concluded  that  the  original
application was invalid and that the appellant therefore  had  no  right  of
appeal. She found that even if the appeal was a  valid  one,  the  appellant
could not succeed since he  had  failed  to  demonstrate  that  he  met  the
requirements of the immigration rules in any event.

Permission to appeal that decision was sought by the appellant on the  basis
that the judge had misapplied the principles in Basnet.

Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchison on 25  August
2015.

Appeal Hearing

At the hearing Mr Richardson submitted that the judge had erred  by  failing
to consider that the respondent had not discharged the burden  of  proof  in
accordance with the principles set out in Basnet, and as  confirmed  in  the
case of Ved & Anor (appealable decisions; permission  applications;  Basnet)
(Tanzania) [2014] UKUT 150. The error in relation to  the  validity  of  the
first application was material and the judge was wrong to consider that  the
appellant failed in any event on  the  merits  of  the  second  application,
given that it was the first application which  was  relevant  and  that  the
appellant had been able, at that time,  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the
immigration rules. Mr Richardson submitted that  the  principles  in  Basnet
did apply in this case, since  it  was  only  the  respondent  who  had  the
relevant page of the appellant's application form and  was  therefore  in  a
position to answer the question of whether the correct fee was paid.

At this point, I asked Mr Richardson if his instructions from the  appellant
were that he had paid the correct fee and he responded  that  the  appellant
did not know whether he had or not.

Ms Murphy submitted  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
correct given that the appellant had failed to provide any details  to  show
that he had paid the correct fee. The respondent only  had  details  of  the
fee paid in the second application.  The  circumstances  were  different  to
those in Basnet.

Mr Richardson reiterated his previous submissions in response.

Consideration and Findings

It is plain from her detailed findings that the judge  was  fully  aware  of
the arguments made in relation to Basnet and that she  undertook  a  careful
analysis of the principles and guidance in that case. The grounds  challenge
the way in which she interpreted the case  and  assert  that  she  erred  by
failing  to  place  weight  upon  the  fact  that  the  respondent  had  not
discharged the burden of proof as required in Basnet. However  it  seems  to
me that the judge gave detailed and valid reasons for distinguishing  Basnet
and for finding that the appellant's circumstances differed  from  those  in
that Basnet.

As the judge found, the particular concern in Basnet which led the  Tribunal
to  conclude  that  the  respondent  bore  the  burden  of  proof  was  that
assertions made by each party as to the fee payment could be  answered  only
by the respondent who had the relevant  information  to  confirm  where  the
fault lay in processing and taking  the  relevant  fee.  In  that  case  the
appellant had demonstrated that he had the relevant funds in his account  at
all times and the only issue, therefore, was why the payment  had  not  been
successful.  In  the  appellant's  case,  however,  the  appellant  had  not
demonstrated that he had the relevant funds  and,  more  significantly,  had
not even claimed to have paid the correct  fee.  Clearly  the  circumstances
were different to those envisaged in Basnet and it could not  be  said  that
the appellant did not bear any  responsibility  or  burden  of  proving  his
case. Accordingly the judge  properly  distinguished  his  circumstances  to
those in Basnet and was entitled to conclude as she did.

Having  found,  for  the  reasons  fully  and  cogently  given,   that   the
application made on 14 July 2014 was not a valid  one,  the  judge  properly
found that the subsequent application made on 13 August 2014 was made  at  a
time when the appellant was an overstayer and that he did not have  a  right
to appeal against the decision refusing the application. The  appellant,  in
his grounds of appeal, asserted that the application made on 14  July  2014,
having been made prior to the expiry of his leave,  extended  his  leave  by
virtue of section 3C of the Immigration Act  1971  so  that  the  subsequent
application was made at a time when he had leave and thus entitled him to  a
right of appeal. However that clearly  could  not  be  the  case  where  the
initial application, albeit made during the currency of his leave,  was  not
a valid one. That is made clear in the case of JH (Zimbabwe) v Secretary  of
State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 78, at paragraph 13.

Mr Richardson, in his submissions, referred to  the  respondent's  treatment
of  the  first  application,  without  providing  the  appellant   with   an
opportunity to rectify his error, as being draconian. However,  without  the
full copy  of  the  respondent's  letter  of  16  July  2014  rejecting  the
application as invalid (which neither party  was  able  to  access),  it  is
impossible to conclude that the respondent did not offer  the  appellant  an
opportunity to re-submit his application within a certain  period  of  time.
In any event, it is  relevant  to  note  that  the  appellant,  by  his  own
evidence in his grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal, left it  until
the last day of his leave to submit his application.  It  is  also  relevant
that he did not submit the second application with  the  correct  fee  until
more than 28 days  had  passed  after  the  expiry  of  his  leave.  Had  he
submitted the first application earlier he would have been in a position  to
re-submit the second application with  the  appropriate  fee  prior  to  the
expiry of his  leave,  given  in  particular  the  prompt  response  by  the
respondent to the first application (two days later). He therefore only  has
himself to blame for delaying in submitting both applications.

Accordingly Judge Cooper was entitled to conclude  that  the  appellant  was
not entitled to a right of appeal against the decision of 30 September  2014
and to find that there was no valid appeal before her.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve  an
error on a point of law. I uphold the decision. There was and  is  no  valid
appeal before the Tribunal.


Signed

Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede     Dated:
