


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39390/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 14 July 2014                             |On 08 Aug 2014               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                           karlene eulalee palmer
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Heybroek, instructed by Eagle Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica, born on  23  June  1970.  She  has
   been given permission to appeal against the decision  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal dismissing her  appeal  against  the  respondent's  decision  to
   remove her from the United Kingdom.

2. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 16 December 2002  with  leave
   to enter as a visitor valid for six months, but overstayed her visa.  She
   had a son, born on 21 October 2005 in the United Kingdom. She applied for
   further leave to remain on  8  December  2011  but  her  application  was
   refused on 11 September 2012. She commenced judicial  review  proceedings
   but withdrew once the respondent agreed to consider her application again
   and make an appealable removal decision in the event of further  refusal.
   The application was then refused on 9 September 2013 and a  decision  was
   made on 11 September 2013 for her removal to Jamaica.

3. In refusing the appellant's application, the  respondent  considered  the
   immigration rules relating to family and private life but concluded  that
   she met the criteria of neither. With regard to Appendix FM and EX.1, the
   respondent accepted that she had a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
   with a seven year old child born in the United Kingdom who may have lived
   continuously  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  seven  years  prior  to  the
   application, but considered that her son could reasonably be expected  to
   return to Jamaica with her. With regard to paragraph 276ADE  it  was  not
   accepted that the appellant had lost all ties to Jamaica.

4. The appellant appealed against that decision. Her  appeal  was  heard  in
   the First-tier Tribunal on 12 February 2014 by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
   Bartlett. The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant, who said that
   she was supported in the United Kingdom by family and friends,  referring
   in  particular  to  Sonia  and  Derek  Brown  who  helped  her  out  both
   financially and materially. She had  two  older  brothers  and  an  older
   sister in Jamaica. Her father was dead. Her mother lived in Jamaica.  The
   judge also heard from Derek Brown and the  appellant's  flatmate  Jessica
   Dixon. It was agreed before the judge that Article 8 applied in its wider
   context rather than under the immigration  rules,  which  had  come  into
   force after the application was made, and that  the  sole  basis  of  the
   appeal was in regard to proportionality and the  best  interests  of  the
   appellant's son.

5. The judge referred to various cases  including  Azimi-Moayed  and  others
   (decisions affecting children; onward appeals) Iran [2013] UKUT  197  and
   considered as a critical factor in the appeal the period of time spent by
   the appellant's son in the United Kingdom. At the time of the hearing, he
   had been living in the United Kingdom, since birth, for eight  years  and
   four months. Applying the principles in that and the other cases to which
   she referred,  the  judge  concluded  that  the  best  interests  of  the
   appellant's son would be to return with her to  Jamaica  and  that  their
   removal from the United Kingdom would not be disproportionate  and  would
   not breach Article 8 of the ECHR. He dismissed the appeal.

6. Permission to appeal was  sought  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  on  the
   grounds that the judge had erred in his assessment of the best  interests
   of the appellant's son and had misunderstood the  ratio  in  Azimi-Moayed
   and Zoumbas v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]  UKSC  74
   and had applied a  test  that  did  not  exist;  and  that  he  had  made
   assumptions about accommodation and financial  support  in  Jamaica  that
   were not supported by the evidence.

7. Permission to appeal was granted on 25 April 2014.

Appeal hearing and submissions

8. At the hearing the appellant was in attendance but was  not  required  to
   give oral evidence. I heard submissions on the error of law.

9. Ms Heybroek expanded upon the grounds of appeal. She submitted  that  the
   judge had erred in his approach to the best interests of  the  child  and
   had created his own test from Azimi-Moayed, considering as  relevant  the
   period of time over and above seven years that the child had lived in the
   United Kingdom and  ignoring  the  first  four  years  of  residence.  Ms
   Heybroek relied upon the Home Office's statement on the  new  immigration
   rules, in particular with regard to the best interests of the  child,  in
   which the key test for remaining in the United  Kingdom  on  a  permanent
   basis was said to be a period of residence of seven  years,  "subject  to
   countervailing circumstances". She also referred to the finding in Azimi-
   Moayed as to it being  inappropriate  to  disrupt  ties  developed  after
   lengthy residence in a country "in the absence of  compelling  reason  to
   the contrary" and submitted that no such reasons had been  identified  in
   the appellant's son's case.  With  regard  to  the  second  limb  of  the
   grounds of appeal, the judge had made assumptions on the evidence  as  to
   the circumstances the appellant could expect to face in Jamaica  and  had
   made errors of fact which amounted to errors of law.

10. Mr Avery submitted that the judge had properly approached the  competing
   issues and had undertaken a comprehensive review of all the  evidence  in
   accordance with the relevant case law. His decision was  consistent  with
   the approach taken in EV (Philippines) & Ors v Secretary of State for the
   Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874. With regard to the second ground  of
   appeal, the judge was entitled to take the view of the evidence  that  he
   did and was entitled to reach the conclusions that he did  in  regard  to
   the support available to the appellant in Jamaica.

11. In response, Ms Heybroek reiterated the points already made.

12. I advised the parties that in my view there was no error of law  in  the
   judge's decision and my reasons for so finding are as follows.

Consideration and findings

13. It is asserted  that  the  judge  erred  in  his  understanding  of  the
   findings in Azimi-Moayed at paragraph (1)(iv) of  the  head-note  and  at
   paragraph 13(iv) of the decision, which states:

    "Apart from the terms of published policies  and  rules,  the  Tribunal
    notes that seven years from age four is likely to be more significant
    to a child than the first seven years of life. Very young children  are
    focussed on their parents rather than their peers and are adaptable."

14. It is submitted that his reference to the appellant's son  having  spent
   only sixteen months  in  the  United  Kingdom  since  the  age  of  seven
   indicated that he had ignored the first four years of the child's life in
   the United Kingdom and had created his own test not intended by the Upper
   Tribunal in Azimi-Moayed. However it is clear  that  the  judge  was  not
   attempting to create any such test and that he had fully understood  what
   Blake J had said in that case. He  was  fully  aware  that  seven  years'
   residence was a significant factor in assessing the best interests of the
   child but was mindful of  Blake  J's  qualification  to  that  period  as
   expressed in Azimi-Moayed. His decision involved a thorough assessment of
   the case law relevant to the issue of the best interests of the child and
   a detailed consideration of the appellant's circumstances in  the  United
   Kingdom and those to which he would return in Jamaica in  line  with  the
   guidance and principles within that jurisprudence.

15. I find myself entirely in agreement with Mr Avery's submission that  the
   judge's assessment was a thorough  and  comprehensive  one,  taking  into
   account all relevant considerations.  He  reached  a  decision  that  was
   entirely open to him on the evidence before him and which was  consistent
   with the recent and relevant jurisprudence concerning the best  interests
   of the child.

16. With regard to the second limb to the grounds, it seems to me that  this
   amounts to little more than a disagreement with the  conclusions  reached
   by the judge about the circumstances to which the appellant and  her  son
   would return in Jamaica. The judge was perfectly  entitled  to  take  the
   view of the evidence that he did and did not make any errors of fact.  He
   was entitled to conclude, on the evidence before him, that the  appellant
   would continue to have access to support from  those  already  supporting
   her in the United Kingdom. In any event he considered in the  alternative
   other sources of support  including  that  from  her  family  members  in
   Jamaica and,  at  paragraphs  49  and  50,  through  her  own  employment
   prospects in Jamaica. He was entitled to find that she and her son  would
   have adequate means of accommodation and support and to  take  that  into
   account in considering proportionality and  the  best  interests  of  the
   child.

17. Taken as a whole, the judge's  determination  contains  a  detailed  and
   thorough  assessment  of  the  appellant's  circumstances  and  the  best
   interests of her child,  together  with  clearly  and  cogently  reasoned
   findings properly open to him on the evidence before him. The grounds  of
   appeal disclose no errors of law in his decision.

DECISION

18. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve
   an error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision. The decision
   to dismiss the appeal stands.





Signed   [pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated: 21 July 2014
