
[pic]
IAC-TH-WYL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/39219/2014
                                                               IA/00502/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 23 March 2016                       |On 8 April 2016                     |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD

                                   Between

                 mr ramesh thavarasasingam - first appellant
                    mrs jeevana ramesh - second appellant
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms V Miszkiel, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Both appellants are citizens of Sri Lanka who on  5  August  2014  made
    combined applications for leave to remain in the United Kingdom as Tier
    1  (Entrepreneur)  Migrants  under  the  points-based  system  and  for
    biometric residence permits.  Their  applications  were  refused  on  1
    October 2014 when the respondent concluded that she was satisfied  that
    the first appellant had failed to provide  the  required  documentation
    under paragraph 41-SD(e)(iii) of Appendix A of  the  Immigration  Rules
    and the second appellant's application was accordingly also refused but
    under paragraph 319C of the Immigration Rules  as  the  respondent  was
    satisfied that she did not meet the requirements of  paragraph  319C(b)
    of the Immigration Rules.

 2. The appellants appealed and following a hearing at Hatton  Cross  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal I Malcolm, in a decision dated 20 May  2015,
    dismissed their appeals under both the Immigration Rules and on Article
    8 grounds.

 3. The appellants sought permission to appeal which was initially  refused
    but granted on a renewed application by Upper Tribunal Judge Frances on
    9 October 2015.  Her reasons for so doing were:-

         "1.  The Appellants are citizens of Sri Lanka.  They appeal against
             the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge I Malcolm dismissing
             their appeals against the refusal of leave to remain as a Tier
             1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant and dependant under  the  Immigration
             Rules and on Article 8 grounds.

         2.   It is  arguable  that  the  Judge  failed  to  properly  apply
             paragraph  41-SD(e)(iii)(1)  which  provides  for   a   period
             starting before 11th July 2014 "up to no  earlier  than  three
             months before the date of application".  The  application  was
             made on 5th August 2014.  It is arguable that the Judge  erred
             in law in failing to consider material  after  5th  May  2014.
             The grounds are arguable."

 4. Thus the appeals came before me today.

 5. I note that in both the skeleton argument  put  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and that put before me today there is reference in paragraph 1
    to an assertion that the judge failed "to  consider  the  child's  best
    interest under Section 55  BCIA  2009".   I  can  see  no  evidence  in
    relation to any child forming  part  of  the  grounds  relied  upon  in
    seeking permission to appeal  and  in  any  event  permission  was  not
    granted in relation to this issue and it was not relied upon by Counsel
    in her submissions today.

 6. Three grounds of appeal were put forward  none  of  which  disclosed  a
    material error of law.

 7. Firstly it is said the judge failed to  consider  all  the  submissions
    made in Counsel's skeleton argument and orally at the appeal hearing to
    the effect that  the  respondent's  decision  was  procedurally  unfair
    because  of  the  Rule  change  regarding  advertising  material  under
    paragraph 41-SD(e)(iii)(1) coming into force on 11 July 2014  but  only
    having been announced in HC 532 the previous day.  Accordingly  it  was
    submitted that the respondent's decision was not in accordance with the
    law.  The judge should have allowed the appeal  as  not  in  accordance
    with the law and remitted it back.  Further or alternatively the  judge
    failed to give any adequate reasons or at all for the finding that  the
    respondent's decision was  not  procedurally  unfair  contrary  to  the
    principles pronounced  in  paragraph  14  of  Budhathoki  (reasons  for
    decision) [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC) in light of the Rule  change  without
    the normal  21  days  notice  having  been  given  under  the  negative
    resolution  procedure.   Further,  the  judge  misdirected  herself  at
    paragraph 40 of  her  decision  by  not  allowing  the  appeal  as  the
    Immigration Rules had in fact been met.

 8. Secondly it is asserted that the judge has also failed to consider  the
    additional submissions at paragraphs 7 and 8 of the  skeleton  argument
    that because of the  procedural  unfairness  of  the  Rule  change  the
    respondent should have considered the  additional  post  11  July  2014
    advertising  material  and  the  respondent   should   have   exercised
    evidential flexibility and allowed the application exceptionally  under
    paragraph 245AA(d)(iii) as the Rule could not be met  as  it  was  only
    announced on 10 July 2014 and the appellant had already submitted proof
    of his domain webhosting dated 29 June 2014 and the business  card  and
    advertising leaflets.

 9. Finally by reason of the matters raised in the first  two  grounds  the
    appellants' appeals should have been allowed under Article  8  ECHR  in
    the alternative as the respondent's decision is not in accordance  with
    the law.  The judge misdirected herself at paragraph 44 of her decision
    that the appellants could make further applications.

10. Mr Melvin's submission was that the judge in coming to her  conclusions
    had interpreted the Immigration  Rules  correctly,  that  there  is  no
    unfairness in the Rule change or indeed the points-based system.  There
    is no material error of law within the judge's decision.

11. On the face of it the changes introduced to the Rules from 11 July 2014
    were  prejudicial  to  the  applications  of   these   two   particular
    appellants.  It has to be acknowledged though that such changes are the
    expression  of  policy  changes  by  the  Secretary  of   State   whose
    responsibility was to comply with  Parliamentary  procedures  following
    Statements of Changes.  Accordingly  it  was  not  for  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge to review such expressions of policy by the Secretary of
    State.   In  any  event  the  appellants  were  unable  to   meet   the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules and there was no basis upon which
    to find the respondent's decision was  unlawful  thereby  enabling  the
    appeal to possibly be allowed on Article 8 grounds as is asserted by Ms
    Miszkiel.  Further I find she is misguided in her other submission that
    the respondent herself interprets two elements of the Rules differently
    when logically they should both be applied in the same way.

12. Even if Judge Malcolm erred in suggesting that  a  further  application
    could be made that is not a material error and would not have led to  a
    different outcome of the Article 8 ground of  appeal  put  before  her.
    The Judge has given adequate reasons having considered all  the  issues
    in these appeals.  Her reasoning is legally  adequate.   The  issue  of
    evidential flexibility was not available to these  appellants  to  rely
    on.

13. The nub of the appeal  is  that  the  appellants  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of the relevant Immigration Rules and  there  was  nothing
    disproportionate in terms of Article 8.  That was the  finding  of  the
    Judge which was open to be made on the evidence before her.

14. There is here no material error of law.

Conclusions

15. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

16. I do not set aside the decision.





Signed                              Date 30 March 2016.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard


