
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/39201/2014
                                                               ia/42703/2014
                                                               IA/42712/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10th February 2016                |On 1st March 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

                 mr bishnu prasad bhandari (first appellant)
                     ms lila bhandari (second appellant)
                           [b b] (third appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms B Asanovic of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the appellants against a decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing their appeals against  the  decisions  of  the
    respondent cancelling the appellants' indefinite leave to remain in the
    UK.

Background

 2. The appellants are citizens of Nepal. The first and second  appellants'
    dates of birth are 3 September 1981, 28 January 1985 respectively.  The
    third appellant is their daughter, whose date  of  birth  is  26  April
    2008, and is dependent  upon  her  parents.  The  first  appellant  was
    granted entry clearance in 2008 for  work  permit  employment  and  the
    second and third appellants as  dependents.  The  appellants  had  been
    issued with a biometric residence permit  on  18  November  2013  which
    conferred settlement status of indefinite leave to remain  in  the  UK.
    On 7 October 2014 and 30 October 2014 respectively the first and second
    appellants, having been to Nepal for a short  period,  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom and having  presented  their  passports  to  Immigration
    Officers  were  identified  from  records  available  to  Border  Force
    Officers as the holders of an invalid English test result  provided  by
    Educational Testing Services ('ETS').  Consequently, they were  stopped
    at the airport and interviewed.  Following their  interviews  with  the
    Border Force Officers the first and second appellants' continuing leave
    was cancelled because  the  Secretary  of  State  considered  that  the
    appellants had made a false representation in the application  for  the
    purpose of obtaining the indefinite leave to remain.  The Secretary  of
    State considered, on the basis of information  provided  by  ETS,  that
    there was substantial evidence to conclude that the  certificates  were
    obtained  fraudulently.  Accordingly,   the   appellants'   and   their
    daughter's leave was cancelled.  The appellants  appealed  against  the
    respondent's decisions to the First-tier Tribunal.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The First-tier Tribunal, in dismissing the appellants'  appeals,  found
    that the appellants were not credible witnesses.  The Judge found  that
    much had been  made  of  the  appellants'  purported  English  language
    ability. The appellants required an interpreter to give evidence before
    the Tribunal and required an interpreter at interview when they arrived
    at Heathrow Airport.  The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  found  that  both
    appellants had  used  false  documents,  namely,  false  language  test
    results to obtain their leave to remain and  that  the  respondent  was
    correct to cancel that leave.  The Judge considered that  the  evidence
    before her showed that ETS had determined that the test the  appellants
    relied upon was invalid because a proxy was used  in  each  test.   The
    Judge attached no weight  to  a  report  of  Dr  Harrison  which  draws
    attention to deficiencies in the analysis carried out by ETS.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 4. The appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  against  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision to the  Upper  Tribunal.   The  grounds  of  appeal
    assert that there is a fundamental error of fact  in  relation  to  the
    second  appellant.   It  is  asserted  that  the  appellant  cannot  be
    identified from the ETS evidence of  printouts  of  results  which  are
    included in the bundle of evidence before the First-tier Tribunal.   It
    is submitted that the ETS printouts do not either have a number or name
    identifying who took the test.  Furthermore, they do  not  contain  any
    allegations of any invalid or defective test.  It is also  asserted  in
    the grounds that the Judge failed to attach weight to the expert report
    of Dr Harrison.  It is submitted that this was inherently infer.  It is
    also asserted that the Judge took irrelevant matters into consideration
    and failed to take into account relevant matters.   On  7  August  2015
    First-tier Tribunal Judge R A Cox granted the appellants permission  to
    appeal.

The Hearing Before the Upper Tribunal

 5. Mr Tarlow made an application at the beginning of the hearing  for  the
    case to be adjourned.  He submitted that there is an ETS case currently
    before the President of the Upper Tribunal  that  was  heard  two  days
    earlier. A further hearing day has been  set  for  4  March  2016.   He
    submitted that the case was going to deal with all issues  in  relation
    to ETS cases involving deception, proof, evidence of the  Secretary  of
    State and the witness evidence of Dr Harrison and that guidance will be
    issued.  He submitted that given the relatively short time  period,  in
    the interests of justice, the appeal should be  adjourned  until  after
    the decision in the test case is released.  Ms  Asanovic  resisted  the
    application for an adjournment.  She submitted that today's decision is
    about an error of law and that does not require guidance as to  how  to
    treat the evidence.

 6. I decided not to grant the respondent an adjournment in this matter.  I
    considered that I was able to proceed on the error of law issue.

Summary of Submissions

 7. I indicated to the parties that ground 1 of the grounds of appeal might
    be determinative of the second appellant's  appeal.  Ground  1  asserts
    that the Secretary of State had not provided specific evidence from ETS
    and that the judge made an error of fact. The second  appellant  cannot
    be identified from the ETS printout which is included in the bundle  in
    her name. I drew Mr Tarlow's attention to a document  contained  within
    the respondent's bundle of documents that  was  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in respect of the  second  appellant.   The  document  was  at
    Appendix G.  This document appeared to be a printout  from  information
    obtained from ETS.  However, there  is  no  indication  of  the  second
    appellant's name or that her test result was  invalid.   The  case  was
    adjourned for a short adjournment to allow Mr Tarlow to  consider  that
    document.  After the adjournment Mr Tarlow referred to  the  bundle  he
    asserted was  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  and  a  witness
    statement of Michael Sartorius dated  1  March  2015.  He  handed  that
    bundle to me. I checked the  court  file  and  the  bundles  that  were
    submitted.  This witness statement was  not  contained  in  the  bundle
    before the Judge in relation to the second appellant  and  neither  was
    the more detailed printout.   Mr  Tarlow  submitted  that  the  witness
    statement of Mr Sartorius was produced for a particular reason and that
    was to tie up the appellants' test results with the notice of  refusal.
    I asked Mr Tarlow if he had any evidence that that bundle was served on
    the First-tier Tribunal.  Ms Asanovic indicated that she did not have a
    copy of that in her bundle either.  She had a copy of the  bundle  that
    was submitted for the hearing as served on the representatives for  the
    appellants which matched the bundle that I had identified in the  court
    file.  Mr Tarlow referred to the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  decision
    where she indicated that she had a bundle for the second appellant that
    was very similar to the bundle for the first appellant.  I  noted  that
    the bundle for the first appellant did not contain a witness  statement
    from Mr Sartorius either.

 8. In relation to the second ground of appeal that  relates  to  both  the
    first and the second appellant Ms Asanovic indicated that  contact  had
    been made with regard to the grounds of appeal which set  out  that  at
    the hearing the Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  had  been  given  an
    opportunity to consider Dr Harrison's report and for the matter  to  be
    adjourned but she had declined to do so.  She indicated that Mr  Tarlow
    had confirmed that no issue was taken as to the recital of those  facts
    as set out in the grounds  of  appeal.   She  submitted  that  all  the
    appellant has to show is that the Harrison  report  is  material.   She
    referred to the case of R (on the application of Gazi) and Secretary of
    State for the Home Department (ETS - judicial review) IJR  [2015]  UKUT
    00327 (IAC) which considered Dr Harrison's report as relied on  in  the
    present case.  She submitted that Dr Harrison had set out a  number  of
    concerns regarding the methodology adopted by ETS.  She submitted  that
    there is a presence of false positives which undermines  the  Secretary
    of State's reliance on the evidence of  the  test  as  discharging  the
    burden of proof.  She submitted that in  this  case  there  were  other
    language tests taken in close proximity by the appellants.  These  were
    in the appellants' bundle before the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   She
    submitted that the decision of the Judge may have been different if she
    took into account the report of Dr Harrison.

 9. It is asserted in the grounds of appeal that  it  was  unfair  for  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge to exclude the evidence of an  expert  report
    from consideration with no warning to the appellant.   It  is  asserted
    that the Judge's reason, given at paragraph 30, for not being  prepared
    to place any weight on the report  was  because  it  was  prepared  for
    another case.  Ms Asanovic submitted that it was  unfair  because  this
    issue was not raised at the time of the hearing.  It is  asserted  that
    as the  report  did  not  refer  to  any  particular  circumstances  or
    applicant but simply examined the procedure  and  the  quality  of  the
    testing used by ETS the fact that the report was prepared  for  another
    case is completely irrelevant for the purposes of whether one can  rely
    on it.  It is asserted that the significance of Dr Harrison's report is
    that it demonstrated that there is an  indeterminate  number  of  false
    positives that it relies on automated voice recognition software  which
    did not appear to make  allowances  for  a  specific  group  non-native
    English speakers and it did not disclose the  full  parameters  of  its
    operation or the level of experience or training  of  the  persons  who
    were undertaking the testing.  She also submitted that against  such  a
    background it was difficult  to  place  reliance  on  the  ETS  results
    particularly as in this case the two appellants both had passed English
    language tests both before and after the  test  identified  by  ETS  as
    having been taken by a proxy.

10.  Ground  3  asserts  that  the  Judge  took  irrelevant  matters   into
    consideration.  At paragraph 12 it is submitted that  the  Judge  erred
    when considering that the appellants had not contacted ETS to challenge
    the allegation that they had used proxies in order to take  the  tests.
    It is asserted that failure to take an action or  absence  of  evidence
    can be relevant for determining credibility only  in  situations  where
    the evidence or the action is obvious and easily taken.  It is asserted
    that it is not obvious that one should challenge the ETS service  where
    there is a right of appeal against cancellation.   The  Judge  did  not
    take into consideration the first appellant's explanation that  he  did
    not know anything about the allegation of the use of a proxy  until  he
    had received notice of  cancellation  of  leave.   The  Judge  has  not
    engaged with that explanation.  It is submitted that the Judge took  an
    irrelevant  matter  into  consideration  namely  that  in  a  courtroom
    situation both the first and second appellants used  interpreters.   It
    was submitted before the First-tier Tribunal Judge that  the  level  of
    English language required  to  be  passed  is  a  very  low  one.   The
    appellants  had  passed  tests  that  required  a   higher   level   of
    understanding of English than  the  B1  level.   The  second  appellant
    passed the ESOL speaking and listening entry 3 in May 2014 and  also  a
    Life in the UK Test on 12 April 2014.

11. Mr Tarlow replied on the Rule  24  response.   He  submitted  that  the
    weight given to the evidence at paragraph 13 was a matter for the judge
    to make.  She correctly noted the  report  from  Dr  Harrison  was  not
    prepared for this appeal.  He submitted  that  there  was  no  material
    error and that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal should stand.

Discussion

12. In relation to ground 1, I find that there was a material error of  law
    in the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  in  relation  to  the  second
    appellant.  The judge did not have the full printout in relation to the
    second appellant or a witness statement  from  Michael  Sartorious  for
    either appellant. At paragraph 11  the  judge  sets  out  the  evidence
    before her and no mention is made of  such  a  witness  statement.  The
    judge made a factual error on relation  to  the  second  appellant.  In
    discharging the burden that is placed  upon  the  respondent  to  prove
    deception the reliance on a document that does not even bear the second
    appellant's name nor does it give any indication on the face of it that
    the test result was invalid is inadequate bearing in mind  that  it  is
    deception that the respondent was required to prove.

13. The Tribunal Judge at paragraph 15 appears to accept at face value that
    the evidence before her showed that ETS had determined  that  the  test
    the appellants relied upon is invalid because a proxy was used in  each
    test.  The evidence that was before  the  Judge  was  the  two  generic
    witness statements provided by  Ms  Collings  and  Mr  Millington  that
    described the processes through which an individual will be  identified
    by ETS.

14. The evidence  of  Ms  Collings,  Mr  Millington  and  Dr  Harrison  was
    considered in the context of a challenge by way of Judicial  Review  in
    the case of R (on the application of Gazi) v Secretary of State for the
    Home Department (ETS - judicial review) IJR [2015] UKUT 00327 (IAC) the
    Upper Tribunal found:

         "35. In my view, taking into account Chapter 50  of  the  EIG,  the
         Respondent's  evidence,  summarised  in  Chapter  II   above,   was
         sufficient to warrant the assessment that the Applicant's TOEIC had
         been  procured  by  deception  and,  thus,  provided  an   adequate
         foundation for the decision made under section 10 of the 1999  Act.
         True it is that,  at  this  remove  and  with  the  benefit  of  Dr
         Harrison's report, there may be grounds for  contending  that  said
         evidence is not infallible. And there may  be  sufficient  material
         for a lively debate about its various  ingredients.  However,  this
         Tribunal, as emphasised above,  must  evaluate  and  determine  the
         Applicant's improper purpose challenge by reference to the material
         presumptively considered by or available to the decision maker when
         the impugned decision was made. I find no clear  or  logical  basis
         for distinguishing between the first tranche of decisions and those
         made later. Furthermore, while the policy  evidential  requirements
         enshrined in the EIG are  strict,  they  require  neither  absolute
         certainty nor infallibility. For the purpose of disposing  of  this
         ground of challenge and bearing in mind that the jurisdiction being
         exercised is one of supervisory review rather than  merits  appeal,
         its suffices for this Tribunal to be satisfied  that  the  evidence
         upon which the impugned decision was  made  has  the  hallmarks  of
         care,   thoroughness,   underlying   expertise    and    sufficient
         reliability. The cornerstone of the Applicant's case  is  that  the
         evidence  was  insufficient  for  this  purpose.  I   reject   this
         challenge."

15. As set out in Gazi  the  witness  statements  of  Ms  Collings  and  Mr
    Millington  are  sufficient  to  warrant  the   assessment   that   the
    appellants' TOEICs had been procured by deception. However, as also set
    out in Gazi, in light of Dr Harrison's report there may be grounds  for
    contending that that evidence is not infallible and it  is  clear  that
    the Upper Tribunal in Gazi did not accept without question the evidence
    of Mr Millington and Ms Collings.  The context of  the  proceedings  in
    Gazi are also relevant. The challenge was by way of Judicial Review  on
    the basis of improper  purpose.  As  the  Upper  Tribunal  set  out  at
    paragraph 34:

         "... This ground of challenge can succeed  only  if  the  Applicant
         establishes that the purpose  for  which  the  Secretary  of  State
         invoked the discretionary power under section 10 of  the  1999  Act
         was motivated by a design other  than  furthering  the  policy  and
         objects of the statute  (the  Padfield  principle).  The  quest  to
         establish improper motive in the context of this challenge engages,
         in my view, a relatively elevated threshold. Improper  purpose,  or
         motive, is not, as a general rule, easily proved."

16. The evidence of Ms Collings and  Mr  Millington  does  not  create  any
    presumption that the test result in any case is invalid unless evidence
    to the contrary is adduced. Whether the respondent has proved  that  an
    appellant has used deception must be a matter for the judge to consider
    on all the evidence available.

17. It is not clear why the Judge was not  prepared  to  even  consider  or
    attach any weight to Dr Harrison's report on  the  basis  that  it  was
    prepared for another case when she was content to  accept  the  generic
    witness statements of Mr Middleton and Ms Collings  also  prepared  for
    another case.  Further, one of the reasons given by the Judge  for  not
    attaching weight was  the  fact  that  Dr  Harrison's  report  was  not
    disclosed to the respondent in good time for the hearing and  that  the
    respondent had had no opportunity to consider it.  As was  accepted  by
    Mr Tarlow,  the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing declined the opportunity to adjourn the matter on  the
    basis that time was needed to consider the report.  The report  in  any
    event had been in the public domain for a considerable period of time.

18. It is difficult to assess whether or not the Judge might have come to a
    different conclusion had she considered the report of Dr  Harrison  and
    the criticisms made therein of the ETS method of analysis.

19. The Judge refers at paragraph 17 to  the  first  appellant's  interview
    record with the Immigration Officer at Heathrow.  The  Judge  draws  an
    adverse inference as to his credibility  from  his  failure  to  answer
    questions he should have known the answers to if he had  genuinely  sat
    the test claimed.  The Judge considers the appellant's explanation that
    he was tired after his flight but considers that this does not  explain
    the serious discrepancies between his interview and his  later  witness
    statement.  The Judge was entitled to arrive at that finding.

20. The judge appears to have disregarded the  evidence  of  several  other
    English language tests undertaken by  the  appellants.  The  Judge  was
    influenced by the fact that the appellants required an  interpreter  to
    give evidence before the Tribunal and required  an  interpreter  to  be
    interviewed when they arrived at Heathrow. At paragraph  12  the  judge
    found:

         "... Much has  been  made  of  the  appellants'  purported  English
         language ability, but the appellants  required  an  interpreter  to
         give evidence before the Tribunal and required an interpreter to be
         interviewed at Heathrow airport ..."

21. The use of interpreters in  formal  interview  settings  and  in  court
    proceedings raises  no  presumption  that  an  appellant  cannot  speak
    English to the level required by the TOIEC testing.

22. Further, the judge  drew  adverse  inferences  as  to  the  appellants'
    credibility because:

         "Furthermore genuine examinees who had taken the  English  language
         test with no assistances from an exam taker pretending  to  be  the
         appellants, would, upon receipt of the reasons for cancellation  of
         leave have  contacted  ETS  to  object  to  their  conclusions  and
         indicate a mistake had been made and to ask to listen to the  tapes
         of the tests for both appellants ..."

23. As set out in the grounds of appeal  the  appellants  had  a  right  of
    appeal against the respondent's decision. The tests were taken  in  May
    2013. The cancellation of leave was 17  October  2014  some  17  months
    later. It is not an obvious and easily taken action when there had been
    such  a  lengthy  delay  between  the  taking  of  the  tests  and  the
    cancellation of leave and where a right of appeal exists.

24. I find that there was  a  material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision not to engage  at  all  with  the  evidence  of  Dr
    Harrison whilst apparently accepting without any evaluation or analysis
    the similarly generic  witness  statements  of  Mr  Millington  and  Ms
    Collings. There was no analysis of the  document  in  relation  to  the
    second appellant which,  as  set  out  above,  I  found  constituted  a
    material error of law. The Judge appears to have taken the evidence  of
    Ms Collings and Mr Millington at face value. Given that the  burden  is
    on the respondent to prove deception a more rigorous  analysis  of  the
    evidence presented was required.

25. I find that there are material errors of law in the First-tier Tribunal
    decision and I set aside that decision pursuant to section 12(2)(a)  of
    the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 ('TCEA').

26. I considered the Practice Statement concerning transfer of proceedings.
    I am satisfied that the nature and extent of judicial fact finding that
    is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be  re-made  is
    such, having regard to the overriding objective, that it is appropriate
    to remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal.

27. I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal for the case  to  be  heard
    before a different judge pursuant to section 12(2)(b) and  12(3)(a)  of
    the TCEA. The case is to be listed  at  Hatton  Cross  for  a  de  novo
    hearing before any judge other than Judge E B Grant  the  date  of  the
    hearing to be fixed at the next available opportunity.

Notice of Decision

The appellants' appeals are allowed and the matter will be remitted  to  the
First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing before a Judge other than Judge  E
B Grant.  The case is to be listed at the  next  available  date  at  Hatton
Cross.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   P M Ramshaw       Date 25 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw

