
[pic]
IAC-HW-AM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39859/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7th January 2016                  |On 1st February 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                        MR INNOCENT CHUKWUDI ANISIOBI
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S. Nwaekwu, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr P. Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria  born  on  16th  June  1980.   He
    appeals against the  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Baldwin sitting at Hatton Cross on 17th July  2015  who  dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal against a decision  of  the  Respondent  dated  21st
    October 2014.  That decision was to refuse the Appellant's  application
    for permanent residence made on the basis  that  the  Appellant  had  a
    retained right of residence following the termination of  his  marriage
    to a European Economic Area national exercising treaty  rights  at  the
    time of the divorce.

2.   On 9th August 2008 the Appellant  married  Silvia  Patricio  Tavares  a
    Portuguese citizen born on 16th June  1987  ("the  Sponsor").   On  8th
    October 2008 the Appellant applied for a residence card as  the  spouse
    of an EEA national which was granted valid until 21st August 2014.   On
    12th August 2014 the Appellant applied for a permanent  residence  card
    on the basis that he had retained a right of residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom notwithstanding the breakdown of his marriage to  the  Sponsor.
    It was the refusal of this application on 21st October 2014  which  has
    given rise to the present proceedings.

The Application for Permanent Residence

3.   When making the application on form EEA 4  the  Appellant  referred  at
    paragraph 3.15 to the Sponsor as his ex-wife.  Under Section 4  of  the
    form "Retained right of residence in the United Kingdom" he stated that
    his reason for claiming entitlement under this section was because of a
    divorce.  A covering letter written by his solicitors (who continue  to
    act for him) dated 11th August  2014  stated  that  the  Appellant  was
    applying for a  permanent  residence  card  because  he  satisfied  the
    conditions in Regulation 10(5) of the  Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006 ("the 2006 Regulations").  The Appellant it  was
    argued ceased to be a family  member  of  a  qualified  person  on  the
    termination of the marriage to the qualified person.  The Appellant was
    residing in the United Kingdom in accordance with the 2006  Regulations
    at the date  of  the  termination.  Prior  to  the  initiation  of  the
    proceedings for divorce the marriage had  lasted  for  at  least  three
    years and the parties to the marriage had resided in the United Kingdom
    for at least one year during the duration of the marriage.

4.   A number of documents were submitted with the EEA  4  application  form
    including a letter from the Edmonton County Court dated 10th March 2014
    stating that an acknowledgement of service of  the  petition  had  been
    received from the Sponsor and was  enclosed.   The  acknowledgement  of
    service form itself was not submitted with the EEA 4 form and there was
    no  other  documentation  such  as  decree  nisi  or  decree   absolute
    submitted.  There were a number of financial  documents,  payslips  and
    bank statements for the Appellant and Sky statements for the Sponsor.

Explanation for Refusal

5.   The Respondent refused the application stating that the  Appellant  had
    to show that he had resided in accordance with the 2006 Regulations for
    a continuous five year period which would mean  that  the  Sponsor  had
    continuously exercised free movement rights up to the point of  divorce
    and  that  the  Appellant  had  been  in  work   since   the   divorce.
    Collectively this evidence must cover a continuous five year period  to
    meet the requirement of Regulation 15(1)(f).  The Respondent noted  the
    documentation provided by the  Appellant  which  was  said  to  include
    several P60s for both the Appellant and the Sponsor.  The Appellant had
    failed to provide a divorce certificate  and  therefore  there  was  no
    evidence that the marriage had been terminated  which  meant  that  the
    Appellant could not retain any right of residence until such time as  a
    decree absolute was obtained.  As the Appellant could not show  he  was
    divorced he could not provide evidence that the Sponsor was  exercising
    free movement rights when any decree was issued.  The  Appellant  could
    not meet  Regulation  10(5)  and  the  application  was  refused  under
    Regulation 15(1)(f).  The  Appellant  appealed  against  that  decision
    arguing that the  Respondent  failed  to  have  proper  regard  to  the
    evidence submitted and that the decision breached  Article  8.   Little
    detail of any substance was enclosed with the Grounds of Appeal.

The Decision at First Instance

6.   The Judge  heard  oral  evidence  from  the  Appellant  and  two  other
    witnesses.  He  considered  the  documentation  at  paragraph   9   and
    concluded:

         "The very large number  of  address  documents  provided  with  the
         application put the Appellant at [ - ] Ordinance  Road  or  [  -  ]
         Langhedge Lane, whilst those in respect of his wife put her at [  -
         ] Dover Road or [ - ] Langhedge Lane.  None of them put him at [  -
         ] Dover Road or her at [ - ] Ordinance Road.  Documents relating to
         Dover Road put [the Sponsor] there between December 2013  and  July
         2014, whilst documents place her at Langhedge  Lane  between  March
         2011 and October 2013.

7.   The Appellant told the Judge that he was 'not fully divorced'  but  had
    been trying off and on for the last fourteen months to  reconcile  with
    the Sponsor.  She had been ready to attend court when  the  appeal  was
    first listed a month earlier but could not  afford  to  take  time  off
    another day to attend the hearing before Judge Baldwin  although  there
    was no letter from the Sponsor confirming that.

8.   The Judge's findings were set out  at  paragraphs  16  and  17  of  the
    determination.  The Appellant had not told the Respondent that  he  was
    attempting reconciliation despite  being  advised  in  the  penultimate
    paragraph at page 3  of  the  refusal  letter  that  if  there  was  an
    alternative basis under European law (i.e. other  than  as  a  divorced
    spouse) he could submit a further application on that basis.  All  that
    would appear clear according to the Judge was that  the  Appellant  and
    Sponsor were not living together and were not divorced.  From 7th  June
    2010 the Sponsor chose to take out health insurance in her  name  alone
    and for her sole benefit.  Where a marriage had  broken  down  and  the
    decree absolute could be provided  the  position  in  relation  to  the
    duration of the marriage was clear.  The Judge noted that that was  not
    the case in this appeal where a legal and factual matrix was being  put
    forward to him which was quite different to that put to the  Respondent
    at the time of the application.  There was no letter from the  wife  in
    support of the Appellant's appeal.  If she were prepared to attend  the
    Tribunal as was claimed by the Appellant  it  was  reasonable  to  have
    expected her to have at least provided a statement but  none  had  been
    provided.  Given the new situation the Presenting Officer had commented
    during the course of the hearing that  the  correct  course  of  action
    would be for the Appellant to simply reapply on the basis that  he  was
    still married to the Sponsor.  However the Appellant had not  made  out
    his case based on the situation put forward  in  his  application.   As
    there were no removal directions set the Judge did not go on to address
    Article 8.

The Onward Appeal

9.   The Appellant appealed against this decision arguing that  it  was  his
    case that he had obtained the  right  of  permanent  residence  in  the
    United Kingdom on the basis of his relationship with  an  EEA  national
    who had herself obtained entitlement to permanent residence after  five
    years as a worker in accordance with the Regulations.   The  Judge  had
    failed  to  consider  Regulation  15(1)(b)  of  the  2006  Regulations.
    Somewhat unhelpfully the  grounds  did  not  set  out  the  wording  of
    Regulation 15(1)(b) which states that a person shall acquire the  right
    to reside in the United Kingdom permanently if they are a family member
    of an EEA national and has resided in the United Kingdom with  the  EEA
    national in accordance with  the  2006  Regulations  for  a  continuous
    period of five years.

10.  As the right of residence in the EEA for a spouse of  an  EEA  national
    lasted until the marriage was formally dissolved the requirement  could
    be satisfied without necessarily depending upon residence  together  in
    the same domicile.  The fact that the Appellant's Sponsor moved out  of
    the marital home in April 2013  was  thus  irrelevant.   The  Appellant
    continued to benefit from the fact that the parties were still married.
     If the Sponsor had herself obtained entitlement to permanent residence
    in the United Kingdom after five years as a qualifying person  (at  the
    latest by May 2014 or the  date  of  the  hearing  in  2015)  then  the
    Appellant would have obtained it as well after five years of  marriage.
    This was so given that the marriage had lasted from  2008  until  2015.
    The absence of the wife from the hearing would have no effect  on  this
    entitlement because the parties were still married.

11.  Where a spouse has obtained permanent  residence  under  Regulation  15
    prior to the divorce, when the divorce takes place it does  not  affect
    that acquired right see Amos [2011] EWCA Civ 552.  At paragraph  20  of
    Amos it was said that a divorced spouse must establish that he has  the
    right of residence in question  before  the  issue  arises  of  whether
    notwithstanding the divorce the right of residence has been retained by
    virtue of the 2006 Regulations.  The Judge should have made  a  finding
    on whether the Sponsor was  exercising  treaty  rights  in  the  United
    Kingdom for a period of five years as it was the Appellant's case  that
    the Sponsor was.  Further there was an error in that the Judge had  not
    dealt with Article 8.

12.  The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett on 4th November 2015.   In  granting
    permission to appeal she found  it  was  arguable  that  the  Appellant
    having failed to show that  he  was  divorced  the  Judge  should  have
    considered the application under Regulation  15(1)(b)  as  it  did  not
    appear to have been in issue that the marriage  between  the  Appellant
    and the Sponsor was a valid one.

13.  The Respondent replied to the grant of permission by letter dated  11th
    November 2015 indicating that she opposed the  appeal.   The  Appellant
    had applied on the basis that he  was  a  divorced  spouse  of  an  EEA
    national.  He was not able to  establish  this  material  fact  to  the
    balance of probabilities.  It did not follow inextricably that  he  was
    still married.  There was clearly some tension in the evidence  of  the
    Appellant and his witnesses.  It was entirely  open  to  the  Judge  to
    conclude that the Appellant did not establish his  case  and  therefore
    the appeal failed.  No further speculative consideration  was  required
    or necessary.

The Hearing before Me

14.  At the hearing before me the Appellant's solicitor  argued  that  there
    had clearly been an error of law. Since the Appellant was not  divorced
    at the date of the hearing, the Judge ought to have considered the case
    under Regulation 15(1)(b).  The  Appellant  had  married  in  2008  and
    resided with the Sponsor until  2015.   Authority  from  the  Court  of
    Justice of the European Union such as Diatta made clear that  whilst  a
    marriage was still in existence it was subsisting even if  the  parties
    were not residing  together.   The  Appellant  sought  to  rely  on  an
    unreported decision of the Upper Tribunal before Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Taylor sitting at Bradford on 25th October 2013 who had found an  error
    in a decision of the First-tier.  It was incumbent upon a Judge to make
    findings on whether an EEA national spouse was exercising treaty rights
    in the United Kingdom for a period of five years.  The  Judge  had  not
    done that in that particular case.  The EEA national  in  question  had
    acquired a permanent right of residence in the United  Kingdom  by  the
    date of her departure from the United  Kingdom  because  she  had  been
    exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom for a continuous  period
    of five years under Regulation 15(1)(a).  As the  EEA  national  spouse
    had obtained entitled to permanent residence so too did  the  Appellant
    in that case her husband after five years of marriage to her.

15.  In reply the Presenting Officer indicated that the  position  was  more
    prosaic than that was being put forward by the  Appellant's  solicitor.
    The Appellant had applied for a permanent residence card stating he was
    divorced from his Sponsor.  The Judge's point was  that  the  Appellant
    had not proved  his  case.   There  appeared  not  to  be  any  decided
    authorities on the meaning of Regulation 15  that  had  been  reported.
    What was important was that the Appellant's case  had  changed  between
    the application and the appeal but the Judge had not been satisfied  on
    the basis of the application put to him.

16.  In conclusion it was argued that the Appellant had said  to  the  Judge
    at the hearing that he was still married to the Sponsor, see  paragraph
    10 of the determination.  The divorce had gone through  now,  a  decree
    absolute had been issued on 11th December 2015, the decree nisi  having
    been granted earlier on 21st September 2015.  However whether a divorce
    occurred subsequent to the hearing  was  immaterial,  the  Sponsor  was
    entitled to permanent residence and  therefore  the  Appellant  was  as
    well.  The application had been made on the basis of a pending divorce.
     As no certificate of divorce had been provided the  Respondent  should
    have  considered  the  case  that  the  Appellant  was  still  married.
    Assuming an error of law was  found  the  matter  could  be  re-decided
    straightaway as there had been no finding by the Judge on  whether  the
    Sponsor was exercising treaty rights for five years.





Findings

17.  The Appellant in this case has sought to  make  an  application  for  a
    permanent residence card on two separate bases.  The  first  basis  was
    that he was divorced from an  EEA  national  who  had  been  exercising
    treaty rights and he therefore retained a right of residence from  that
    marriage.   The  difficulty  with  that  argument  was  that  when  the
    Appellant made his application to the Respondent and  indeed  when  his
    appeal was heard by the First-tier Tribunal, the  Appellant  was  still
    married to the EEA national.  He  could  not  therefore  succeed  under
    Regulation 10 of the 2006  Regulations  as  a  family  member  who  had
    retained the right of residence.

18.  For the Appellant to show an error of law in the First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision to dismiss his appeal, the Appellant must show that his second
    argument based on the fact that he was still married to the Sponsor was
    a valid one but not considered adequately by the  First-tier.  Although
    it is correct that the Appellant accepted at first instance that he was
    not divorced from  the  Sponsor  it  is  not  at  all  clear  from  the
    determination that the second argument which would be under  Regulation
    15 of the 2006 Regulations was made with any force  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

19.  Regulation 15 sets out the categories of persons who  are  entitled  to
    acquire the right to reside in the United Kingdom  permanently.   There
    are two relevant categories for the purposes  of  this  appeal  and  in
    particular deciding whether the First-tier Tribunal has made  an  error
    of law.  Those two categories are 15(1)(a)  an  EEA  national  who  has
    exercised treaty rights for five years and (b) the family member of  an
    EEA national who has  resided  in  the  United  Kingdom  with  the  EEA
    national in accordance with the Regulations for a continuous period  of
    five years.

20.  The Appellant argues that the Sponsor acquired the right to  reside  in
    the United Kingdom permanently having resided in  accordance  with  the
    2006 Regulations.  The evidence before the Judge of that  consisted  of
    the Appellant's assertions  (to  a  certain  extent  supported  by  his
    witnesses) and the  documentary  evidence  analysed  by  the  Judge  at
    paragraph  9  of  the  determination  (see  paragraph  6  above).   The
    Appellant's case was not helped at first instance by the untidy  bundle
    presented to the Judge which amongst other matters was intended to show
    that the Sponsor had been exercising treaty  rights  for  a  continuous
    period of five years.  There were wage slips for  the  period  2013  to
    2015 and self-employment tax returns for the period 2009 to 2013.   The
    Judge did not make a specific finding that these documents could not be
    relied upon. On that basis when considering whether an error of law has
    arisen I proceed on the assumption that the Sponsor could show she  was
    exercising treaty rights for a continuous period of five years or more.

21.  That  means  that  one  moves  on  to  Regulation  15(1)(b)  where  the
    Appellant must show that he has resided in the United Kingdom with  the
    Sponsor in accordance with the Regulations for a continuous  period  of
    five years.  The argument put to me in submissions  was  that  "resided
    with" did not mean cohabitation between the Appellant and  the  Sponsor
    it merely meant that their marriage was still  in  existence.   By  the
    time the marriage was in fact put to an end it had lasted for more than
    five years and therefore the Appellant could satisfy  the  criteria  of
    15(1)(b).

22.  In my view the 2006 Regulations  have  to  be  given  their  plain  and
    ordinary meaning.  The words "resides with" must  mean  that  it  is  a
    condition that an Appellant can show he has resided with his or her EEA
    Sponsor before being able to satisfy the requirements  and  entitlement
    to a permanent right of residence.  The question of whether a  marriage
    is still in existence until it is terminated by divorce  is  irrelevant
    for the purposes of 15(1)(b).   It  may  be  highly  relevant  for  the
    alternative case which the Appellant initially made in his  application
    under Regulation 10 but that is not relevant where the marriage was not
    ended by divorce at the time of the application and/or hearing at first
    instance.  If Regulation 15(1)(b) had meant to say that a family member
    of an EEA national was entitled to acquire the right to reside  in  the
    United Kingdom as long as they had been married for at least five years
    to an EEA national who had themselves acquired permanent  of  residence
    then no doubt the Regulations would have said that.  They  do  not  say
    that.

23.  What the Appellant had to show was that he had been residing  with  the
    Sponsor for a period of five years.  It  is  at  this  point  that  the
    findings of the First-tier Tribunal are especially relevant.  The Judge
    did not find that the Appellant could show that he  had  been  residing
    with the Sponsor for five  years  continuous  or  otherwise.   Had  the
    Sponsor attended to give oral evidence, indeed had she been prepared to
    make a statement for these proceedings,  the  decision  may  have  been
    different but that is to engage in speculation which understandably the
    Judge did not engage in.  What the Judge  had  to  deal  with  was  the
    position before him.  He had no evidence beyond the  assertion  of  the
    Appellant which he was not prepared to accept for the reasons  he  gave
    that showed that the Appellant and  Sponsor  had  resided  together  in
    accordance with the Regulations.  The  Appellant  could  have  produced
    such evidence if for example the Sponsor had been prepared  to  make  a
    statement or attend court but she was  not  it  seems  prepared  to  do
    either.  The Sponsor did not attend the error of law hearing before  me
    notwithstanding that the Tribunal had  made  a  direction  in  standard
    terms that if an error of law was found any further evidence  that  the
    Upper Tribunal might need to consider (if  it  decided  to  remake  the
    decision) should be available to be considered at that hearing.

24.  I do not accept the argument that the  Judge  failed  to  deal  with  a
    material matter namely whether the Appellant could show he had  resided
    with the Sponsor for a continuous period of five  years  in  accordance
    with the 2006 Regulations.  The Judge made it clear that the  Appellant
    could not show that for the reasons given.  There was no error  of  law
    for the Judge to dismiss the appeal under Regulation 10 (because at the
    time of the hearing the parties were not divorced) and under Regulation
    15.

25.  A further ground of appeal was made against the Judge's  decision  that
    he had not considered Article 8.  Permission to appeal was not  granted
    on that basis and there were no arguments made to  me  in  relation  to
    Article 8.  That must be correct since the Court of  Appeal  have  made
    clear in the case of TY Sri Lanka [2015] EWCA Civ 1233  that  where  no
    removal directions are made Article 8 cannot be argued in  relation  to
    an EEA decision such as the present one which was to refuse to issue  a
    permanent residence card.  As it is not  necessary  to  have  leave  to
    remain when making an application under the 2006 Regulations, there  is
    as the First-tier Tribunal pointed out  no  reason  why  the  Appellant
    cannot make another application under Regulation 10 now that he  is  in
    fact divorced from the Sponsor.  An application may or may not succeed,
    that is a matter for an assessment by the Respondent of  the  evidence.
    What I am concerned with is whether there was an error of  law  by  the
    Judge based on the situation as it was before him at  the  time  and  I
    find there was no such error.  The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and I dismiss the Appellant's appeal against  the  decision  of
the First-tier Tribunal.

Appellant's appeal dismissed.

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 28th day of January 2016

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeal has been dismissed there can be no fee award.


Signed this 28th day of January 2016

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft

