
[pic]
IAC-PE-AW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39548/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 23rd October 2014                            |On 13th November 2014      |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                             MS Abida Kausar DAR
                          (ANONYMITY NOT retained)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Jagadeshan
For the Respondent:    Miss Johnstone


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 28th November 1967 is a citizen of Pakistan.  The
    Appellant was represented by Mr Jagadeshan of Counsel.  The  Respondent
    was represented by Miss Johnstone, a Home Office Presenting Officer.



Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom in 2007 as a  visitor  and  in
    2008 had applied for leave to remain outside the Rules on compassionate
    grounds but that was refused with no right of  appeal.   On  30th  July
    2013 she made a further application for leave  to  remain  outside  the
    Rules on human rights grounds which had been refused by the  Respondent
    on 26th September 2013.

 3. The Appellant had appealed that decision and her appeal  was  heard  by
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Bruce sitting at  Manchester  on  19th
    February 2014.  The judge  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  on  all
    grounds.

 4. Application for permission to appeal that  decision  was  made  on  3rd
    April 2014 and permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge
    Deans on 16th April 2014.  It was  said  that  the  Grounds  of  Appeal
    raised arguable errors of law.  The Respondent opposed the  application
    by letter dated 2nd May 2014.

 5. The matter comes before me firstly to decide whether an  error  of  law
    was made.

Submissions on Behalf of the Appellant

 6. Mr Jagadeshan summarised his submissions into four matters by reference
    to the Grounds of Appeal.  Firstly he  submitted  that  the  judge  had
    erred in law in transposing a test within the  Immigration  Rules  when
    considering Article 8 of the ECHR.

 7. Secondly he submitted that the judge having found that the  Appellant's
    father could not relocate to Pakistan did not weigh that factor in  the
    balance.  It was also said that there was no consideration given of the
    negative effect on the Appellant given that she had  demonstrated  that
    she would be distraught in having to leave her father  behind  and  the
    judge had imposed a subjective view of the case.

 8. Thirdly it was said that  the  judge  having  criticised  the  father's
    paternity then those were matters that should  have  been  put  to  the
    witness and alternatively it was not a fair matter to have raised.

 9. Finally it was submitted that the judge had  proceeded  on  a  mistaken
    basis in assuming the Appellant would be  a  financial  burden  on  the
    State given there was evidence within the Appellant's  bundle  to  show
    that State care for the father  would  require  expansion  which  would
    bring with it financial costs.

Submissions on Behalf of the Respondent

10. Miss Johnstone submitted that the judge had given adequate reasons  and
    had assessed proportionality under Article 8 entirely properly weighing
    up factors both for and against and had reached conclusions  that  were
    open to her.  Specifically in terms of  the  financial  matter  it  was
    submitted that the father already had a carer and there was no evidence
    that the Appellant would continue to provide care particularly  if  his
    position worsened and the State would in any event  therefore  have  to
    take up that greater cost.

11. At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision to consider
    matters raised.  I now provide that decision with my reasons.

Decisions and Reasons

12. The judge had the valuable advantage over myself or any other judge  in
    seeing and hearing the Appellant and family members giving evidence and
    having  that  evidence  tested  by  questioning.   It  is  not  without
    significance in a case such as this that is based  on  an  exercise  of
    discretion - proportionality and weighing evidence in the round.

13. The Appellant is 46 years of age and has lived all her life in Pakistan
    until coming to the UK in 2007 on a  two  year  visit  visa.   Although
    arriving on a visit visa she then applied for leave to  remain  outside
    of the Rules in April 2009 and that application  was  refused  with  no
    right of appeal.  There is no evidence to indicate why the Home  Office
    failed in their duty of removal.  The application made by the Appellant
    in 2013, the subject matter of  this  case,  is  therefore  her  second
    application to remain outside of the Rules.

14. The judge had correctly identified that the Appellant could not succeed
    under the Immigration Rules (paragraph 5).  She had also noted that for
    the Appellant to succeed outside of the Rules under Article  8  of  the
    ECHR then the guidance in Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640 applies  (paragraph
    5, footnote 1).

15. The judge had noted at paragraph 17 that:

         "Recent jurisprudence has been that I must look  carefully  at  the
         case before I can even contemplate Article 8 outside of the  Rules.
         That is because the Rules as presently drafted have been  found  to
         be a complete code for the consideration of Article 8 of  the  ECHR
         approved by Parliament for that purpose R  (Nagre)  v  SSHD  [2013]
         EWCA Civ 1192".

16. There has been a substantial amount of recent case law  emanating  from
    the Tribunal and the  Superior  Courts  regarding  Article  8  and  its
    relationship with recent legislation.  It  is  difficult  to  say  that
    those cases present a uniform, simple or cohesive explanation  of  that
    relationship.   The  judge  was  correct  to  say   that   the   recent
    jurisprudence means a judge has to look carefully at a case outside  of
    the Rules under Article 8 of the ECHR, when  compared  to  the  earlier
    approach adopted.  It may well be it was an overstatement by the  judge
    to say that "the Rules had been found to  be  a  complete  code".   The
    Rules can be regarded as a complete code if the specified  Rules  under
    examination  have  a  built-in  discretionary  element,  such   as   in
    deportation as in the case of R (Nagre) referred to by the judge.

17. However if that overstatement amounted to an error of law  it  was  not
    material because in the next paragraph (18) the judge provided  reasons
    why she decided to look at Article 8 outside of the Rules, having found
    compelling reasons so to do.  She further indicated (paragraph 18) that
    she looked at Article 8 of the ECHR  within  the  framework  of  Razgar
    [2004] UKHL 27.

18. The judge had concluded that notwithstanding the Appellant was an adult
    there was  family  life  existing  between  her  and  her  parents  and
    accordingly  had  looked  at   the   fifth   stage   test   of   Razgar
    (proportionality) at paragraphs 19 to 32.

19. The judge was criticised for raising doubts concerning the paternity of
    the Appellant.  It is said that she should have raised such matter with
    the Appellant and witnesses as it  was  not  a  matter  raised  by  the
    Respondent.  The judge having  heard  evidence  from  the  parties  had
    clearly formed  views  upon  that  evidence  and  did  not  shirk  from
    expressing matters in the determination.   She  was  entitled  to  form
    views based upon the evidence from  those  individuals.   She  made  it
    clear that the question in her mind  about  paternity  arose  from  the
    significantly different way the  Appellant  had  been  treated  by  her
    father as opposed to her other male and  female  siblings.   Again  the
    judge was entitled to raise such concerns.  It  could  well  have  been
    however an error of law for the judge to have proceeded  on  the  basis
    that the Appellant was not the daughter/sibling of the  Sponsors  given
    that the relationship had never been raised by the Respondent or at the
    hearing.  However as a reading of the determination clearly reveals the
    judge did proceed  throughout  on  the  basis  the  Appellant  was  the
    daughter/sibling of the Sponsors.  Firstly as noted above at  paragraph
    19 she had found family life existed  between  the  Appellant  and  her
    parents.  Secondly the judge specifically noted at paragraph 24  "I  am
    however required to make findings on the evidence  before  me  and  the
    evidence before me is she is the daughter of Mr and Mrs  Majeed  and  I
    assess proportionality on that basis".  It could not have  been  stated
    more plainly.

20. The judge was also criticised and it was said to be an error of law for
    her  to  import  the  requirements  of  E-ECDR.2.4  and  2.5  into  her
    consideration   (paragraph   29).    The   judge   needed   to   assess
    proportionality or otherwise of removal of the Appellant  from  the  UK
    and her family members.  It was fact specific and required an  exercise
    of discretion and judgment.   The  judge  had  noted  that  whilst  the
    Immigration Rules had provision for a family member to enter the UK  to
    be looked after by a UK based carer (E-ECDR.2.4 and 2.5)  the  converse
    (applicable in this case) was not catered for  within  the  Immigration
    Rules.  That was one of the reasons why the judge at paragraph  18  had
    found reason for examining this case under Article 8 of the ECHR.   The
    judge had looked at the  requirements  of  E-ECDR.2.4  and  2.5  as  an
    instructive and perhaps useful aid for assessing  what  may  be  deemed
    proportionate or not under  Article  8  of  the  ECHR  in  the  reverse
    position given the absence of such provisions within  the  Rules.   The
    judge could perhaps have concluded that the absence of such  provisions
    within the Rules demonstrated that Parliament did not believe the entry
    and settlement in the UK of a family member solely to be a carer was in
    any circumstances proportionate within the terms of Article  8  of  the
    ECHR otherwise there may well  have  been  such  provision  within  the
    Immigration Rules.  However she did not so conclude but merely used the
    guidance within E-ECDR.2.4 and 2.5  as  a  useful  tool  to  assist  in
    assessing proportionality.  That was a reasonable and  indeed  sensible
    mechanism adopted.  However the judge had at paragraphs 30 to 32 looked
    at other features when assessing proportionality in the round.

21.  The  judge  contrary  to  submissions  made  had  not  overlooked  the
    Appellant's emotional ties or asserted wishes:

         "I am prepared to accept that the bond with her  father  has  since
         2008 been cemented by the fact she is  now  his  full-time  carer."
         (paragraph 20)

         "I  find  myself  hugely  sympathetic   towards   the   Appellant."
         (paragraph 23)

         "I have considered the emotional impact upon the Appellant and  the
         wider family of her return to Pakistan." (paragraph 30)

         "As far as the Appellant is concerned  she  is  clearly  a  devoted
         carer who sees it as her role to look after her  elderly  parents".
         (paragraph 30)

22. However a decision on proportionality  under  Article  8  of  the  ECHR
    cannot be based simply on the wishes of the Appellant alone.

23. The judge had concluded in terms of proportionality that there  was  no
    reason for the Appellant to be in the UK  other  than  as  a  full-time
    carer for her father.  That was a proper finding based on the evidence.
     She found other family members could assist in care (paragraphs 27  to
    28).  The father had recourse to social care available within  the  UK.
    There was reference at paragraph  31  of  the  financial  cost  to  the
    country.  That clearly arose from a submission made on the  Appellant's
    behalf that if she was removed paid State care would  be  required  and
    that would increase the cost  to  the  UK  and  thereby  obviating  the
    economic wellbeing argument.  The judge did not necessarily accept that
    in the long-term that argument was valid.  She was  entitled  to  reach
    that view.  Firstly a financial "balance sheet" is speculative  but  as
    the judge had pointed out there were other  family  members  who  could
    assist with care.  Secondly she noted that long-term the  cost  to  the
    economy of a new person, unskilled and with little English  could  well
    outweigh the short-term gain in her remaining as an unpaid carer.   The
    judge was entitled to reach that conclusion; indeed it is likely to  be
    entirely a correct financial conclusion.  It is also noteworthy that in
    referencing the Appellant's lack  of  English  the  judge  was  several
    months in advance, echoing the wording of the Immigration Act 2014.

24. This was a careful, detailed and balanced decision where the judge  was
    exercising a proportionality test based on evidence that she heard from
    a number of key witnesses additional to the Appellant.  It was  neither
    unreasonable, unbalanced or failed to follow the case law and  guidance
    despite the lack of a clear, simple and cohesive pathway in  this  area
    of the law.





Notice of Decision

There was no error of law made by the judge in this case and  I  uphold  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity order is made.






Signed                              Date 12th November 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever


