
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39537/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 24 August 2016                         |On 11 October 2016                |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                            MR AMIT ALOYSH MACWAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     The Appellant did not attend and was not represented
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Senior Presenting Officer


             DECISION/ NOTICE THAT APPEAL ABANDONED AND REASONS

   1. This matter has a somewhat  long  and  convoluted  history.   For  the
      reasons submitted by Ms Ahmad before us and which we  set  out  below,
      there was no valid appeal before Judge Pullig and  nor  is  there  any
      appeal before us, such appeal as was made  having  to  be  treated  as
      abandoned by reason of the Appellant's departure from the UK on 26 May
      2016.  However, in light of the rather confused position and since the
      Appellant was not present (for good reason)  and  the  solicitors  who
      lodged the appeal or application  for  permission  to  appeal  (Farani
      Javid Taylor) did not attend, we agreed with Ms Ahmad  that  we  would
      provide a reasoned decision in writing as to the position rather  than
      simply  indicate  that  the  appeal  is  treated  as  abandoned.    We
      satisfied ourselves at the start of the hearing that notice of it  was
      sent to Farani Javid Taylor.  There was no application  before  us  to
      adjourn the hearing nor any explanation provided for their failure  to
      attend.  We therefore decided that it was in the interests of  justice
      that we proceed, particularly in light of the view we have taken about
      the validity and continuing existence of an appeal.

   2. The appeal is originally against a decision made by the Respondent  on
      22 September 2014 curtailing the Appellant's leave as a Tier 4 student
      on  the  basis  that  he  had  exercised  deception.   The  Notice  of
      Immigration Decision is a notice of removal (an IS151A  Part  2)  made
      under section 10 Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 on the basis that the
      Appellant has exercised deception.   This  gave  rise  to  an  out  of
      country right of appeal.  The accompanying IS151A provided a statement
      of reasons for the decision to remove as follows:-

         "You are specifically considered a person who has sought  leave  to
         remain in the United Kingdom by deception.   For  the  purposes  of
         your application dated 20 July 2012, you  submitted  a  certificate
         from Educational Testing Service ("ETS") to the Home  Office.   ETS
         has a record of  your  speaking  test.   Using  voice  verification
         software, ETS is able to detect when a single person is undertaking
         multiple tests.  ETS undertook a check of your test  and  confirmed
         to the SSHD that there was significant evidence  to  conclude  that
         your certificate was fraudulently obtained by the use  of  a  proxy
         test taker.  Your scores from the test taken on  17  July  2012  at
         Seven Oaks College have now been cancelled by ETS.  On the basis of
         the information provided to her by ETS, the SSHD is satisfied  that
         there is substantial evidence to conclude that your certificate was
         fraudulently obtained."

   3. We make two further observations about the background to the appeal at
      this point which are relevant to what follows.  The first is that, the
      Respondent's decision having been made prior to 6 April 2015  and  not
      being one to which the interim transitional  provisions  applied,  the
      right of appeal arose under the appeal provisions prior to the  coming
      into force of  the  Immigration  Act  2014.   As  such,  the  decision
      generating the right of appeal was not a refusal  of  a  human  rights
      claim but a section 10 notice  of  removal  which  is  an  immigration
      decision under section 82(2)(g) Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
      Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act") as then  in  force.   As  a  result  of  The
      Immigration Act  2014  (Commencement  No  3  Transitional  and  Saving
      Provisions) Order 2014 (SI No 2771 of 2014) ("the 2014 Order") and the
      Immigration Act  2014  (Commencement  No  4  Transitional  and  Saving
      Provisions and Amendment) Order 2015 (SI No 371 of  2015)  ("the  2015
      Order"), the "saved provisions" which include Part V of the  2002  Act
      as in force prior to the Immigration Act 2014 apply.  Paragraph  8  of
      the 2015 Order amending paragraph 9  of  the  2014  Order  at  9(1)(d)
      provides that the saved  provisions  have  effect  in  relation  to  a
      decision made before 6 April 2015 in relation to which an  appeal  was
      pending at that date.  The appeal in this case was  originally  lodged
      on 4 October 2014.

   4. The second matter relates to an application made by the  Appellant  on
      30 September 2014 (that is after the Respondent's  decision  was  made
      and served) as a dependent on his wife's Tier 4 application.  His wife
      apparently had leave to remain  as  a  student  until  February  2016.
      Farani Javid Taylor rely on that application in their letter  dated  8
      December 2014 as having formed the basis  of  a  human  rights  claim.
      Their letter dated 8 December 2014 states as follows:-

         "It is our instructions that  the  Appellant  submitted  a  Tier  4
         dependent application on  the  basis  of  his  partner,  which  did
         encompass a human rights element to the extent that they enjoyed  a
         private and family life together as husband and wife."

    The difficulty with that assertion is that there is no evidence of that
    application or the covering letter to it  before  us  and  nor  was  it
    produced or relied upon before Judge  Pullig.  As  such,  there  is  no
    evidence that a claim was in fact made rather than  being  implied  (on
    the Appellant's case) by reason of the nature of the application.

   5. With that introduction, we move on to consider the decision  of  Judge
      Pullig which is the foundation of the appeal before us.  That decision
      (hereafter "the Decision") was promulgated on 17 December  2015.   The
      Appellant was not present or represented at that appeal.  Farani Javid
      Taylor asked for the appeal to be determined on the papers.

   6. The Judge properly reminded himself at [2] of the  Decision  that  the
      appeal proceeded under the provisions prior to the coming  into  force
      of the Immigration Act 2014.  The Judge set out at  [3]  to  [11]  the
      background of the appeal to that date.  He rightly noted that  it  was
      relevant to know  whether  the  Appellant  had  made  a  human  rights
      application (perhaps more accurately a  "claim")  to  the  Respondent.
      There is nothing to suggest that he received a positive answer to  the
      directions which he had previously given asking the Appellant  or  his
      solicitors to confirm this.  The Judge appears to have thought that he
      had no copy of the letter giving  the  reasons  for  the  Respondent's
      decision.  That is incorrect as the IS151A to which we  refer  at  [2]
      above was with the grounds.  As we  have  already  noted,  the  IS151A
      provided the reasons for the Respondent's decision.  That may not have
      been  with  the  original  faxed  appeal  grounds  (submitted  by  the
      Appellant in person) but it was certainly with the bundle submitted by
      the Respondent to the Tribunal on 5 November 2015.  The Judge referred
      to the Appellant having raised Article 8 ECHR in his grounds  but,  of
      course, following the Court of Appeal's judgment in  Nirula  v  First-
      tier  Tribunal  (Asylum  and  Immigration  Chamber)  and  another  and
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 1436,  that
      could not constitute a claim for the purposes of section  92(4)(a)  of
      the 2002 Act.

   7. It is at this point  that  the  Judge  fell  into  fundamental  error.
      Having sought a copy of the letter giving reasons for the Respondent's
      decision from the Respondent's representative who was present and  not
      having received that, the Judge went on to say as follows (at [5]):-

         "If that is the case it is difficult to know the basis  upon  which
         the decision to remove the appellant was made.  If that decision is
         lawful then it gives rise to an in country right of appeal  but  if
         it was not of course there is no valid appeal before me."

         [our emphasis]

    That observation is clearly  in  error.   The  Judge  appears  to  have
    understood that the Respondent's decision under appeal was a section 10
    decision ([1] of the Decision) and, it appears, received  nothing  from
    the Appellant to confirm that a human rights claim had been made to the
    Respondent so that the only reference was to Article 8 in  the  grounds
    of appeal which was insufficient to amount  to  a  human  rights  claim
    under section 92(4)(a) of the 2002 Act.  The Judge should therefore  at
    that point have concluded that he had no valid appeal before him as the
    right of appeal was one exercisable only from outside the UK.  Instead,
    the Judge went on to consider validity  on  an  alternative  basis  and
    dismissed the appeal "for want of jurisdiction" for procedural  reasons
    at [24] to [28] of the Decision.  For  those  reasons,  if  we  had  to
    determine this appeal  substantively,  we  would  have  set  aside  the
    Decision on the basis that it contains an error of law in  relation  to
    the reasons given for the invalidity of the appeal.

   8. The Judge having concluded that there  was  no  jurisdiction  for  the
      reasons he gave, then went on at [29] to say as follows:-

         "However it may well be  that  the  respondent  may  make  a  fresh
         decision or the appellant may appeal again out  of  time.   If  the
         latter then I would invite the Duty Judge who may  receive  a  late
         notice of appeal to extend time given the importance of  the  issue
         raised by the appellant, namely the allegation of deception."

   9. The Judge's remark at [29] of the Decision appears  to  have  prompted
      the further action taken by the Appellant's representatives which  led
      to the hearing before us.  On 7  January  2016,  Farani  Javid  Taylor
      lodged an appeal to the First-tier Tribunal purporting to be an appeal
      against the Respondent's decision dated 22  September  2014  asserting
      that, since the Appellant had  initially  appealed  in  time  and  his
      appeal had been dismissed for the reasons given by  Judge  Pullig  but
      with the observation made at [29] of the Decision, time  ought  to  be
      extended for what would be in effect a second appeal.

  10. The grounds included reference to a preliminary issue to  be  decided.
      The Appellant asserted that he qualified for a full  right  of  appeal
      against the Respondent's decision based on  Nirula  (see  [6]  above).
      Leaving aside whether the Court of  Appeal's  judgment  can  bear  the
      analysis placed on it by the Appellant's solicitors (that the Tribunal
      can "assume jurisdiction and/or  air  any  doubts  it  has  about  its
      jurisdiction and invite submissions on  that  question")  the  reasons
      given for the assertion that there  exists  an  in  country  right  of
      appeal are wholly unmeritorious.  It is argued  that  because  of  the
      severity of the allegation of deception, the Appellant should be given
      an in country right of appeal.  That might be an argument which  could
      be put forward by way of judicial review (although now likely to  fail
      in light of Court of Appeal authority) but it runs completely contrary
      to the primary legislation set out in Part V of the 2002 Act. There is
      no reference to the statutory framework which  applied  prior  to  the
      Immigration Act 2014 to determine whether there was a right of  appeal
      and, if so, the forum of that appeal.  As  such,  those  grounds  were
      positively misleading.

  11. We turn then finally to the grant of permission to  appeal  of  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Robertson dated 21 July 2016.  As Judge  Robertson
      rightly observes at [2] of his decision, there can be no question of a
      second  appeal  against  the  same   decision   of   the   Respondent.
      Accordingly, the appeal documents were treated as an  application  for
      permission to appeal.  The reason for the grant is  that  the  grounds
      were arguable because, as we have noted at [6]  to  [7]  above,  Judge
      Pullig's  reasons  for  finding  that  he  had  no  jurisdiction  were
      procedural ones based on the lack of any reasons  for  refusal  letter
      (which was itself  incorrect  on  the  facts).   The  Judge  had  also
      arguably overlooked the submissions made in the  Appellant's  skeleton
      argument.  Judge Robertson therefore decided that it was arguable that
      Judge Pullig erred in deciding that he had no jurisdiction to hear the
      appeal and time was extended.

  12.  It  is  somewhat  unfortunate  that  the  grounds  submitted  by  the
      Appellant's solicitors were misleading as we have already  noted.   We
      note the duty of solicitors appearing before both  this  Tribunal  and
      the First-tier Tribunal not to mislead  the  Tribunal.   We  are  also
      unimpressed by other conduct of this particular  firm  in  failing  to
      attend the hearing before us without any explanation and also, perhaps
      more importantly, failing to notify the Tribunal  that  the  Appellant
      has left the UK, the effect of which is, as we  note  at  [17]  below,
      that the appeal must be treated as abandoned.  This  has  led  to  the
      listing of an appeal for hearing unnecessarily with  the  impact  that
      has on other appeals which could have been heard instead and  a  waste
      of the Tribunal's time and resources.

  13. It is equally unfortunate though that the Presenting  Officer  in  the
      First-tier Tribunal did  not  point  out  the  obvious  problems  with
      validity of the appeal in this case and nor is the point raised in the
      Rule 24 statement (although we note  that  this  may  be  because  the
      appeal had by that stage to be treated as abandoned  -  a  point  with
      which we deal below). Indeed, the Rule 24 statement  seeks  to  uphold
      Judge Pullig's Decision.

  14. If we had been in the position of having to re-make  the  decision  in
      the appeal, having found an error of law in Judge  Pullig's  Decision,
      we would have found that there was no valid  appeal  before  us.   The
      right  of  appeal  generated  by  the  Respondent's  decision  is  one
      exercisable only from outside the UK unless a human  rights  claim  is
      made (to the Respondent and not in the grounds of  appeal).   We  have
      seen no evidence of such a claim being made to the Respondent and none
      has been expressly relied upon by the Appellant or his solicitors.  We
      note of course that the Appellant was given an out of country right of
      appeal by the Respondent's decision dated 22 September 2014.   He  has
      now left the UK.  He can therefore pursue an  out  of  country  appeal
      although it appears  that  he  would  now  be  outside  the  time  for
      appealing.

  15. We turn finally to the reason why there is no longer an appeal  before
      us.  Section 104(4) of the 2002 Act (which is a provision within  Part
      V) provides as follows:-

         "An appeal under section 82(1) brought by a person while he  is  in
         the United Kingdom shall be treated as abandoned if  the  appellant
         leaves the United Kingdom"

  16. Ms Ahmad pointed us to section 17A of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
      Tribunal) Rules 2008 which provides as follows:-

         "Appeal treated as abandoned or finally  determined  in  an  asylum
         case or an immigration case

         17A. -   (1)  A party to an asylum  case  or  an  immigration  case
                before the Upper Tribunal must notify the  [Upper]  Tribunal
                if they are aware that-

                   (a) the appellant has left the United Kingdom;

                   ...

                (2)    Where an appeal is treated as abandoned  pursuant  to
                section 104(4) or (4A) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
                Asylum Act 2002(d) or paragraph 4(2) of Schedule  2  to  the
                Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006, or as
                finally  determined  pursuant  to  section  104(5)  of   the
                Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002,  the  Upper
                Tribunal must send the parties a notice informing them  that
                the  appeal  is  being  treated  as  abandoned  or   finally
                determined."

  17. We noted at [3] above, that part V of  the  2002  Act  which  includes
      section 104(4) continues to apply to this appeal  notwithstanding  its
      repeal by the Immigration Act 2014.  Accordingly, this appeal must  be
      treated as abandoned.

Decision

The Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Pullig promulgated on 17  December
2015 contains an error of law.  We would therefore have set that  aside  and
substituted our own decision finding that there is no  valid  appeal  before
us.  However, since the Appellant left the UK on 26  May  2016  and  section
104(4) Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 applies to this  appeal,
the appeal is to be treated as abandoned.  We hereby  give  notice  to  that
effect.

Signed:  [pic]    Dated: 7 October 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

