
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39200/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |            Decision & Reasons      |
|                                         |Promulgated                         |
|On 8 July 2015                           |            On 14 July 2015         |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF

                                   Between

                                 SANDEEP RAI
                       (anonymity direction Not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Duncan of Counsel instructed by NC Brothers
& Co, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms E Savage of the Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a subject of the Kingdom of Nepal, born on 12 December
    1984.  In 2011 he entered with leave as a student expiring on  2  March
    2013.  In time, he applied for indefinite leave to remain  outside  the
    Immigration Rules on the basis that he was a dependent of his father, a
    retired Gurkha soldier.  Between 2002 and coming to the United  Kingdom
    as a student he had studied in the United States.

The Decision

 2. On 6 September 2013 the Respondent refused the Appellant's  application
    on the basis that it was for a purpose not covered by  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The Appellant was at the date of decision 28 years old and  the
    Respondent considered he would be able to  support  himself  in  Nepal,
    having had the benefit of education in the United States and the United
    Kingdom.  He had lived away from his parents for over ten years  before
    coming to the United Kingdom.  The argument that Gurkhas  had  suffered
    an historic injustice by being refused settlement in the United Kingdom
    before 1997 had to be taken into account but was not determinative  and
    the circumstances of the Appellant's case  were  not  exceptional  such
    that he should be  granted  settlement.   The  Respondent  proposed  to
    remove him to Nepal.

 3. The Appellant did not meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE of  the
    Immigration Rules.  He had failed to establish there  were  exceptional
    circumstances or sufficiently compelling or compassionate circumstances
    which would merit granting him leave to remain outside the  Immigration
    Rules or by way of reference to Article 8 of the European Convention.

 4. On 25 September 2013  the  Appellant  lodged  notice  of  appeal  under
    Section 82 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  as
    amended (the 2002 Act).  The  grounds  referred  to  the  judgments  in
    Sharmila Gurung and Others v SSHD [2012] EWHC 1629 (Admin) and UG,  NT,
    RM and YP (Nepal) v ECO [2012] EWCA Civ 58.  The grounds  asserted  the
    Respondent's decision was oppressive and arbitrary.

The First-tier Tribunal's Determination

 5. By a determination promulgated on 24 September 2014 Judge of the First-
    tier  Tribunal  Prior  dismissed  the  appeal.   The  Appellant  sought
    permission to appeal which on 12 November 2014 Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal P J M Hollingworth refused.  The application  was  renewed  on
    the same grounds to the Upper  Tribunal  where  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Archer granted permission to appeal on the grounds  that  it  was
    arguable the Judge had disregarded the purpose of the  policy  and  the
    historic  injustice  argument  in  respect  of  dependants  of   Gurkha
    soldiers, had failed to account of the difficulty the Appellant or  his
    father would have in producing evidence of intention to settle  in  the
    United Kingdom on the Appellant's father retiring from the  Brigade  of
    Gurkhas and had failed to make clear findings on the evidence.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 6. The Appellant and his  father  attended  the  hearing.   In  the  event
    neither of them gave evidence.  Mr Duncan for the Appellant  relied  on
    the grounds submitted in  support  of  the  application  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal for permission to appeal.  The Judge had failed to  take  into
    account the historic  injustice  worked  on  the  Gurkhas.   Indeed  at
    para.25 of his determination he had concluded that no weight should  be
    attached to it.  At paragraph 59 of the determination  in  Ghising  and
    Others (Gurkhas/BOCs: Historic wrong: weight) [2013] UKUT 567 (IAC) the
    Upper Tribunal had accepted the submission that:

         "... where Article 8 is held to be engaged and the  fact  that  but
         for the historic wrong the Appellant would have been settled in the
         UK long ago is established,  this  will  ordinarily  determine  the
         outcome of the proportionality assessment; and determine it  in  an
         Appellant's favour.  The explanation for this is to be  found,  not
         in any concept of new or additional "burdens" but, rather,  in  the
         weight to be afforded to the historic wrong/settlement issue  in  a
         proportionality balancing exercise.   That,  we  consider,  is  the
         proper interpretation of what the Court of Appeal were saying  when
         they referred to the historic injustice as being such an  important
         factor to be taken into account in the balancing exercise.  ... the
         historic injustice issue will  carry  significant  weight,  on  the
         Appellant's side of the balance, and  is  likely  to  outweigh  the
         matters relied on by the Respondent, where these consist solely  of
         the public interest ... "

 7. The Judge had set the bar for establishing an intention  to  settle  in
    the United Kingdom at too high a level at para.22 of his determination.
     Further, there had been no cross-examination or  submissions  made  on
    this  particular  issue.   Absent  any  challenge,  he  submitted  this
    amounted to a material error of law as identified at  para.  2  of  the
    Upper Tribunal's grant  of  permission.   There  was  evidence  of  the
    intention of and desire of the Appellant's  father  to  settle  in  the
    United Kingdom.

 8. The Judge had not given due appreciation to the case  law  specific  to
    the children of former members of the  Brigade  of  Gurkhas.   At  this
    point he added the Appellant's mother had died some two months  earlier
    which was a change in circumstance since the appeal had been  heard  in
    the First-tier Tribunal.  The Judge had in any event failed to make any
    fact specific findings in his assessment of  the  family  life  of  the
    Appellant which had been re-established on his  coming  to  the  United
    Kingdom in 2011.  At para 26 of his determination the Judge had said he
    was not satisfied there were sufficiently close emotional ties  on  the
    part of the Appellant to his parents to constitute family  life.   This
    did not pay regard to the Sponsor's stated intention and hope that  the
    family would be able to establish  itself  as  a  unit  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  Additionally, the Judge had not made  any  reference  to  the
    financial support given to the Appellant  by  members  of  his  family.
    Further, the Judge had not taken into account the  fact  the  Appellant
    had no family in Nepal.

 9. The Respondent's claim was there was no clear and unchallenged evidence
    that the Appellant's father in 1989 or 1990 wished  to  settle  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The Judge had failed to take account  that  there  had
    been no mechanism for the Appellant or his  father  to  settle  in  the
    United Kingdom until after the Appellant had become an adult.

10. Mr Duncan relied on the determination in Ghising and concluded that the
    Judge had failed to take into account that it had not been possible for
    the Appellant's father to  settle  in  the  United  Kingdom  until  the
    Appellant had ceased to be a child.

11. For the Respondent, Ms Savage relied on the  response  under  Procedure
    Rule 24.  The Judge had properly considered the evidence as well as the
    relevant policies and case law.  The Appellant had not shown there  was
    any existing family life and the Judge  had  not  been  satisfied  that
    there were sufficiently close ties between the Appellant and his family
    in the United Kingdom to meet the test in Kugathas v Immigration Appeal
    Tribunal [2003] EWCA Civ 31.  The Appellant had been at boarding school
    from 1998 until 2002 when he had gone to the United States where he had
    been living independently of his parents.   When  he  had  entered  the
    United Kingdom in 2011 he had not evinced any intention to remain.   On
    this basis it was open to the Judge to make his findings.

12. She referred to paragraphs 47 and 48 of the judgment in R  (Gurung  and
    Others) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 8 in which the Court of Appeal had found
    in respect of two appellants aged 24 and 26 at the  relevant  time  and
    were living in Nepal that the First-tier Tribunal did not err in law in
    considering in the circumstances which it  had  found  that  there  was
    little evidence of family life between the appellants and their  father
    who was their Sponsor, although he supported them  financially  as  was
    expected in Nepalese culture.  These were  findings  similar  to  those
    made by the Judge at para.26 of his determination.  The Judge had  been
    entitled to make the finding about  the  absence  of  family  life  and
    nevertheless he had considered the proportionality of his decision.  At
    para.21 he had referred to policy considerations  arising  out  of  the
    historic injustice and at para.22  to  the  lack  of  evidence  of  the
    Appellant's father's intention to settle in the United Kingdom.  It was
    notable the Appellant had remained  in  the  United  States  after  his
    father had obtained leave and entered the United Kingdom in 2004 but he
    stayed in the United States until coming to the United Kingdom in 2011.



13. Mr Duncan reiterated the point that the appellants  in  R  (Gurung  and
    Others) were out of the country and the Appellant in this case had been
    in the United Kingdom since 2011.  At paragraph 42  of  R  (Gurung  and
    Others) the Court of Appeal had said:

         If a Gurkha can show that, but for the historic injustice, he would
         have settled in the UK at a time when  his  dependant  (now)  adult
         child would have been able to accompany him as  a  dependent  child
         under the age of 18, that is a strong reason for holding that it is
         proportionate to permit the adult child to join his family now  ...
         .

    He referred to paragraphs 3 and 4 of the headnote in the  determination
    in Ghising:

         (3)  What concerned the Court in Gurung  and  Others  was  not  the
             burden of  proof  but,  rather,  the  issue  of  weight  in  a
             proportionality assessment.  The  Court  held  that,  ...  the
             historic wrong suffered  by  Gurkha  ex-servicemen  should  be
             given substantial weight.

         (4)  Accordingly, where it is found that Article 8 is engaged  and,
             but for the historic wrong,  the  Appellant  would  have  been
             settled in the UK long ago, this will ordinarily determine the
             outcome of the Article  8  proportionality  assessment  in  an
             Appellant's  favour,  where  the  matters  relied  on  by  the
             Secretary of State... consist solely of the public interest in
             maintaining a firm immigration policy.

    The First-tier Tribunal's determination contained an error of  law  and
    should be set aside.





Findings and Consideration

14. The Judge referred to para.59 of Ghising at para.21 and then  concluded
    that there was not clear and unchallenged evidence that the Appellant's
    father had wished to settle in the United Kingdom.  This failed to take
    into account the statements made by the Appellant's father  about  what
    he would have done if he had had a right of settlement  in  the  United
    Kingdom and been informed of it when  he  had  completed  his  military
    service had not been challenged at the First-tier  Tribunal's  hearing.
    His conclusion at para.25 that no weight  should  be  attached  to  the
    historic wrong in the absence of any materially  adverse  matters  does
    not reflect the learning contained in headnote 3 of  the  determination
    in Ghising.

15. The Appellant had been in the United Kingdom living  with  his  parents
    for some three years by the time of the First-tier Tribunal's  hearing.
    The claim finding at para.26 that in effect there was  no  family  life
    between the Appellant and his  parents  was  unsupported.   It  is  not
    difficult to establish family life.  The issue which the  Judge  needed
    to have addressed was whether family life was  of  a  nature  that  the
    decision to remove constituted an interference with  it  sufficient  to
    engage Article 8 and the State's obligations under Article 8 and if  so
    whether the decision  to  remove  was  proportionate  to  the  need  to
    maintain proper immigration control.  Again the Judge did not take into
    account what was said about proportionality in  such  circumstances  at
    para.59 of the determination  in  Ghising.   These  errors  would  have
    seriously affected the Judge's assessment of the claim under Article  8
    of the European Convention.

16. The test  propounded  by  the  Tribunal  in  Gulshan  [2013]  UKUT  640
    (IAC).was not as stated at para.27 of the Judge's determination, namely
    exceptional and compassionate circumstances. The test was  "exceptional
    circumstances" meaning circumstances in which refusal would  result  in
    unjustifiably harsh consequences for the  individual  or  their  family
    such that refusal of the application would not  be  proportionate:  see
    para.15 of Gulshan.

17. For these  reasons  I  find  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  determination
    contains errors of law such that it is unsafe and should be  set  aside
    in its entirety.

18. I enquired whether parties were ready to proceed.  Mr  Duncan  reminded
    me that  the  Appellant's  mother  had  passed  away  some  two  months
    previously  so  that  there  were  now  changed  circumstances  and  so
    additional statements would need to prepared.   Having  set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal, s.12(2) of the  Tribunals,  Courts
    and Enforcement Act 2007 allows for the case  to  be  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal with directions or for the Upper  Tribunal  to  re-
    make it. Having regard to the  Practice  Statement  7.2  (B)  and  that
    additional evidence will need to be obtained or prepared  may  consider
    it appropriate for the matter to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal
    for re-hearing afresh.

Anonymity

19. There was no request for an anonymity direction or order and I  do  not
    consider any is required.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contained  errors  of  law
    such that it should be set aside.  The matter is remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal for hearing afresh.



Signed/Official   Crest                                                 Date
10. vii. 2015




Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


