
[pic]
IAC-CH-AP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39113/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1st September 2015                |On 17th September 2015               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

                        mr sridhar thiruvali kuttiyan
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No representative
For the Respondent:    Mr Paul Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is an Indian national born  on  2nd  May  1989.   He  was
    granted permission to appeal a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    promulgated on 19th February 2015 dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's refusal to grant him leave to remain as a  Tier  4
    (General) Student  Migrant.   His  complaint  is  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal failed to make any decision on his Grounds of Appeal  relating
    to human rights.

 2. The Appellant wrote to the court advising that he was unable to  attend
    and inviting a determination in his absence.

 3. Mr Duffy addressed me briefly to the point that the Appellant's Grounds
    of Appeal in respect of Article 8 amounted  to  no  more  than  a  bald
    assertion, it was a moot point as to whether or not that was  a  ground
    which required determination by the judge in light of  the  absence  of
    particularisation and the Appellant's failure to adduce any written  or
    oral evidence.  If I were minded to find that  the  judge  should  have
    nonetheless determined the Article 8 ground the evidence was such  that
    only a dismissal of the ground  could  follow  and  in  that  event  he
    invited me to remake the decision to dismiss the appeal on the  Article
    8 ground.

My Consideration and Findings

 4. The Appellant has not made any application  to  adduce  any  additional
    evidence to that before the First-tier Tribunal.  His Ground of  Appeal
    at paragraph 12 states:

         "12. It is also submitted that the Secretary of State has not given
             due consideration to the appellant's right under Article 8  of
             the ECHR.

         13.  It is submitted that the appellant has  private  life  in  the
             United Kingdom.

         14.  Appellant is an International student present  in  the  United
             Kingdom.

         15.  He has already paid his course fee.

         16.  The interference of the respondent is not  according  to  law,
             not necessary in a democratic society, public safety,  or  for
             the economic well-being of the country or for  the  prevention
             of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or  morals,
             or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others."

 5. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  accurately  records  that  the
    Appellant failed to attend the oral hearing that he had requested.   He
    provided no explanation for his  absence.   He  failed  to  submit  any
    evidence to support his grounds.

 6. The judge found that the Appellant had failed to submit the documentary
    evidence required to support his Tier 4 application and  dismissed  the
    appeal under the Immigration Rules.

 7. Strictly speaking the judge is required to make a decision  in  respect
    of every Ground of Appeal.  He did not make a decision  in  respect  of
    the Appellant's Article 8 Grounds of Appeal.  In those circumstances, I
    set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to  the  extent,  and
    only to the extent, that the Article 8 ground has not been  determined,
    and I remake the decision in respect of the Article 8 ground dismissing
    the Appellant's appeal.



Decision

 8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal reveals  no  error  of  law  in
    respect of the dismissal of the Appellant's appeal on Immigration Rules
    grounds and to that extent it stands.

 9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal in  respect  of  Article  8  is
    deficient for failing to formally record a decision and I  remake  that
    part of the decision and dismiss the Appellant's appeal on human rights
    grounds.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge
