
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/39104/2013
     IA/42228/2013
     IA/39105/2013
     IA/42295/2013
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 December 2015                          |On 1 June 2016                |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    J R M
                                     U J
                                    M A J
                                     M J
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   No Representation


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal brought by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department against the decision  of  First-tier  Judge  Lobo  dated  13
    October 2014 in which he allowed an appeal brought by the  above  named
    applicants against the decisions of the Secretary  of  State  dated  10
    September 2013 to refuse to vary their leave  to  remain  and  to  make
    decisions under Section 47 Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006
    to remove them. In this decision I shall refer to the parties  as  they
    were before the First  tier,  that  is  that  the  applicants  are  the
    Appellants, and the Secretary of State for the Home Department  is  the
    Respondent.

2.   The members of the family are Mr Malik, presently aged 46, Mrs  Javaid,
    presently aged  40,  Moeez  Javaid,  date  of  birth  15  August  2002,
    presently aged 13 and Mooaaz  Javaid,  date  of  birth  2  March  2007,
    presently aged 8.

3.   The first Appellant has been present in the United Kingdom  with  valid
    leave to remain as a student since 21 January  2004  (the  Respondent's
    decision letter suggests that this was  21  June  2004  but  the  first
    Appellant's entry clearance valid from 22 December 2003 to 28  February
    2005 is within the Respondent's bundle at Annex  H  and  has  an  entry
    stamp on it dated 21 January 2004). The  second  and  third  Appellants
    have been present since 14 June 2005 (see her entry clearance, Annex H;
    page 3 of the original grounds of appeal from the Respondent's decision
    to the FtT; and  the  findings  of  the  judge  at  [13]).  The  fourth
    Appellant was born in the United Kingdom.

4.   The Appellants obtained successive grants of leave to remain, up to  30
    August 2012.
     On 28 August 2012 they applied  for  a  variation  of  their  leave  to
    remain on the basis of their  private  and  family  lives  in  the  UK,
    relying upon Immigration Rule 276ADE  and  Article  8  outside  of  the
    Rules. At the  time  of  that  application,  the  third  Appellant  had
    therefore been present in the United Kingdom for more than 7 years.

5.   A relevant consideration in this matter is that  the  fourth  Appellant
    has been diagnosed as having autistic spectrum disorder ('ASD'), having
    been diagnosed with that from the age of 3.  He receives help from  the
    Speech and Language Therapy Service of Kent.  There is a  statement  of
    special educational  needs  in  accordance  with  Section  324  of  the
    Education Act 1996.  He attends a special school.

6.   In her decision of 10 September  2013  (more  than  a  year  after  the
    application) the Respondent refused to vary leave  to  remain,  on  the
    ground that the Appellants did not in the Respondent's  view  meet  any
    relevant  Immigration  Rule,  whether  under  276ADE  or  Appendix  FM.
    Considering the matter outside the Immigration Rules the Respondent was
    of the view that  the  application  did  not  contain  any  exceptional
    circumstances that might warrant consideration by the Respondent for  a
    grant of leave to remain outside the Rules.

7.   The Appellants appealed against  that  decision,  their  appeal  coming
    before the judge at Taylor House on 30 September 2014.  The  judge  had
    before him a range of documentary evidence,  particularly  relating  to
    the fourth Appellant.  The evidence set out the  matters  mentioned  at
    [5] above. Further, there have been problems with his public  behaviour
    although these were said to have improved. He  can  understand  only  a
    little Urdu and he only  responds  to  English  [13].  In  the  judge's
    findings at [16] he  finds  that  the  fourth  Appellant's  'effective'
    language was English [16(d)]; his prognosis was that he 'will always be
    challenged' but if supported in the correct  way,  at  the  appropriate
    time, he will be able to live a fulfilling  and  semi-independent  life
    [16(e)].

8.   In relation to the  third  Appellant,  the  judge  noted  that  he  had
    arrived in the UK in 2005 aged 2 and was aged 12 at date of hearing. He
    had been educated in the United Kingdom,  was  involved  socially  with
    friends, follows football, speaks English and  is  totally  integrated.
    He lives in Tunbridge Wells, which is not an area  normally  associated
    with persons originally from Pakistan.

9.   In his conclusions at [17] the judge held as follows:

         "As a consequence  of  the  decided  facts  the  third  and  fourth
         Appellants have persuaded me to the necessary  standard  that  they
         meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules  and  in  particular
         paragraph 276ADE(ii)*.   I  am  satisfied  that  it  would  not  be
         reasonable to expect the applicants to leave the United Kingdom."


10.  * I have marked the subparagraph of 276ADE for  the  following  reason.
    It seems that at [17] and indeed at [5] the  judge  slightly  misquotes
    the Rule in 276ADE.  The relevant subparagraph relating to children  is
    276ADE(1)(iv), which provides "... is under the age of 18 years and has
    lived continuously in the UK for at least seven years (discounting  any
    period of imprisonment) and it would not be reasonable  to  expect  the
    applicant to leave the UK".  I do not find that the slight misquote  of
    276ADE is material.


11.  Continuing in his decision at [18-19], the judge  held  that  the  best
    interests of both children was a  primary  consideration  and  that  an
    overall assessment is that it would not be reasonable to expect them to
    live in another country, because the third  Appellant  has  lived  here
    nine years and is fully integrated and the fourth Appellant because  of
    his ASD and the better  treatment  that  is  available  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  Furthermore that both the third  and  fourth  Appellants  are
    more at ease speaking English  and  the  fourth  Appellant  has  little
    understanding of Urdu.

12.  Without setting out any remaining parts of the decision it suffices  to
    say that  the  judge  allowed  the  appeal  of  the  third  and  fourth
    Appellants under the Immigration Rules and  of  the  first  and  second
    Appellants on human rights grounds on the basis that  if  the  children
    could not reasonably be expected to leave the United Kingdom nor  could
    their parents.

13.  In Grounds of Appeal dated  17  October  2014  the  Respondent  appeals
    against that decision arguing that the Immigration Judge had materially
    erred in law by "failing to  take  into  account  the  findings  of  EV
    Philippines [2014] EWCA Civ 874 when considering the reasonableness  of
    the 4th  Appellant  to  leave  the  UK".  The  Respondent  quoted  from
    paragraphs 58 to 60 of EV Philippines:

          "58. In my  judgment,  therefore,  the  assessment  of  the  best
          interests of the children must be made  on  the  basis  that  the
          facts are as they are in the real world. If  one  parent  has  no
          right  to  remain,  but  the  other  parent  does,  that  is  the
          background against which the assessment is conducted. If  neither
          parent has the right to  remain,  then  that  is  the  background
          against which the assessment  is  conducted.  Thus  the  ultimate
          question will be: is it reasonable to expect the child to  follow
          the parent with no right to remain to the country of origin?
          59. On the facts of ZH  it  was  not  reasonable  to  expect  the
          children to follow their mother to Tanzania,  not  least  because
          the family would be separated and the children would be  deprived
          of the right to grow  up  in  the  country  of  which  they  were
          citizens.
          60.That is a long way from the facts of our  case.  In  our  case
          none of the family is a British citizen. None has  the  right  to
          remain in this country. If the mother is removed, the father  has
          no independent right to remain. If the parents are removed,  then
          it is entirely reasonable to expect the children to go with them.
          As the immigration judge found it  is  obviously  in  their  best
          interests to remain with their parents. Although it is, of course
          a question of fact for  the  tribunal,  I  cannot  see  that  the
          desirability of being educated at public expense in  the  UK  can
          outweigh the benefit to the  children  of  remaining  with  their
          parents. Just as we cannot  provide  medical  treatment  for  the
          world, so we cannot educate the world."

14.   The  grounds  submitted  that  the  fourth  Appellant's   needs   were
    educational in nature and as a result the findings  of  EV  Philippines
    applied to his continuing special educational needs.   It  was  further
    submitted that the judge had materially erred in law by failing to take
    into account the requirements  of  Section  117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ('NIAA 2002'), in  particular  that  no
    consideration of the public interest considerations outlined in Section
    117B of the Act had been given and as a result the judge had materially
    erred in law in finding that the decision to remove the Appellants  was
    disproportionate.

15.  Permission to appeal was granted by Judge  P  J  M  Hollingworth  on  7
    September 2015 in brief terms: "An arguable error of law has  occurred.
    The Judge has failed to set out the  application  of  the  criteria  of
    Section 117 to the facts".

16.  In a notice of hearing dated 23 November 2015 the Upper  Tribunal  gave
    notice of today's  hearing  date,  15  December  at  Field  House.   In
    correspondence to the Tribunal dated 8 December 2015, S & S Immigration
    Law requested an adjournment of the present appeal on  the  basis  that
    the Appellants had only recently instructed their  firm  and  that  the
    notice of hearing did not give sufficient notice of the  hearing  prior
    to 15 December to enable them to prepare  their  case  or  to  instruct
    Counsel.  That application to adjourn was  refused  by  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge McGeachy in  a  notice  communicated  to  the  Appellants  on  10
    December on the grounds that it was  not  possible  at  this  stage  to
    adjourn the appeal and the judge saw  no  reason  why  another  Counsel
    could not be instructed as the issues in the  appeal  were  not  unduly
    complicated.  It was also pointed out that there was an  error  of  law
    hearing and should the judge find  an  error  of  law  the  Appellants'
    Counsel could  apply  for  an  adjournment  to  a  further  substantive
    hearing.

17.  In correspondence from S & S Immigration Law  dated  11  December  2015
    they stated that they had received the Tribunal's letter informing them
    that their request for an adjournment had been refused. They state:

         "The hearing is now just two working days away.  As we explained in
         our request for adjournment it has not been  possible  to  instruct
         Counsel for this Upper Tribunal hearing at such short  notice.   In
         the circumstances the Appellant or his representatives will not  be
         attending the  hearing  but  we  wish  to  rely  upon  the  written
         submissions  attached  herewith.   Kindly  place  these   for   the
         attention of the judge."

18.  There is then attached a set of  representations  of  some  five  pages
which in summary  argue that the  First-tier  Judge  appropriately  directed
himself in law and  did  not       commit  any  material  error  of  law  in
allowing the appeal.

19.  In fact that letter had not come  to  my  attention  by  the  time  the
    appeal was called on at 2  o'clock  this  afternoon  and  so  I  caused
    enquiries to be made to S & S Immigration Law as to  their  attendance.
    They re-sent the representations of 11 December and again  invited  the
    court to take those representations into  account  and  indicated  that
    they would not be attending the hearing.


20.  As the meaning and effect of both EV  Philippines  and  Treebhawon  and
others [2015]     UKUT 674 (IAC) (see below) was likely to  be  relevant  to
the discussion in the present    appeal,  I  provided  Mr  Walker  with  the
opportunity to review those authorities      before making submissions.

21.  I then heard submissions from Mr Walker on behalf  of  the  Respondent.
    He relied principally in the Grounds of Appeal, referring to the  Court
    of Appeal authority of EV Philippines, the passages  of  which  I  have
    quoted above.

22.  However, Mr  Walker  accepted  that  the  immigration  history  of  the
    present Appellants was not adverse. The present Appellants have at  all
    material times possessed leave to remain, and the  youngest  child  had
    developed a disabling condition after  birth  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    These  were  matters  which  Mr  Walker  accepted   could   potentially
    distinguish the present Appellants' position from the position  of  the
    Appellants in the case of EV  Philippines.  Ultimately  the  Respondent
    does not forcefully submit to me today that there was a clear error  of
    law in the First-tier decision.

     Discussion

23.  It seems to me that a party's reference to certain  passages  within  a
    reported judgement does not of itself advance a particular  proposition
    in law, or demonstrate that a decision under appeal contains a material
    error of law. In EV Philippines, Christopher Clarke LJ gave the  first,
    and longest judgement, with which Lewison  LJ  agreed,  adding  'a  few
    observations' of his own. Jackson LJ agreed with both judgments.

24.  In terms of what the ratio of EV Philippines is, I  believe  it  is  as
    follows:


    (i)  The Court  rejected  the  proposition  advanced  at  [21]  by  the
         appellants that  where it was established that the  best  interests
         of children lay in their continuing their education in the UK, that
         only 'the most cogent countervailing considerations' could  justify
         the removal of the family;  insofar as Lord Kerr's judgment  in  ZH
         Tanzania v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4 appeared to advance  the  proposition
         that the best interests of a child  'must  rank  higher'  than  any
         other factor, the Court  noted  that  he  was  there  dealing  with
         British children, that he had agreed with Lady Hale, and the  Court
         should be guided by the formulation which  she  adopted  which  was
         that the best interests of a  child  was  a  primary  consideration
         which  could  be  outweighed  by  others  provided  that  no  other
         consideration was  treated  as  inherently  more  significant  (see
         Christopher Clarke LJ at [32]).

    (ii) The best interests of the child are to be determined by  reference
         to the child alone without reference to the immigration history  or
         status of either parent (Christopher Clarke LJ at [33]).
    (iii)    "34 In determining whether or not, in a case  (where  none  of
         the family are British and they are relying on private  and  family
         life grounds to remain in the UK), the need for immigration control
         outweighs the best interests of the children, it  is  necessary  to
         determine the relative strength of the factors  which  make  it  in
         their best interests to remain here; and also to  take  account  of
         any factors that point the other way.
         35. A decision as to what is in the best interests of children will
         depend on a number of factors such as (a) their age; (b) the length
         of time that they have been here; (c) how long they  have  been  in
         education; (c) what stage their education has reached; (d) to  what
         extent they have become distanced from the country to which  it  is
         proposed that they return; (e) how renewable their connection  with
         it may be; (f) to what extent they will have linguistic, medical or
         other difficulties in adapting to life in that country; and (g) the
         extent to which the  course  proposed  will  interfere  with  their
         family life or their rights (if they have any) as British citizens.


         36. In a sense the tribunal  is  concerned  with  how  emphatic  an
         answer falls to be given  to  the  question:  is  it  in  the  best
         interests of the child to remain? The longer  the  child  has  been
         here, the more advanced (or critical) the stage of  his  education,
         the looser his ties with the country  in  question,  and  the  more
         deleterious the consequences of his return, the greater the  weight
         that falls into one side of the scales. If it is overwhelmingly  in
         the child's best interests that he should not return, the  need  to
         maintain immigration control may  well  not  tip  the  balance.  By
         contrast if it is in the child's best interests to remain, but only
         on balance (with some factors pointing the other way),  the  result
         may be the opposite.
         37. In the balance on the other side there falls to be  taken  into
         account the strong weight to be  given  to  the  need  to  maintain
         immigration control in pursuit of the economic  well-being  of  the
         country and the fact that, ex hypothesi, the  applicants  have  no
         entitlement to remain. The immigration history of the  parents  may
         also be relevant e.g.  if  they  are  overstayers,  or  have  acted
         deceitfully." (Christopher Clarke LJ at [34-37])
    (iv) The approach to the  assessment  of  best  interests  set  out  in
         paragraphs 23-24 of MK India (Best interests of the  child)  [2011]
         UKUT 00475 (IAC) was approved, which emphasises a  fact  sensitive,
         'overall' balancing of factors (Christopher Clarke LJ at [39]).
    (v)  In answering the question whether  one  has  to  assess  the  best
         interest of the children without regard to the  immigration  status
         of the parent, the assessment of the best interests of the children
         must be decided on the basis that the facts are as they are in  the
         real world; the ultimate question will  be:  is  it  reasonable  to
         expect the child to follow the parents with no right to  remain  to
         the country of origin? (Lewison LJ, [50] and [58]).
25.   I  specifically  find  that  the  most  often  quoted  passage  of  EV
    Philippines "Just as we cannot provide medical treatment for the world,
    so we cannot educate the world" (Lewison LJ at [60]) does not form part
    of the ratio of the case; it does not seek to approve or  disapprove  a
    proposition in law; it is something of an overall observation but which
    should not be treated by the Respondent as some indefeasible mantra.
26.  On the facts of EV, the Court of Appeal held  that  the  FtT  judge  in
    that case had not erred in  law  in  finding  that  the  importance  of
    maintaining immigration control outweighed the best  interests  of  the
    children of that particular family, on the facts of the case. The Court
    noted, at [44] that the parents would be employable in the Philippines,
    the family would not be homeless, there was an extended family to which
    they would have access, the family had  been  in  the  UK  for  only  a
    limited time - 3 years and 9 months at the date of  the  FtT  decision,
    and the children would not be without  education  in  the  Philippines.
    Further, it was reasonable to expect the children to  live  in  another
    country [45]; if the parents were to be removed, it  was  obviously  in
    the children's best interests to remain with their parents. Although it
    a question of fact for the tribunal, the desirability of being educated
    at public expense in the UK could  not  outweigh  the  benefit  to  the
    children of remaining with their parents [60].
27.  Since the Court of Appeal gave judgment in EV Philippines, Part 5A  has
    been inserted into NIAA 2002:

         "s.117A
         Application of this Part
           (1) This Part applies where a court or tribunal is  required  to
           determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-
                 (a) breaches a person's right to respect  for  private  and
                 family life  under Article 8, and
                 (b) as a result would be unlawful under section  6  of  the
                 Human Rights Act 1998.
           (2) In considering the public interest question,  the  court  or
           tribunal must (in particular) have regard-
                 (a) in all cases, to the considerations listed  in  section
                 117B, and
                 (b)  in  cases  concerning  the  deportation   of   foreign
                 criminals, to the considerations listed in section 117C.
           (3) In subsection (2), "the public interest question" means  the
           question of whether an interference with  a  person's  right  to
           respect for private and family life is justified  under  Article
           8(2).

           117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all
           cases
           (1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in  the
           public interest.
           (2) It is in the public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
           interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
           persons who seek to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  are
           able to speak English, because persons who can speak English-
                 (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
                 (b) are better able to integrate into society.
           (3) It is in the public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
           interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
           persons who seek to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  are
           financially independent, because such persons-
                 (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and
                 (b) are better able to integrate into society.
           (4) Little weight should be given to-
                 (a) a private life, or
                 (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying  partner,  that
                 is established by a person at a time when the person is  in
                 the United Kingdom unlawfully.
           (5) Little weight should be given to a private life  established
           by a person at a time when the person's  immigration  status  is
           precarious.
           (6) In the case of a person who is not  liable  to  deportation,
           the public interest does not require the person's removal where-
                 (a) the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                 relationship with a qualifying child, and
                 (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
                 the United Kingdom."

           117D Interpretation of this Part
           (1) In this Part-
                 "Article 8" means Article 8 of the European  Convention  on
                 Human Rights;
                 "qualifying child" means a person who is under the  age  of
                 18 and who-
                      (a) is a British citizen, or
                     (b) has lived in the United Kingdom for  a  continuous
                     period of seven years or more ..."




28.  A  number  of  reported  cases  have  considered  the  meaning  of  the
    provisions within Section 117B.  A recent example is  Treebhawon  which
    provides in its head note as follows:

         "Section  117B(6)  is  a  reflection  of  the   distinction   which
         Parliament has chosen to make between persons who are, and who  are
         not, liable to deportation.   In  any  case  where  the  conditions
         enshrined in Section 117B(6) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
         Asylum Act 2002 are satisfied, the Section 117B(6) public  interest
         prevails over the public interests identified in Section 117B(1)  -
         (3)."


29.  In the body of the decision, which is given by  the  President  of  the
    Upper Tribunal, Mr Justice McCloskey, and Upper Tribunal Judge Frances,
    the Tribunal further considers the  meaning  of  Section  117B(6).   At
    paragraph 14 the  Tribunal  formulate  an  issue  before  them  in  the
    following terms:

         "In a case where a court or Tribunal decides that a person  who  is
         not liable to deportation has a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
         relationship with a qualifying child, as defined in Part 5A of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, as  amended,  and  it
         would not be reasonable to expect such child to  leave  the  United
         Kingdom, with the result  that  the  two  conditions  enshrined  in
         Section 117B(6) are satisfied, is this determinative of the 'public
         interest question',  namely  the  issue  of  proportionality  under
         Article 8(2) ECHR?"

30.  The Tribunal then consider the recent case of  Deelah  and  others  and
    stated as follows at [20-22]:

         "20.  In  section  117B(6),   Parliament   has   prescribed   three
         conditions, namely:
          (a) the person concerned is not liable to deportation;
          (b) such person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
         with a qualifying child, namely a person who is under the age of 18
         and is a British citizen or has lived in the United Kingdom  for  a
         continuous period of seven years or more; and
         (c) it would not be reasonable to expect the  qualifying  child  to
         leave the United Kingdom.


         Within this discrete regime, the  statute  proclaims  unequivocally
         that where these three conditions are satisfied the public interest
         does not require the removal of the parent from the United Kingdom.
         Ambiguity there is none.


         21. Giving effect to  the  analysis  above,  in  our  judgment  the
         underlying  Parliamentary  intention  is  that  where   the   three
         aforementioned  conditions  are  satisfied  the  public   interests
         identified in section 117B(1) - (3) do not apply.


         22. It would further appear that the " little weight" provisions of
         section 117B(4) - (5) are of no application. If Parliament had been
         desirous of qualifying, or diluting, section 117B(6)  by  reference
         to either section 117B(4) or (5), it could have done so with  ease.
         It has not done so. Fundamentally, there is no  indication  in  the
         structure or language of Part 5A that in cases where, on the facts,
         section 117B(4) and/or (5) is engaged, the unambiguous proclamation
         in Section 117B(6) is in some way weakened or demoted. To this  may
         be added the analysis in [18] - [21] above. Clearly, there is  much
         to favour this construction. However, conscious of  the  limits  of
         the judicial function, we decline to provide a definitive answer to
         this discrete question, for two  reasons.  First,  we  received  no
         argument upon it. Second, it does not clearly fall within the grant
         of permission to appeal."

31.  Therefore whilst the Tribunal appear to hold that the  Section  117B(6)
    has an  absolute  and  unambiguous  meaning,  it  did  not,  it  seems,
    ultimately rule on that point at paragraph 22 for the  twofold  reasons
    that the Tribunal had received no argument upon  the  meaning  of  that
    provision and that the construction of that provision had  not  clearly
    fallen within the grant of permission to appeal.

32.   However,  the  President  has  given  what  is  so  far  the  clearest
    assistance in understanding the meaning and effect of Section  117B(6).
    It seems to me that if it has been held that a qualifying child  cannot
    reasonably be expected to leave the United Kingdom and  the  parent  of
    that child has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with  the
    child, then the public interest simply does not require the removal  of
    the parent, and any such proposed removal would be disproportionate.

33.  As the Respondent's grounds  of  appeal  are  not  very  particular  in
    identifying how the judge failed to 'take into account the findings  of
    EV Philippines', I take the Respondent's   challenge  to  be  that  the
    judge's findings are in some way contrary to the  ratio  of  EV,  as  I
    understand it to be.

34.  I disagree. In assessing the best interests of the children, the  judge
    directs himself in law by reference to relevant  authorities  at  [18].
    There is no misdirection in law, for example by requiring there  to  be
    'the most cogent countervailing considerations' present to outweigh the
    best interests of the children. The judge assessed the  best  interests
    of the children in isolation  to  the  immigration  position  of  their
    parents; he considered whether it was reasonable for the children to be
    required to leave the UK, and only then did he start  to  consider  the
    immigration position of the parents at [20].

35.  In assessing that it was not reasonable for the children to  leave  the
    UK, the judge took into account, in relation to the fourth Appellant in
    particular, that if supported in the correct way (as he is being in the
    UK) he will be able to live  a  fulfilling  and  semi-independent  life
    [16(e)] in a country where a person diagnosed with ASD and  the  family
    enjoy and benefit from a generosity of spirit and a  concern  from  the
    public in general and society as a whole [16(h)]. This appears to be in
    very sharp contrast to judge's assessment (which is not  challenged  by
    the Respondent)  of  the  fourth  Appellant's  likely  future  life  in
    Pakistan; ASD is rarely identified or diagnosed in Pakistan and persons
    afflicted with it are placed in institutions for the mentally  retarded
    [16(f)]; ASD is viewed or  regarded  as  reflecting  the  sins  of  the
    parents  [16(h)];   there  is  a  lack  of  awareness,  a   dearth   of
    professional medical expertise, almost  non-existent  health  care  and
    most of all, social  stigma  associated  with  persons  diagnosed  with
    autism [16(i)(i)].  The judge also took into account  that  the  fourth
    Appellant's (apparently limited) communication skills were in  English,
    not Urdu [13] and [16(d)]. This is clearly  not  a  child  who  may  be
    presumed to be able to easily  pick  up  a  language  merely  by  being
    immersed into it.

36.  The assessment of  the  fourth  Appellant's  best  interests  does  not
    involve simply a comparison of educational opportunities for him in the
    UK and Pakistan (as I think is suggested by the Respondent's grounds of
    appeal); rather it involves an assessment of the quality of life he  is
    likely to have overall. In summary,  the  contrast  identified  by  the
    judge is that in the UK the fourth  Appellant  has  an  opportunity  of
    having a future fulfilling life in, whereas in Pakistan, he  does  not.
    There can be nothing  more  central  to  the  assessment  of  the  best
    interests of a child with  a  disabling  condition  than  to  determine
    whether its future life will or will not be fulfilling.

37.  Other factors that the judge took into account, and which according  to
    the ratio of EV he was entitled to take into account, was the period of
    time that the children had been in the United Kingdom; at the  date  of
    the FtT hearing, this had been 9 years for the third Appellant, and the
    whole of the fourth Appellant's life, who  was  then  7  �.  The  judge
    performed an 'overall assessment' [19] as was required of him (EV  para
    [39]).  The  outcome  of  his  assessment  was  clearly  based  on  the
    particular facts of the case as he found them to be (and the  Court  of
    Appeal in EV acknowledge that these  assessments  are  fact-sensitive).
    There were no adverse elements from the parents' immigration history to
    take into account in the proportionality balancing  exercise  (such  as
    overstaying or acting deceitfully; EV para [37]).

38.  In relation to Respondent's submission that the judge erred in  law  in
    failing to take into  account  the  public  interest  consideration  in
    s.117B NIAA 2002, I find that  this  is,  subject  to  what  I  say  at
    [41]below, not the case;  the  judge  balanced  the  interests  of  the
    Appellants against the  public  interest  in  maintaining   immigration
    control, at [22], the beginning of [23] and at [24]. Even if the  judge
    did not refer to Part 5A in terms, this is not an error of law  if  the
    judge has applied the test he or she was supposed to apply according to
    its terms (which he did); what matters is  substance,  not  form;  Dube
    (ss.117A-117D) [2015] UKUT 90 (IAC).

39.  However, there are two ways in which I find that the  judge  has  erred
    in law. These issues are not raised in the application  for  permission
    by the Respondent (or indeed the Appellant) but are Robinson obvious.

40.  The first is that in allowing the fourth Appellant's appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules, seemingly under rule 276ADE(1)(iv), he erred in law.
    The first line of 276ADE requires that an applicant must have satisfied
    the conditions set out in the Rule at the  date  of  application.   The
    fourth Appellant, born on 2 March 2007, had lived in the United Kingdom
    for seven or more years at the date of the appeal before the FtT on  30
    September 2014, but had not done so prior to the  date  of  application
    made on 28 August 2012.  In that respect, and Mr Walker agrees with me,
    the appeal of the fourth Appellant did  not  stand  to  be  allowed  by
    reference to paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv). However, on the grounds that  his
    removal is not reasonable, I find that the fourth  Appellant's  removal
    would amount to a disproportionate and therefore unlawful  interference
    with his private life, and would be contrary to s.6  Human  Rights  Act
    1998.

41.  The judge also erred in law in failing  to  have  regard  to  s.117B(6)
    NIAA 2002.  At the date of  hearing,  both  children  were  'qualifying
    children' as defined under s.117D NIAA 2002, on the grounds  that  they
    had both lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous period  of  seven
    years or more. In contrast with para 276ADE, there is no requirement in
    Part 5A NIAA 2002 for that seven year requirement to have been  met  at
    the date of application. Further, on  the  judge's  finding  (which  is
    sustainable), that it is not reasonable to expect the children to leave
    the UK, and there being no question  but  that  the  first  and  second
    Appellants have genuine and subsisting relationships with the children,
    then s.117B(6) provides that the public interest does not  require  the
    removal of the first and second Appellants. Applying  Treebhowan,  that
    outcome is 'unambiguous', and is it not necessary to consider,  in  any
    event, s 117B(1-3) (Treebhowan, paras [21-22]).


     Decision

42.  I find as follows.

     (i) The making of  the  First-tier  decision  involved  the  making  of
    material error of law, that being that the  fourth  Appellant's  appeal
    did not stand to  be  allowed  under  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  of  the
    Immigration Rules because he had not been present in the United Kingdom
    for seven or more years at the date of application.  I  set  aside  the
    decision in respect of the fourth Appellant, but I remake the  decision
    in relation to the  fourth  Appellant  by  allowing  his  appeal  under
    Article 8 ECHR.

     (ii) I find that the decision of the judge in  relation  to  the  third
    Appellant allowing his appeal under  the  Immigration  Rules  does  not
    disclose any material error of law.

     (iii) The making of the First tier decision in relation  to  the  first
    and second Appellants involved the  making  of  an  error  of  law,  in
    failing to find that the public interest did not require their removal,
    in accordance with s.117B(6) NIAA 2002. However,  that  error  was  not
    material to the outcome of their appeals, which were allowed  on  human
    rights grounds, and which still stand to be  allowed  to  human  rights
    grounds. I do not set aside the decision in relation to the  first  and
    second Appellants.


Signed                                  Date: 28.1.16

[pic]


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings
