
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/39858/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On Wednesday 30 September 2015       |On Monday 5 October 2015             |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MISS SAJIA FARAH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms M Malhotra, Counsel


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I  find  that  no
particular issues arise on the facts of this case  that  give  rise  to  the
need for a direction. For this reason no anonymity direction is made.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

    1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home  Department.
       For ease of reference, I refer below to the parties as they  were  in
       the First-Tier  Tribunal  albeit  that  the  Secretary  of  State  is
       technically the Appellant in this particular appeal.

    2. The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh.  She initially came to the
       UK in 2009 as a Tier 4 student with leave to  remain  until  30  June
       2011.  She was  granted  further  leave  from  19  July  2012  to  24
       September 2013.  She returned  to  Bangladesh  in  January  2013  and
       returned to the UK on 28 August 2014 with leave valid from 15  August
       2014 to 30 January 2016.  On 16 October 2014, on arrival in  the  UK,
       she was stopped at the port by the Respondent on suspicion  of  using
       deception in her entry clearance application. She was interviewed and
       released  pending  further  investigation.    Following   a   further
       interview,  on  16  October  2014,  the  Respondent   cancelled   the
       Appellant's leave to enter under paragraph 321A(1) of the Immigration
       Rules.

    3. The basis for the cancellation was that the Appellant had used  false
       representations because she had relied on an  English  language  test
       certificate  which  had  been  fraudulently  obtained  when  she  had
       obtained her leave in 2012. This is one of the so-called  Educational
       Testing Service ("ETS") cases where it is said by the Respondent that
       an ETS certificate has been obtained using a proxy test  taker.   The
       Respondent relies in that regard on the generic evidence produced  in
       all such cases namely witness statements given  by  two  Home  Office
       witnesses, Mr Peter Millington and Miss Rebecca Collins ("the Witness
       Statements").  The  Respondent  also  relied  on  the  extract  of  a
       spreadsheet showing that the Appellant's was a  case  where  ETS  had
       decided that the ETS results were invalid and on the content  of  the
       interviews with the Appellant.

    4. The Appellant's appeal  was  allowed  by  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Farmer in a decision promulgated on 29 April 2015  ("the  Decision").
       The Appellant gave evidence at  the  appeal  hearing  and  the  Judge
       found, for reasons set out at [6] to [7] of the  Decision,  that  she
       was credible.  That finding is not challenged. Permission  to  appeal
       was granted by First-Tier Tribunal Judge Cox on the  basis  that  the
       Decision was arguably inadequately reasoned and  arguably  failed  to
       engage with the evidence for the Respondent.  The matter comes before
       me to determine whether the Decision did involve  the  making  of  an
       error of law.

  Submissions

    5. Mr Jarvis submitted that the Decision was  very  brief  and  had  not
       engaged with the  Respondent's  explanatory  statement,  the  Witness
       Statements or the record of interviews.  The Judge disposed  of  that
       evidence solely on the basis that it was generic.  Not  only  was  it
       incumbent on the Judge to engage with the Witness Statements but also
       the Judge had failed to make findings on  part  of  the  Respondent's
       case that the Appellant had not been able to remember the name of the
       test centre.  I pointed out that the Appellant had taken the test  in
       2012 so it was perhaps not unnatural for her not to remember the name
       of the centre after three years.  Mr Jarvis accepted that this may be
       so but submitted that it was still incumbent on the Judge to  make  a
       finding in that regard.

    6. Mr Jarvis also submitted that it was not open to the  Judge  to  deal
       with the matter as she had at [11] of the Decision.  Having  referred
       to the Respondent's evidence as generic at [8] and  directed  herself
       in relation to the burden of proof under Part 9 of the rules  at  [9]
       in accordance with PR (proof of forgery) Nigeria [2006] UKAIT  00086,
       the Judge went on to say as follows:-

           "I find that the respondent has failed, in this case, to satisfy
           the burden.  I put  into  the  balance  the  fact  that  I  have
           accepted the evidence  of  the  appellant  and  I  have  made  a
           positive assessment of her credibility."

       Mr Jarvis submitted that either the Judge had to accept the  evidence
       as establishing  deception  in  which  case  the  assessment  of  the
       Appellant's evidence became irrelevant or had to  reject  it  as  not
       establishing deception in which case the Judge needed to give reasons
       for rejecting what was cogent evidence.  The Judge  was  entitled  to
       find based on the Respondent's evidence that this was  a  case  where
       there was a "false positive" result but that  was  not  the  finding.
       The Judge had impermissibly considered the  Appellant's  evidence  in
       this case in a vacuum.  The bringing in of the  Appellant's  evidence
       when considering whether the Respondent had discharged the burden  of
       proof was a confused approach at best.

    7. Ms Malhotra submitted that the Judge had not ignored the Respondent's
       evidence. It was taken into account at [9]  to  [12].   However,  the
       Judge was entitled to consider also the Appellant's evidence  and  to
       make findings whether the Appellant was credible as she had found  at
       [6] to [7].  Those findings were not challenged  by  the  Respondent.
       The Decision gave no indication  that  the  Judge  had  rejected  the
       Respondent's evidence but had found the evidence to be generic which,
       in relation to the Witness Statements  at  least  was  the  position.
       Based on the  case  of  Gazi  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
       Department (ETS - judicial review) IJR [2015] UKUT 00327  (IAC),  she
       submitted that it was for the Judge to make findings  of  fact.   The
       Judge was entitled, as part of that exercise, to take account of  the
       Appellant's evidence.  She accepted that the  Decision  was  succinct
       but submitted that  the  Judge  had  provided  adequate  reasons  for
       allowing the appeal.

  Error of law decision and reasons

    8. The case of Gazi was a judicial review and for that reason  does  not
       make findings on the Witness Statements.  It does however  provide  a
       useful review of the Witness  Statements  and  it  is  not  therefore
       necessary for me to set out at length the content of those statements
       (see [6] to [15] of Gazi).  In summary, Mr  Justice  McCloskey  found
       that the Witness Statements  were  capable  of  establishing  to  the
       requisite degree of proof that a test was taken fraudulently but  the
       test is not infallible and it is open  to  a  Tribunal  in  any  case
       considering the specific facts of and evidence in that case to decide
       that the particular appeal should be allowed [35].

    9. Mr Justice McCloskey at [25] to [27] of Gazi reviews the  outcome  of
       three appeal decisions from the First-Tier Tribunal where appeals had
       been allowed for different reasons.  I accept that this case does not
       fall neatly within any of  those  three  outcomes  in  terms  of  the
       Judge's reasoning.  It is not said in  terms  for  example  that  the
       Appellant's case is an exception on the basis that her's  is  one  of
       the "false positive" cases which ETS accepts may  emerge  from  their
       process (see in particular [30] to [33] of the Millington statement).
        However, neither does the Judge say that she  does  not  accept  the
       Respondent's evidence.   Although  that  might  be  said  to  be  the
       inference from the reference to cases on the burden and  standard  of
       proof at [10], the finding on the evidence is at [12]  and  does  not
       say that the evidence is rejected.  Instead,  the  Judge  finds  that
       this evidence is "not sufficiently  particular  to  this  appellant".
       Alone, that finding may suggest that the Judge has failed  to  engage
       with the content of the Witness Statements.  However,  it  cannot  be
       criticised as a description of the Witness Statements.

   10. The Decision may be criticised on the basis that it is brief  and  is
       limited in its reasons for finding that the  deception  is  not  made
       out.  However, when read as a whole,  paragraphs  [6]  to  [12]  give
       adequate reasons for the allowing of the appeal.  The Judge has taken
       into account the Witness Statements and has  not  rejected  them  (in
       which case she would have needed  to  give  reasons  for  so  doing).
       Instead, she notes that they are generic (as they are) and  therefore
       considers the factors and evidence individual to the Appellant's case
       on both sides in order to reach a view  whether  the  Respondent  has
       discharged the burden on her to prove deception.  I am reinforced  in
       that view by the reference to "in this case"  [11]  when  considering
       whether the Respondent has  discharged  the  burden.   If  the  Judge
       considered that the "generic" evidence i.e.  the  Witness  Statements
       could not on any view overcome the burden, she would  have  said  so.
       The approach is not an erroneous one based on what is  said  in  Gazi
       and is not inconsistent with the authorities  related  to  deception.
       The fact that a party may bear the burden of proof does not mean that
       in order to consider whether that burden is discharged  the  evidence
       on the other side has to be left out of account.

   11. I have also considered Mr  Jarvis'  submission  that  the  Judge  has
       failed to  consider  the  individual  evidence  relied  upon  by  the
       Respondent by failing to make a finding about the Appellant's failure
       to recall the name of the test centre.  Ms Mahotra did  not  seek  to
       suggest that the Judge had made a finding on this.  However, the lack
       of any finding has to be considered against  the  background  of  the
       Respondent's case which is summarised at [4] of the Decision.   There
       is no reference there to this point.  Although this issue  is  raised
       in the grounds of appeal at [10], this relies on what is said in  the
       interview record.  There is no mention  of  it  in  the  Respondent's
       decision as  being  something  on  which  the  Respondent  relied  as
       assisting her case or undermining the Appellant's. Mr  Jarvis  relied
       on the Respondent's explanatory statement.  However,  although  there
       is mention of this in that statement under the heading of  Interview,
       there is no mention of this failure specifically in the reasons given
       for the decision at [17] of that statement.  It was not  therefore  a
       matter relied upon by the Respondent and there is no error of law  by
       the Judge in failing to make a finding on  that  issue.    The  Judge
       took into account the issue which was relied upon  as  emerging  from
       the interview namely the choice of test centre and made a finding  on
       that at [6].

   12. For the above  reasons,  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the  First-tier
       Tribunal Decision involved the making of an error of law.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision


Signed      [pic]      Date 2 October 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

