
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39265/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision sent to parties on:         |
|On 19 April 2016 and 7 November 2016 |On 11 November 2016                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                 Ayesha [S]
                            [NO ANONYMITY ORDER]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr E Nicholson, Counsel instructed by Bhogal and
                    Partners, solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr T Wilding (19 April 2016) and Ms Z Ahmed (7
                    November 2016), Senior Home Office Presenting Officers



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    to refuse her application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom  on
    human rights grounds.  The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.

 2. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on a visit visa valid  from  4
    February 2009 to 4 February 2011.  She has had no leave to remain since
    4 February 2011.

 3. The appellant's family members in the United Kingdom  are  as  follows:
    her father, [SRS] (Mr [S]); her mother,  [BP]  (Mrs  [P]);  her  eldest
    brother, [M Arifeen S] ('Arifeen'); her  second  brother,  [Ricky  [R]]
    ('Ricky'); her third  brother,  [M  Abideen  S]  ('Abideen');  and  the
    youngest of her brothers, Mr [Wajahat S].  In addition, there  are  her
    sisters-in-law, Ewelina [S] (a Polish citizen originally), Shaista [S],
    and Nadia [S], and her nephews and nieces.  All of her family  are  now
    British citizens, except the appellant's  mother,  who  has  indefinite
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom and is awaiting naturalisation.

Background

 4. The appellant has an unusual personal history.  She was born on 13 July
    1987 and is therefore now 29 years old.  Although she  is  a  Pakistani
    citizen, she has never resided in  Pakistan.   The  appellant's  mother
    returned to Pakistan for her birth, then took the appellant back to the
    United Arab Emirates when she was 1 month old.  The appellant has spent
    a total of 180 days in Pakistan in her life, all  in  hotels  or  other
    rented accommodation.  She speaks only basic Urdu.

 5. Mr [S], who is a banker, relocated to Dubai for work in 1973 and  lived
    and worked there until 2005, when he lost his banking job.  He then had
    15 months left on his work permit but despite his best efforts did  not
    find another job.  The family led an itinerant life on visit  visas  to
    Pakistan, Dubai, and London, for some years, but by 2011 they  had  all
    moved to live together in the United Kingdom.  Mrs [P]  had  a  brother
    (now deceased) in Pakistan, but lost contact with him when she married.
     Mr [S] has a brother, but has not had contact  with  him  since  2007,
    following a dispute when Mr [S] was unable to continue maintaining  his
    brother because he had lost his job in Dubai.

 6. The appellant has four brothers, Ricky, Muhammed, Wajahat and  Abideen,
    all of whom have children, and 3 of  whom  are  married.   All  of  her
    siblings were raised in the United Arab Emirates, but the  family  left
    the country from time to time, to renew their visas, sometimes spending
    time in the United Kingdom and sometimes in  Pakistan,  till  the  work
    visa for Mr [S] and the residence visas for the children came  through.



 7. The appellant's grandparents have died.  Her maternal grandparents, and
    her paternal grandmother all died in Pakistan.  The appellant's  father
    then brought her paternal grandfather to Dubai,  where  he  obtained  a
    residence visa for him and the family lived together as a  unit  there.
    The appellant's paternal grandfather died before the  family  left  the
    United Arab Emirates for the United Kingdom.  In 2006, the  family  had
    to leave Dubai as their residence permits had expired.  It appears that
    the family had hopes of staying in the United Arab Emirates, since they
    bought an apartment there in 2006, which they still owned in  2008.  By
    2007, they were all living an itinerant life on visit visas  to  Dubai,
    Pakistan and the United Kingdom, finally settling in the United Kingdom
    in 2011 as a family unit.

 8. There are 12 of the appellant's family members living in one  house  in
    Hounslow, London: mother, father, all 4 brothers, all  3  daughters-in-
    law, and all of  her  nephews  and  nieces  except  one.   One  of  the
    appellant's brothers has a son  from  an  estranged  relationship,  who
    lives just a few minutes away with his mother.  The  appellant  is  the
    only person in that household who does not  have  indefinite  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom.  10 of her  family  members  are  British
    citizens: the  appellant's  mother,  who  has  mobility  problems,  has
    indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom but has not  yet  been
    naturalised because she  was  unable  to  attend  her  appointment  for
    biometric information.   That  is  being  rectified  and  there  is  no
    evidence to suggest that Mrs [P] will not also be  naturalised  British
    soon.

 9. The appellant has mental health problems (depression and  agoraphobia),
    which were diagnosed in 2014 and she has psychotherapy for  that.   She
    did have drug treatment as well initially but now only has  fortnightly
    psychotherapy.

The 2011 application and appeals

10. On 4 February 2011, the  appellant  applied  for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom as the dependant relative of  her  brother
    Mohammed, pursuant to paragraph 317 of the Immigration Rules HC395  (as
    amended).  Leave to remain was refused on 26 May 2011.   The  appellant
    appealed.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge allowed the appeal,  accepting
    the appellant's evidence that the family had no real ties to  Pakistan,
    that all members of the immediate family were in  the  United  Kingdom,
    and that the appellant could not be safely returned to  Pakistan  as  a
    lone female and would have no family base used by her, or her  parents,
    to help her there.

11. The Secretary of  State  appealed  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Kebede set  aside  that  decision.   She  dismissed  the
    appeal, taking a different view on  facts  and  credibility  from  that
    taken by the First-tier Tribunal. At the date of  hearing  (2  February
    2012), her parents, who had also arrived on visit visas and overstayed,
    still had no  leave  to  remain.   Judge  Kebede  considered  that  the
    parents, whose appeal had been dismissed, had no prospect of  obtaining
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom and that therefore the  appellant
    had not demonstrated that if returned to Pakistan she would  be  living
    alone in the most exceptional compassionate  circumstances  and  mainly
    dependent on relatives settled in the United Kingdom.

12. Judge Kebede considered that the evidence  of  the  appellant  and  her
    family  members  was  self-serving  and  fabricated,  and  that   their
    remaining ties to Pakistan were much stronger than they  admitted.   In
    particular, she noted that the appellant had  been  untruthful  in  her
    account to the Entry Clearance Officer  before  coming  to  the  United
    Kingdom and that she would be returned to Pakistan  with  her  parents,
    where she  would  be  able  to  establish  herself  without  any  great
    difficulty.

13. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal, which
    was refused, both by the Upper Tribunal and the Court of Appeal.   When
    refusing permission to  the  Court  of  Appeal,  Lord  Justice  Stanley
    Burnton said this:

         "The  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  manifestly
         unsustainable.  It was inadequately reasoned and even the  exiguous
         findings of fact did  not  support  the  conclusion  that  if  [the
         appellant] returned to Pakistan, [she] would live alone in the most
         exceptional compassionate  circumstances.   The  finding  that  she
         would return as a lone woman was also inconsistent with  the  facts
         as to the immigration status of her parents. ..."

Circumstances after February 2012

14. On 4 December 2012, the appellant applied for an EEA residence card  as
    the extended family member of her  brother  Wajahat  and  his  wife,  a
    Polish  citizen  exercising  Treaty  rights  in  the  United   Kingdom.
    Immigration officers came to the family home to interview the appellant
    unexpectedly at 0600 one morning, finding Wajahat and his wife  not  at
    home.  That visit is said to have contributed to the appellant's  later
    mental health problems. The application was refused without  any  right
    of appeal.

15. Two months later, the appellant applied for leave to remain on  private
    and  family  life  grounds  pursuant  to  Article  8  ECHR,  which  the
    respondent refused on 25 October 2013.

The 2014 application

16. On 29 April 2014, the appellant applied for indefinite leave to  remain
    in the United Kingdom outside the Rules. It is the respondent's refusal
    of that application which is the subject of the present appeal.

17.  The  respondent  considered  the  appellant's  claim  under  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi), concluding that her application on  the  basis  of  your
    private life should be refused under paragraph 276CE with reference  to
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.   Exceptional  circumstances
    were considered briefly, but were also rejected as a basis of stay.

18. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

First-tier Tribunal decision

19. The appeal was heard in the First-tier Tribunal by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Hanes.  She set out the undisputed history and  reminded  herself
    that, applying the decision of the Immigration and Appeal  Tribunal  in
    STARRED Secretary of State for the Home Department v D  (Tamil)  [2002]
    UKIAT 00702 (Devaseelan), the decision of Judge Kebede on  the  earlier
    appeal was the starting point for any later decision,  but  that  facts
    subsequent to that hearing could always be taken into account.

20. The new facts which Devaseelan permitted the Judge to take into account
    related primarily to the appellant's mental health problems, which  had
    begun in Dubai after her  'O'  levels,  in  or  about  2004,  when  the
    appellant was 17, and the physical health of Mr [S] and  Mrs  [P],  who
    relied particularly on her care, and on whom the appellant  relied  for
    emotional support, along with that of her 4 brothers.

21. In his consideration of the evidence, the Judge noted that no  detailed
    chronology of the time spent in Pakistan, Dubai and the United Kingdom,
    nor any current or expired passports for any  family  member  had  been
    provided.  She relied upon Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede's  finding  that
    there were family members in Pakistan with  whom  the  appellant  could
    live on return.  Mrs [P] had not appeared at the hearing nor provided a
    statement.  The medical evidence and the  evidence  of  an  independent
    social worker was inconsistent.

22. The Judge did not accept that there  was  dependency  at  the  Kugathas
    level between the appellant and her parents, or her siblings.  She  was
    satisfied that psychiatric care was available in Pakistan and that  the
    family in the United Kingdom could fund it, if required.  He considered
    that the appellant should be encouraged to  make  changes  to  separate
    herself from Mrs [P] and become more independent.   He continued:

         "43. ... Even if it were also accepted that the  appellant  suffers
         from symptoms of agoraphobia, there is no doubt in my mind that one
         or more family members would accompany the appellant to Pakistan to
         ease her transition.  Whilst I  acknowledge  that  the  appellant's
         parents suffer from various medical problems, her  father  appeared
         at the hearing to give evidence and was able to self-mobilise.   Dr
         Cohen met the appellant's mother and noted that apart  from  having
         some back problems, she presented as reasonably fit  and  well  and
         seemingly able  to  function  independently.   I  accept  that  the
         appellant would lose day to day physical contact with  her  parents
         and siblings however  she  would  be  able  to  keep  in  touch  by
         telephone, SKYPE and other modern means  of  communication.   I  am
         satisfied that both her siblings and her parents would visit her in
         Pakistan  and  I  take  judicial  note  that  most  airlines   have
         facilities for older, less mobile and disabled passengers."

23. The Judge found that the appellant was not an indispensable  carer  for
    her parents, that further support from Social Services  might  well  be
    available, and that  the  appellant's  nephews  and  nieces  had  their
    parents to care  for  them.    He  did  not  consider  that  it  was  a
    disproportionate breach of the appellant's Article  8  ECHR  rights  or
    those of her family members for her to be removed to Pakistan.

24. The First-tier Tribunal Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal.

Permission to appeal

25. The appellant sought permission  to  appeal.   Her  grounds  of  appeal
    challenged the First-tier Tribunal's assertion that  Judge  Kebede  had
    found that there were family members in Pakistan who could support  the
    appellant, such that she would not return alone  to  Pakistan,  and  in
    addition, she contended that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  displayed
    bias and had descended into the arena by cross-examining witnesses, who
    were bewildered and scared by the hostility of her questioning. She had
    given the impression at the beginning  of  the  hearing  that  she  was
    minded not to allow the appeal. When  Counsel  requested  her  to  stop
    cross-examining, the Judge was alleged to have said that he could  make
    whatever application he liked.

26. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Finch  on  the
    basis that the First-tier Tribunal in this appeal had erred in fact and
    law by finding that the appellant had close family members in  Pakistan
    with whom she would be living, and that she would not be  living  as  a
    lone woman, if returned to Pakistan.

27. Upper Tribunal Judge Finch considered the record of proceedings, noting
    that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  had  indeed  asked  a  substantial
    number of questions after recording that  the  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer had indicated that he did not wish to cross-examine a  witness.
    She noted that, applying SA (clarificatory questions  from  immigration
    judges  -  best  practice)  Iran  [2006]  UKAIT  00017,  the  level  of
    questioning by the Judge was capable of giving rise to an appearance of
    bias by the Tribunal.

Rule 24 Reply

28. The respondent filed a Rule 24 Reply, arguing that the grounds  were  a
    mere disagreement, and noting as follows:

         "4.  At paragraph 15  of  the  determination  it  does  record  the
         evidence that the appellant has been diagnosed with agoraphobia and
         dysphoria.  It is also clear that  the  Judge  has  considered  the
         medical evidence.  The Judge was entitled to find at  paragraph  39
         that the  medical  evidence  did  not  support  the  appellant  and
         witnesses' assertions.  In this appeal none of  the  witnesses  has
         been found credible.

         5.    At  paragraph  43,  the  Judge  adequately  reasons  why  the
         appellant would be able to return to Pakistan and she would not  be
         without emotional support.

         6.   The respondent requests an oral hearing."

29. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Error of law hearing (19 April 2016)

30. On 19 April 2016, this appeal came before  me  for  a  decision  as  to
    whether there was an error of law.  I had before me a witness statement
    from Mr Thomas Power, the Home Office Presenting Officer at the hearing
    on 23 April 2016, taken from his record of proceedings  (which  is  not
    attached). It is very brief and I will cite it in full.

         "I, Thomas Power, represented the Secretary of State for  the  Home
         Department at the appeal hearing of Ayesha  [S]  on  the  23  April
         2015, at the IAC Taylor  House  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Hanes. The following is my account of the hearing as taken from  my
         record of proceedings.

          1. My record of proceedings does not record,  nor  can  I  recall
             making  any  concessions  or  making  any  indication   of   a
             concession with regard to the Secretary of State's position on
             the matter.

          2. I did engage with the evidence of the appellant,  Abideen  [S]
             and Ricky [R] by way of cross-examination.  I would not say  I
             was reluctant to conduct cross-examination  of  the  witnesses
             tendered to give evidence  but  challenged  or  clarified  the
             evidence as I felt it was appropriate to further the Secretary
             of State's position.

          3. My record of  proceedings  does  not  show  that  Judge  Hanes
             interjected to cross-examine the  witnesses  herself,  rather,
             when the appellant's barrister or I had finished questioning a
             witness, Judge Hanes asked questions  to  merely  clarify  the
             evidence.

         I believe the above to be a truthful and accurate reflection of the
         hearing."

    Mr Power did not appear and I was unable to test his evidence by cross-
    examination.

31. Ms Nabila Mallick, Counsel  who  had  appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, gave evidence.  She  adopted  her  witness  statement  of  31
    January 2016 (which also did not attach any contemporaneous note).

32. In her witness statement, Ms Mallick said that before the  hearing,  as
    is her custom, she approached the Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  to
    agree issues.  The two representatives agreed that there was  an  issue
    as to change of circumstances since the hearing before  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Kebede, as the appellant's parents were now settled in the United
    Kingdom, and the question was therefore whether the appellant would  be
    returned to Pakistan as a lone woman.

33. At the beginning of the hearing, Ms  Mallick's  evidence  was  that  Mr
    Power, the Home Office Presenting Officer told the  Tribunal  that  'he
    had few questions of the appellant, although he did intend to  ask  her
    questions regarding the medical evidence, but not many.  He  also  said
    he had few questions to ask of the witnesses'.

34. Ms Mallick raised the new evidence  with  the  Judge,  who  retired  to
    consider  it  and  then  returned.  The  hearing  proceeded.  Counsel's
    statement continues as follows:

         "6.  I proceeded with the hearing, however throughout the  hearing,
         [the  Judge]  interjected  overtaking  cross-examination   of   the
         appellant and her witnesses,  after  the  [Home  Office  Presenting
         Officer] completed cross-examination.  The manner and tone of  [the
         Judge's]  questioning   became   gradually   more   aggressive   as
         proceedings continued.

         7.   [The Judge] interjected,  challenging  the  appellant  on  her
         medical evidence, putting paragraphs of the medical reports to [the
         appellant and her  witnesses].   She  then  put  questions  to  the
         appellant's father and brothers, challenging them on their answers.

         8.   The immigration judge did not act independently but had  taken
         an adversarial role.  I objected on  2  occasions.  On  the  second
         occasion, I believe [the Judge] took a note of my  objection  after
         suggesting I could make whatever application I liked but  that  she
         was going to continue with her questions.

         9.   The  immigration  judge's  approach  caused  one  advocate  to
         comment that he would rather be adjourned than to put his  client's
         case before [the Judge]."

35. Ms Mallick gave oral evidence.  She adopted her statement and then said
    that the Judge had asked questions on the medical evidence, dependency,
    return to Pakistan and so on.  She had asked a lot of questions.    All
    the witnesses had been nervous and confused by the aggressive,  hostile
    questions asked.  Their recollection of the facts had been  shaken  and
    it seemed as though the Judge  had  been  trying  to  trick  them  into
    admitting that their evidence was fabricated.

36. In cross-examination, Ms Mallick's said that her evidence was from  her
    recollection, and from the grounds.   Ms Mallick  accepted  that  there
    had been no formal concession by the Home  Office  Presenting  Officer,
    but maintained that cross-examination by  the  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer had been minimal.

37. Ms Mallick said that she was not the quickest of note  takers  but  had
    drafted the grounds as soon as she received the decision, in  late  May
    2015. Since receiving the  grant  of  permission  to  appeal,  she  had
    rechecked it against her notes: she apologised for not  attaching  them
    to her statement.  Ms Mallick stated that she had  re-examined  all  of
    the witnesses, but by then the damage was done.  The Judge had  already
    made up her mind as to the 'real facts'.

38. In re-examination, Ms Mallick reminded the Tribunal  that  all  of  the
    witnesses had stated that there was no  family  in  Pakistan  who  were
    willing or able to take on the care of their sister: even if there were
    family members (the paternal uncle) they were not willing.    The  Home
    Office Presenting Officer had not challenged Ms Mallick's position that
    the appellant would be returned  to  Pakistan  as  a  lone  woman.   Ms
    Mallick was not certain whether she had been given the opportunity  for
    further re-examination after the Judge's questions,  but  she  did  not
    believe that had been the case.

39. After hearing submissions, I examined the record of proceedings in  the
    judge's handwriting on the file.  The Judge recorded that the appellant
    gave evidence first.  She had notes in front  of  her,  but  the  Judge
    asked her to give evidence from her own  recollection.   The  appellant
    adopted her witness statement and there were 7 supplementary  questions
    from her Counsel, 7 in cross-examination, and  25  questions  from  the
    Judge.  No opportunity to re-examine at  the  end  of  those  questions
    seems to have been given or taken.

40. The next witness was the appellant's brother Arifeen.  He  adopted  his
    statement and was asked no  supplementary  questions  by  Counsel.   In
    cross-examination, Mr Power asked 11 questions.   Ms  Mallick  asked  3
    questions in re-examination, then the Judge asked 7  further  questions
    and gave an opportunity for additional re-examination.  There was no re-
    examination.

41. The following witness was Abideen.  He adopted his  statement  and  was
    asked 4 supplementary questions by Ms Mallick.  There were 5  questions
    in cross-examination by Mr Power, and 4 in re-examination.   The  Judge
    asked a further 10 questions and  then  gave  an  opportunity  for  re-
    examination. There were 5 questions by way of re-examination.

42. Next, Wajahat gave evidence.  He adopted his statement.  There were  no
    supplementary questions and no cross-examination.  The  Judge  asked  9
    questions.   Counsel  then  objected,  saying  the  Judge  was   cross-
    examining.  The Judge said that she was seeking to clarify the  witness
    statement, which was 'unclear'.  She asked 5 more questions (a total of
    14, for a witness  whose  evidence  had  not  been  challenged  by  the
    respondent).  She did not  offer  Ms  Mallick  an  opportunity  to  re-
    examination at the end of her questions.

43. The next witness was Ricky.  His statement was adopted and  there  were
    no supplementary questions.  Mr  Power  asked  7  questions  in  cross-
    examination and Ms Mallick asked 3  in  cross-examination.   The  Judge
    asked another 3 questions and gave an opportunity for re-examination.

44. Finally, the appellant's  father  gave  evidence.   His  statement  was
    adopted, with no supplementary questions.  He  was  cross-examined  (12
    questions).  There  was  no  re-examination  and  the  Judge  asked  no
    questions.

45. The questions recorded by the Judge went beyond clarification  and  can
    properly be characterised as descending into the arena, by taking  over
    cross-examination.   I have considered the written evidence of Mr Power
    as to what occurred, and the oral evidence of Ms Mallick.   The  record
    of proceedings supports Ms Mallick's evidence that  she  did  challenge
    the  Judge's  questioning  and  that  the  Judge  asked  a  great  many
    questions, in some cases where the respondent had chosen not to  cross-
    examine, and in other cases, where Mr Power had challenged or clarified
    the evidence as I felt it was appropriate to further the  Secretary  of
    State's position.  For at least two witnesses, did not offer Ms Mallick
    the opportunity to re-examine after her questions were complete.

46. The conduct of the Judge was procedural inappropriate and amounts to  a
    material error of law. I set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and ordered that the decision be remade in the Upper  Tribunal
    with no findings of fact or  credibility  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision preserved.

Substantive hearing (7 November 2016)

47. The appeal therefore  came  before  me  for  hearing  afresh,  with  no
    findings  of  fact  or  credibility  maintained.   All  four   of   the
    appellant's brothers attended the hearing, but her brothers  Ricky  and
    Wajahat did not give evidence.

48. As before, the decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede  stands  as  the
    Devaseelan starting point.  I have before me the witness statements  of
    the appellant, her father Mr Siddique, and her brothers Arifeen, Ricky,
    Wajahat and Abideen.  Oral evidence was given by the appellant, Mr [S],
    and her brothers Arifeen and Abideen. The appellant's evidence and that
    of her witnesses was based on the witness statements prepared in  April
    2015 for the First-tier  Tribunal  hearing.  As  before,  there  is  no
    evidence from Mrs [P]: her position in this account has to  be  deduced
    from the medical and social work  evidence,  and  that  of  her  family
    members.

49. I approached the  hearing  on  the  basis  that  this  appellant  is  a
    vulnerable  as  defined  at  section  59(1)(d)  of   the   Safeguarding
    Vulnerable Groups Act 2006 and I therefore had regard to  the  guidance
    to Judges of the FTTIAC and  UTIAC  given  in  the  Joint  Presidential
    Guidance Note No. 2 of 2010 entitled 'Child, Vulnerable  and  Sensitive
    Appellant Guidance' in the direction of the hearing.  I discussed  with
    the appellant, who was crying even before her evidence began,  how  the
    Tribunal could make her more comfortable in giving her evidence.

50. Two of the appellant brothers (Ricky and Wajahat) were  sitting  behind
    her.  I asked if it would assist if they sat next to the appellant, and
    she said that it would.  Counsel  confirmed  that  they  would  not  be
    giving evidence.  The appellant then gave her evidence with one brother
    on each side, holding her hands.  I asked the appellant to let me  know
    if she needed a break during her evidence.  I also explained that after
    some supplementary questions from Mr Nicholson, Ms Ahmad for  the  Home
    Office would ask questions to give her an opportunity to respond to any
    matters on which the respondent would rely, and that I would  also  ask
    about matters on which I needed clarification, as we  went  along.  The
    appellant confirmed that she understood and had no objection.

51. The appellant cried throughout her evidence and looked down most of the
    time.  Her voice was very quiet.  Both  Counsel  and  the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer, Ms Ahmad, asked their questions  in  a  non-hostile
    manner, as did I when I needed clarification.  There was  no  objection
    to such questions as I did ask.

Appellant's evidence

52. The appellant adopted her witness statement of 18 April 2015.  In  that
    statement, she said that she was born in Pakistan but moved back to the
    United Arab Emirates when she was a month old.  Mr [S] was  working  in
    Dubai as a banker.  She stated that the family always  lived  together,
    in Dubai and in the United Kingdom.  In 2003, her 3  youngest  brothers
    went to the United Kingdom to study, leaving  only  the  appellant,  Mr
    [S], Mrs [P] and Ricky in Dubai: they all visited the younger  brothers
    frequently in the United Kingdom.  In 2005, Ricky got a job at the same
    bank where Mr [S] worked.

53. In 2005, Mr [S] was made redundant from his banking post.   Ricky  kept
    his job at the bank.  The appellant was then 17 years old and had  just
    completed her 'O' levels.  She was hoping to go on and  study  fashion,
    but after Mr [S]'s redundancy she could not go to  University  and  her
    education was interrupted.  Mr [S]  arranged  a  United  Kingdom  study
    visa, but Mrs [P] became ill, and she was unable to use it.  Mr [S] had
    15 months left on his visa, to find  a  new  job:  he  tried,  but  was
    unsuccessful, and  in  September  2006,  when  the  visa  expired,  the
    appellant and her parents left for the United Kingdom, travelling  back
    and forth on visit visas at first; the appellant and her  family  would
    spend the maximum of 6 months on a visit visa in  the  United  Kingdom,
    then return (presumably also as visitors) to the United Arab  Emirates,
    interspersed with short visits to Pakistan.

54. From about 2010, the appellant and her parents remained in  the  United
    Kingdom after their last visit visa  expired.   In  January  2011,  the
    eldest brother joined the rest of the family, and his  Polish  fianc�e,
    in the United Kingdom.  None  of  the  family  now  has  any  right  of
    residence in the United Arab Emirates and the appellant's  evidence  is
    that she has no social, cultural or family ties to Pakistan.  There  is
    no family property there: when  the  family  visited,  they  stayed  in
    hotels.

55. The appellant ascribed her mental illness to the  interruption  of  her
    life and her studies when Mr [S] lost his job, which coupled  with  Mrs
    [P]'s illness, made her  disappointed  as  she  felt  deprived  of  her
    education. She was  extremely  disappointed  by  the  reversal  of  her
    original  successful  application  to  the  First-tier   Tribunal   for
    indefinite leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom,  and  shocked  and
    traumatised by the 6 am visit from  the  Immigration  Officers  at  her
    home, following her EEA dependant application.  The appellant says that
    their loud knocking at her door and torch shone on her face to identify
    her left her  with  flashbacks,  and  a  feeling  of  fear  and  panic.
    Overall, the appellant felt that life had been unfair to  her:  all  of
    her family were settled and she was the only one  left  dependent  upon
    them, without any lawful status, despite her attempts to regularise her
    position.

56. The appellant stated that she experienced  panic  attacks,  was  always
    tearful, had been hurting herself  on  broken  glass,  and  had  fallen
    downstairs after a blackout.  She was now never alone by herself, being
    accompanied by family members when going to medical appointments or  to
    Eaton House to report to immigration officers. On 4 February 2015,  she
    had suffered a  major  panic  attack  at  Eaton  House  while  held  in
    security, when the place was crowded: since then,  a  letter  had  been
    provided by her  consultant,  Dr  Cohen,  which  allowed  her  to  have
    somebody with her in public places  like  Eaton  House.   Her  brothers
    always came along on her medical and reporting visits.

57. When left alone, the appellant had  suicidal  thoughts  and  felt  very
    lonely.  She tried to stay with family members to keep  those  thoughts
    at bay.  The appellant said she was very dependent  on  Mrs  [P],  from
    whom she had never been separated, and with whom she still slept in the
    same bed.  She did not know how to live without her; if  she  lost  Mrs
    [P], it would end the appellant's life.

58. In response to supplementary questions from Mr Nicholson, the appellant
    said that she had last seen her  psychotherapist,  Dr  Halari  2  weeks
    before the Upper Tribunal hearing, and would be seeing her on  Saturday
    12 November 2016.  She was handed a schedule (prepared by  Mr  [S])  of
    her travel to Pakistan and confirmed that she had never travelled alone
    to Pakistan, and that the longest she had  ever  stayed  there  was  50
    days.

59. In cross-examination, the appellant confirmed  the  evidence  about  Mr
    [S]'s loss of his job and visa status in  Dubai.   The  family  had  to
    leave.  She was asked about her maternal and paternal uncles:  Mrs  [P]
    had one brother, but there was no longer any contact and  she  did  not
    know why.  Mr [S] had one brother,  who  lived  in  Pakistan  when  the
    family last had contact with him.  That was some time ago and  she  did
    not know where he was now.  Her father and mother were  not  interested
    in her uncles: she did not know what had occurred to cause  the  family
    rift.  The appellant's grandparents were all dead and as far as she was
    aware, she had no cousins in Pakistan.

60. The appellant had lost her chance of studying because she  was  looking
    after Mrs [P]. She would have liked to  study  at  home  but  had  been
    unable to do  so.   Hse  lived  with  her  brothers,  their  wives  and
    children, all in one house, with her parents as well.

61. The appellant said that she was not now taking any medication, but  was
    seeing Dr Halari regularly.  It was put to the appellant that it was  a
    contradiction for her to say that she could not cope herself, but also,
    that she was Mrs [P]'s carer.  The appellant explained that  while  her
    sisters-in-law were able to help in the daytime, she was  the  one  who
    was there in the bed at night when she wanted to turn  over.   Mrs  [P]
    was quite obese, and needed support.  The appellant  needed  Mrs  [P]'s
    emotional support and felt a bit better when around her: she  was  very
    attached.

62. The appellant confirmed that she was now 29 years old and it  was  two,
    or perhaps three years since she  had  left  the  house  unaccompanied.
    When she tried, she was afraid: she thought something would  happen  to
    one of her parents and she got quite bad panic attacks.

63. The  family  spoke  English  at  home,  although  the  appellant  could
    understand basic Urdu.  One sister-in-law was originally Polish but now
    a British citizen, the other  two  were  both  British  by  origin  and
    citizenship.  The family's cooking ranged across  all  cuisines.    All
    her family, except the appellant and Mrs  [P],  were  British  citizens
    now.  Mrs [P] was waiting to hear  about  her  citizenship.   Only  the
    appellant lacked status.  If she had to return to Pakistan,  no  family
    member would go with her as they all  had  jobs  and  families  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The family had talked about it: nobody would leave the
    United Kingdom to accompany her.

64. There was no re-examination.

65. At the end of her evidence, the appellant and one of her brothers  went
    outside so that she could take a breather and recover after the  stress
    of giving evidence.  The hearing continued, and  she  returned  to  the
    room during the next witness' evidence.

Evidence of [M Abideen S] ('Abideen')

66. Abideen adopted his witness statement of 18  April  2016.   He  was  no
    longer working as a manager at McDonalds Fast Food; now, he  worked  in
    security  for  British  Airways.   He  confirmed  the  communal  living
    arrangement and that his sister had been living in the  house  most  of
    the time since 2006.  The family moved to its  present  home  in  2011,
    following Abideen's marriage in March 2011.

67. The whole family were worried  about  the  appellant,  her  immigration
    status and her worsening mental health.  She would suffer badly if  she
    was expected to go to  Pakistan  because  there  was  nobody  there  to
    support her or provide the care she needed, and  she  had  never  lived
    there alone.  He would  worry  all  the  time  if  his  sister  was  in
    Pakistan.  The family had always lived together; his sister rarely went
    out and they always had to accompany her, because she was  tearful  and
    fearful.

68. Abideen is a British citizen and his future is here, not  in  Pakistan.
    He had been to Pakistan as a child for family holidays or visiting  his
    late grandparents, but had no wish to live there.

69. In cross-examination, Abideen was asked about  his  family  members  in
    Pakistan.  He had been surprised, at the  previous  hearing,  to  learn
    that he had a paternal uncle still in Pakistan.  His father never spoke
    of his brother and the family had no ties to the country.  Abideen  had
    last been in Pakistan in the 1990s, when his grandmother was alive.  He
    was a young child then, and now he  was  in  his  thirties.   When  his
    grandmother died, the  appellant's  father  had  brought  his  paternal
    grandfather back to Dubai, where he died in 1993.

70. Their mother had no contact with her family in Pakistan after marriage:
    the family was living in Dubai.  He had no knowledge  of  his  maternal
    grandparents, both of whom were now dead.  He did know there had been a
    maternal uncle, but he also died, quite some time ago.

71. Abideen clarified that only 10 family members currently  lived  in  the
    house.  His eldest brother Ricky came and went.

72. The appellant had  severe  agoraphobia.   She  was  having  fortnightly
    psychotherapy,  but  was  not  on  any  medication  now.    Since   the
    agoraphobia had developed, his sister never went out alone; she was not
    out of sight of family members for even a few minutes.  The family  had
    encouraged her to plan a journey outside the house, or to try making  a
    solo journey, because  the  psychotherapist  said  this  was  what  she
    needed, but it never happened.  The appellant's medical  condition  did
    not allow her to move freely, or think logically.

73. Their mother had serious mobility issues.  Their father had just had  a
    heart bypass operation and was on his second post-surgical check-up.

74. All of them now had jobs and family in the United Kingdom,  so  it  was
    highly unlikely that anyone would accompany the appellant to  Pakistan,
    if she had to return. They would not sacrifice their relationships  for
    life in Pakistan,  nor  would  they  be  able  to  help  the  appellant
    financially when she was there.

75. In re-examination, Abideen said that he had a child and that all  three
    of his brothers also had children.

Evidence of [M Arifeen S] ('Arifeen')

76. Arifeen adopted his statement of 18 April  2015.   In  that  statement,
    Arifeen said that he had been employed full time at the  London  Clinic
    from July 2009, where he is Deputy Head of IT for  London.   He  earned
    �48000.  He provided for his sister and his  parents  financially,  and
    had done so for 9 years (now 10 years) since 2006.   Before  coming  to
    the United Kingdom, he had lived with his sister in a joint family unit
    for 16 years, since her birth.  She was very important to the family.

77. The family rent a 7-bedroom home and have no recourse to public  funds.
    They had been living together as a family unit in  the  United  Kingdom
    since 2008-2009.

78. The appellant had a very strong emotional and physical bond with  their
    mother, with whom she had shared a bed for the last 6  (now  7)  years.
    She cooked for their parents, and helped regularly with their  mother's
    physical care.

79. Their mother had osteoporosis, rheumatoid arthritis, and a severe  back
    injury, a herniated lumbar disc, and uncontrolled type 2 diabetes.  She
    had regular treatment in the United Kingdom for  these  problems.   Her
    spinal injury was historic, but her osteoporosis,  arthritis  and  back
    condition were worsening now and she required regular physical support.
     Their mother was mostly bedridden  now:  the  appellant  prepared  her
    special diabetic meals, helped her dress, and bathed her.

80. The  appellant's  mental  condition  had  come  on  gradually,  out  of
    depression about her immigration status and uncertain future prospects.
     She had self-harmed on several occasions,  including  cutting  herself
    with glass.  She wanted to live a normal, fear-free life, but could not
    at present.

81. In answer to supplementary questions from Mr  Nicholson,  Arifeen  said
    that he had never spoken to his paternal uncle and had learned  of  his
    existence only through his father.  His parents and siblings, and their
    families, were the only family he knew.  Her also had a maternal uncle,
    but his mother said that her brother had died.  He had  never  had  any
    relationship or contact with his maternal uncle.  He did not know if he
    had any maternal cousins in Pakistan.

82. He confirmed the family living arrangements and that the appellant  had
    stopped taking any  medication,  because  of  its  side  effects.   The
    medication had made her worse.  His sister's assistance in the home was
    now limited to her night support for Mrs [P]: it was  about  18  months
    since she had cooked for her parents or the family, and over two years,
    probably closer to 3  years,  since  his  sister  had  left  the  house
    unaccompanied.  The family had tried to persuade the  appellant  to  go
    outside alone, after the psychotherapist advised  them  that  it  would
    help their sister recover, but it  made  things  very  difficult.   The
    appellant would get worse, becoming panicky  and  nervous,  crying  and
    fearful.  She relied on the therapy provided by her psychotherapist, to
    help her get better so that in the future she could live an independent
    life.

83. Arifeen confirmed that no family member would go  to  Pakistan  if  his
    sister  were  removed  there.   There  were  no  family,   friends   or
    accommodation in Pakistan and it was unimaginable  that  the  appellant
    could be separated from her family. They had all made  their  lives  in
    the United Kingdom for the last 14 years and  had  no  real  ties  with
    Pakistan.  Arifeen certainly could not go himself: his ex-wife and  son
    lived 2 miles away, in Southall, and he needed to  remain  involved  in
    his son's life in the United Kingdom.

84. The family had never  had  any  relationship  with  their  maternal  or
    paternal uncles.  Arifeen's understanding was that his father  used  to
    give financial support to their paternal  uncle  and  his  family,  but
    after losing his banking job in the United Arab  Emirates,  his  father
    had been unable to continue doing so.  Arifeen understood that in 2007,
    when his father and his paternal uncle last met, the uncle  lived  with
    his family in an overcrowded flat with a very  low  standard  of  life.
    Their paternal grandparents had rented a small flat  for  him,  and  he
    understood that his paternal uncle had a wife and children.  His father
    had travelled to Pakistan alone in 2007 to tell  their  paternal  uncle
    that he could no longer support him, but the meeting had not gone well.
     There had been no contact since then, and the appellant's parents  had
    not returned to Pakistan after 2007.

85. Arifeen said that he had assisted his sister financially for the past 5
    years, as part of the communal family living structure, but  would  not
    be able to do so for her individually in Pakistan.  Arifeen's  evidence
    was that the appellant was 'high dependency' and  that  in  any  event,
    financial provision would  not  assist  her  in  adapting  to  life  in
    Pakistan. If the appellant were in Pakistan alone,  she  would  not  be
    stable.  She experienced uncontrolled panic attacks and it  would  take
    the family quite a while to calm her down.  She had to have one of  the
    family with her all the time.  It was not simply a question  of  money,
    living alone was no good for the appellant.

86. There was no re-examination.

Evidence of [SRS]

87. Mr [S] is the appellant's father.  He adopted  his  witness  statement,
    adding that he is now a  British  citizen.   He  confirmed  the  family
    arrangements and that the appellant is the only daughter, and the  only
    person in the family who has no leave to remain.  Mr [S] has not worked
    since losing his job  in  2005:   he  is  supported  by  his  sons  and
    daughters-in-law.  There were no family ties to Pakistan.

88. Mr [S]'s statement spoke of his wife's ill  health.   His  wife  had  a
    spinal  injury,   osteoporosis,   rheumatoid   arthritis   and   severe
    uncontrolled diabetes.  Her health was  deteriorating  at  an  alarming
    pace.  She was now bedridden and unable to perform  basic  tasks.   Mrs
    [P] used a wheelchair when she went to the doctor, and  to  move  about
    within the home.  The appellant made food for her parents and  assisted
    Mrs [P] at night, with changing sides, and guiding her to the lavatory.
    She also took responsibility for administering their daily medication.

89. Mr [S] had cardiovascular  disease,  bronchitis,  uncontrolled  type  2
    diabetes, and arthritis, which  severely  restricted  movement  in  his
    shoulders, knees, and feet.  Neither he nor Mrs [P]  had  travelled  at
    all since 2009, because of their severe mobility restrictions, but also
    because all of their family was in the United Kingdom, so they  had  no
    reason to travel.

90. Mr [S] confirmed the account of the appellant's  health  given  by  the
    other witnesses.  The  appellant,  like  her  parents,  was  completely
    dependent on the financial support of her brothers.

91. In answer to questions from Mr Nicholson, Mr [S] said that  his  wife's
    application for naturalisation had been held up  because  she  had  not
    been able to attend the  biometric  appointment  because  of  her  back
    problem.  Mrs [P] had indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom,
    so there was no difficulty in the meantime.

92. Mr [S] then spoke about his brother.  He had last seen him in  Pakistan
    in March 2007.  The financial issue of his  being  unable  to  continue
    supporting  his  brother  after  losing  his   job   had   broken   the
    relationship.  He went to see his brother alone, leaving the  appellant
    and Mrs [P] in Dubai:  he could hardly stay 4-5  days  because  of  the
    brother's reaction to that news.  He had not seen him since.

93. Mr [S] had never met Mrs [P]'s brother:  he had been  living  in  Dubai
    for almost 40 years and Mrs [P]  also  had  no  relationship  with  her
    brother.  In 2009 or 2010, Mrs [P] told Mr [S]  that  she  had  learned
    through a third party that her brother had died,  sometime  previously.
    Mr [S] explained that in Asian culture, when a  daughter  married,  she
    left her birth family and joined the family of her husband.  Mr [S] had
    no interest in Mrs [P]'s brother.

94. In cross-examination, Mr [S] said he did not know who told Mrs [P] that
    her brother had died.  He  had  not  bothered  to  ask.   He  had  left
    Pakistan in January 1973 and they were a growing family in Dubai.  They
    had no relatives, no cousins, and no social gatherings. Mrs [P] visited
    Pakistan rarely after her marriage, the  last  time  probably  in  July
    1990, when Mr [S]'s mother died.

95. While their mother was alive, Mr [S]'s parents had  lived  in  Pakistan
    with his brother, his sister-in-law and their children in a tiny  flat.
    Mr [S]'s mother had cared for his father, but when she died, there  was
    no one in Pakistan to care for him. Mr [S]'s  brother  could  not  help
    their father: he was in very poor condition, not  well  connected,  and
    away all day  and  night.   Their  father  also  had  cardiac  problems
    requiring medical treatment.

96. Mr [S] got his father a residence visa in Dubai  and  took  him  there,
    where Mrs [P] cared for his father until he died. When Mr [S]'s  father
    died in Dubai in 1993, Mrs [P] did not accompany Mr [S], who  took  his
    father's body back to Pakistan for burial on his own.

97. Mr [S] confirmed that the language spoken in the  family  home  in  the
    United Kingdom was English.   The  family  ate  mostly  Lebanese  food,
    plainly grilled.  Mr [S] was avoiding all food as he had a heart bypass
    4 months before the hearing (so in July 2016).  The  appellant  carried
    the medicine book for Mr [S], as sometimes he could not  remember  what
    he was supposed to take, so she would get  him  the  right  medication.
    Sometimes, the appellant would  take  her  parents  to  their  doctors'
    appointments.  The children used to drive Mr [S] to his appointments at
    Hammersmith hospital, which was a long way away, but that had not  been
    necessary for 4 months, since his operation.

98. Mr [S]'s  understanding  was  that  the  appellant  did  not  take  any
    medication; she had a fear of life, she was afraid that  she  might  be
    sent away from her parents, and so on.  The appellant had not gone  out
    alone for the last 2� to 3 years.  The appellant had tried leaving  the
    house on one or two occasions, only to be prevented by a panic  attack.
    After that, he had not pressed her to try to go out  alone:  sometimes,
    the appellant was even scared to open the main gate of the house on her
    own. The appellant had been seeing Dr Robert Cohen since  2014  and  he
    had referred her to Dr Halima.  The psychotherapy she was receiving was
    helping, there was improvement but it was slow,  and  would  take  some
    years.

99. There was no re-examination.

100. That was the end of the oral evidence.  I also had  witness  statements
    from Wajahat and Ricky, both dated 18 April 2016.   I  can  place  less
    weight on these documents as the brothers,  who  were  present  at  the
    hearing and supported their sister, did not give evidence.

Witness statement of [Wajahat S] ('Wajahat')

101. Wajahat said that he went to school with the appellant  and  felt  very
    close to her.  The appellant was the  youngest  of  the  siblings,  and
    cherished by them all.  His son, Aayan, spent a lot of  time  with  the
    appellant during the day, learning  from  her.   The  appellant  looked
    after Aayan while Wajahat and his wife were at work, and they  regarded
    her as a primary carer for the child.

102. Wajahat explained what had happened about the EEA application.  He  and
    his wife had moved out of the family home, just a few days  before  the
    immigration officer visit, taking the appellant with them, but she  was
    visiting the family home on that day, and asleep when  the  immigration
    officers called.  It had not been the appellant's intention to  deceive
    the respondent about where and with whom she lived, and  she  had  been
    very shocked by the early morning visit.   She  was  'living  in  fear'
    since then.

103. The rest of the statement replicates evidence already summarised.

Witness statement of [Ricky R] ('Ricky')

104. Ricky is also a banker and is the eldest  brother.   His  statement  is
    dated 18 April 2016.  In it, he says he lives  with  the  rest  of  the
    family and  is  married  with  a  young  daughter.   He  sponsored  the
    appellant's visit visas to Dubai between 2005-2010,  when  she  led  an
    itinerant lifestyle between Dubai and the United Kingdom.  He had a job
    in his father's former bank, from 2005 until  he  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom to join his now wife.

105. Ricky's evidence is that his  paternal  grandparents  lived  in  rented
    accommodation in Pakistan when his father left for  Dubai.   There  had
    never been any family property owned by their parents in  Pakistan.  If
    returned, the appellant would have nowhere to live.

106. The appellant's mental health had deteriorated in the last year  (April
    2014 to April 2015): she had severe  anxiety  and  panic  attacks,  and
    feared strangers.  Ricky  worked  from  home  during  the  day  so  was
    generally available to help if his sister got very anxious about  being
    separated from her family, or had a blackout.  He enjoyed his  life  in
    the United Kingdom and was 'a liberal': he had never lived in  Pakistan
    and did not intend to visit for any purpose in future.

Social work report

107. The bundle contains a report from an independent social  worker,  Diane
    Jackson,  prepared  at  the  request  of   the   appellant's   previous
    solicitors, Wesley Gryk.  She described the family circumstances at the
    date of her report, 22 January 2014.  She had visited the family  home,
    then a large house in Hammersmith.

108. The fulltime residents of that  house  were  the  appellant's  parents,
    then aged 66 and 58 years old; Arifeen, then  33  years  old,  who  was
    living apart from his wife, who lived in Greenford with their son, then
    6� years old, whom Arifeen saw every weekend;  Abideen,  and  his  wife
    Shaista, who had just had their first son on 28 December 2013, and whom
    Ms Jackson considered would be looking for a home of  their  own  soon;
    and the appellant.  Tashfeen (Ricky) the eldest  son,  lived  elsewhere
    with his wife and daughter, then just under 2 years  old;  Wajahat  and
    Ewelina rented a property nearby, and had a room of their  own  in  the
    family home, where their 3-year-old son Aayan spent the day every  day,
    and stayed from Thursday night to Sunday morning each week.

109. Ms Jackson recorded that the appellant,  as  the  only  daughter,  took
    primary responsibility for looking after Mrs [P],  prepared  meals  for
    her parents suitable for their diabetes, and cooked some meals for  the
    family.  She did most of the work of running the home  for  the  family
    members who  lived  there.   Wajahat  worked  for  Tashfeen/Ricky,  and
    Wajahat's wife also worked full time, so 3-year-old Aayan was cared for
    by the appellant and her parents, with the support of her brothers.  He
    would be going soon to nursery, and the plan  was  that  the  appellant
    would take and collect him from nursery.   Arifeen  and  Abideen  slept
    near Mr [S] when Aayan was staying; on other nights, Arifeen  slept  in
    Mr [S]'s room in case he needed assistance or was ill during the night.



110. The appellant had her own room, but did not sleep there.  She slept  in
    her mother's room downstairs.  Mrs [P]  said  that  the  appellant  did
    everything for her, gave her medicine, 'and she always  helps'.   At  7
    am, when Mrs [P] awoke, the appellant would bring her tea, and help her
    to the lavatory, Mrs [P] balancing herself between a stick on one  side
    and the appellant on the other.  The appellant also helped  her  change
    her clothes. Mrs [P] had been unable to take herself  to  the  bathroom
    upstairs for several months.  The property owner was going  to  have  a
    downstairs shower room converted into a wet room with a walk in bath.

111. The appellant would then make Mrs [P]'s skimmed milk  and  whole  grain
    cereal breakfast and prepare and administer Mrs [P]'s  morning  insulin
    injections.  Mrs [P] had been a good cook, but could no longer do that,
    or join the family for  meals.   The  appellant  did  the  cooking  and
    washing now, but said she could not cook like Mrs [P]. Mr [S] could not
    cook and was not expected to do so, for cultural reasons.

112. In  addition,  since  the  time  when  her  sister-in-law  Shaista  was
    pregnant and had gestational diabetes, the appellant did  not  get  any
    help from Shaista with food preparation either.  Now that the baby  had
    arrived, Abideen and Shaista were looking for  a  home  of  their  own.
    Wajahat and Ewelina had already moved out, wanting their own space,  so
    no help was forthcoming from them.

113. The appellant cleaned and changed the linen in  each  of  her  parents'
    rooms, cleaning both rooms, the downstairs lavatory and shower room  as
    well as her own.  Other family members kept their own rooms clean.

114. Until approximately  2011,  Mrs  [P]  had  been  able  to  control  her
    diabetes with oral medication and diet, but her health had deteriorated
    since then. Every day, Mrs [P] had 30 minutes infrared therapy for  her
    back pain, and the appellant would help her get comfortable and  change
    sides during that therapy, as well as massaging Mrs [P]'s legs to  help
    with swelling on her feet and increase her circulation.   Mrs  [P]  had
    monthly physiotherapy, going  by  car  with  her  wheelchair,  and  the
    appellant accompanied her.  Mrs [P]'s mobility  had  deteriorated,  and
    she spent most of her days in bed, taking no exercise, watching  movies
    on a laptop, reading and talking on the telephone.

115. In January 2014, when  this  report  was  written,  the  appellant  was
    trying to maintain a personal life.  She went to the gym, twice a week,
    a distance of 5 minutes from home.  She sometimes went to  Church  with
    her sister-in-law Ewelina.  She got to the cinema, or  a  girls'  night
    out with her sisters-in-law or  friends,  once  a  week,  or  at  least
    fortnightly.  She always made sure some of the others were home to keep
    an eye on her parents.  Other family members took Mr [S] to the  mosque
    on Friday, and sometimes other days.  The  appellant  hoped  to  run  a
    fashion business from home while continuing to look after  and  support
    her parents.

116. Ms Jackson's assessment of the family in January 2014 was that  it  was
    in transition between living as an extended family to living in smaller
    individual units.  The home was not big enough for all of the family to
    live together.  The four sons and  their  partners  were  committed  to
    looking after Mr [S] and Mrs [P], but they were all working, except for
    Shaista who had a new baby and was on maternity leave.

117. The report concludes:

         "6.4 The [appellant's] parents are extremely fortunate in having  a
         daughter, their youngest child, who is unmarried and  available  in
         the words of [Mrs [P]] to do 'everything for me'.  It is clear that
         her brothers and their wives support [the appellant] in her  caring
         role but without her there would be no one  to  be  the  full  time
         carer  for  their  parents,  especially  for  their  mother.   [The
         appellant's] care enables [Mrs [P]] an  intelligent  and  dignified
         woman, to live as full a life as her limited mobility allows and to
         enjoy the company  of  her  grandchildren.   Most  importantly,  it
         allows [Mrs  [P]]  to  have  her  personal  care  provided  by  her
         daughter, rather than by a stranger. ...

         6.6  Whilst I do not think  that  either  [Mr  [S]]  or  [Mrs  [P]]
         requires residential care at the present time, I am aware that [Mrs
         [P]'s] condition is progressive and that her mobility is  now  very
         limited.  [The appellant] loves her mother and her caring for  [Mrs
         [P]] is a representation of her love.  As an only daughter and  her
         youngest child, [the appellant] has a special relationship with her
         mother, they have always lived with each other and there is no  one
         in the family, let alone a stranger, able to  provide  the  quality
         and consistency of the personal care [Mrs  [P]]  requires  now  and
         will require in the future."

118. The prediction by Ms Jackson that the family  was  in  transition  into
    smaller units proved wrong: instead, the family chose to find a  larger
    house which would accommodate all  of  them,  and  return  to  communal
    living.

Medical evidence

119. The bundle contains medical evidence  about  the  appellant's  parents'
    physical health, and also the appellant's own health.  It is  important
    to read this evidence chronologically, as it shows the deterioration of
    the appellant and her parents over the years between 2012 and 2016.

120. The evidence concerning the  appellant's  parents  is  in  two  letters
    written on 24 July 2012 by Dr Alan D Kohn MB ChB  (Birmingham)  of  the
    Ealing Independent Family Practice concerning Mr [S], who  had  chronic
    obstructive  airways  disease,  resulting  in  cough  and  wheeze   and
    sometimes 'syncope with the coughing'.  His lung function was poor  and
    he needed to see a chest specialist.  Mr [S]  had  heart  disease,  for
    which he had a bypass in 2008, and was now taking 'maximal preventative
    therapy to keep his grafts open'.  That condition was under  reasonable
    control.  He had fair control of his type 2 diabetes, with the  aid  of
    insulin injections.

121. The report concluded that:

         "Mr [S] can manage his tasks of  everyday  living,  but  his  cough
         syncope (collapsing when coughing) is giving rise to  concern,  and
         means that he is not safe at present to be on his own.  All in all,
         with good medical input his prognosis  is  fair,  but  his  medical
         problems are bound to get worse with the passage of time."

    That report is now over 4 years old and the evidence before me is  that
    the appellant's father has had further heart  surgery,  in  about  July
    2016.

122. The letter concerning Mrs [P], dated 24 July  2012,  records  that  she
    also has type 2 diabetes controlled by insulin injection and metformin.
     Her diabetes is poorly controlled.  She had  already  had  a  cataract
    replaced in her left eye, and also had an early cataract in  her  right
    eye, both diabetic complications.  She had raised cholesterol which was
    only partially controlled with Atorvastatin.

123. An MRI scan confirmed that Mrs [P] had extensive  degenerative  disease
    of  her  spine,  quite  advanced  osteoporosis   for   her   age,   and
    osteoarthritis in her knees.  She had a home visit in mid-July 2012 for
    a flare up of back pain not controlled by  simple  analgesics  and  was
    prescribed opioid painkillers.  The report concluded:

         "Mrs [P] currently requires a large amount of assistance  from  her
         family to help with personal care.  At present  she  is  unable  to
         walk.  Her mobility problems are likely to  settle  down  somewhat,
         but the degenerative  changes  in  her  spine  are  widespread  and
         structural, and it is unlikely that any surgery  will  help,  which
         leaves us to having to manage this condition with physiotherapy and
         pain relief.

         In my view, she will become increasingly  disabled  over  the  next
         year or two, and require continuous help with her personal care."

    On the evidence of the appellant and her brothers,  this  rather  bleak
    prediction has been  borne  out  by  the  deterioration  in  Mrs  [P]'s
    physical condition in the ensuing 4 years.

124. I have before me documentary evidence  about  the  appellant's  medical
    circumstances.  The appellant's first medical  intervention  came  when
    she contacted  her  general  medical  practitioner,  Dr  Susan  Beattie
    BSc(medical) MBBS FRACGP, at the London General  Practice  in  February
    2014 with a history of depression and episodes of anxiety, including 2-
    3 episodes of self-harm. These matters  do  not  appear  to  have  been
    brought to Ms Jackson's attention when she  wrote  her  report  on  the
    family circumstances, just a month earlier.

125. Dr Beattie noted that the appellant had been treated  for  low  thyroid
    (hypothyroidism) since the age of 14 and was living at  home  with  her
    supportive family.   She  had  vague  suicidal  thoughts  the  previous
    Sunday, but was proactive in trying to alleviate them  by  calling  the
    Samaritans.  She was tearful and had difficulty sleeping.   She  wanted
    to become 'the person that she feels  is  inside  her,  that  being  an
    ambitious, productive, positive and confident young woman'. Her  doctor
    referred her to Dr Mike McPhillips, a consultant psychiatrist.

126. On 14 April 2014, Dr N Dove referred the appellant to Dr Robert  Cohen.
     He said this:

         "Dear Robert,

         Thank you for seeing this poor girl, who presented to  Syon  Clinic
         GP Practice today with a history of anxiety/ depression  and  self-
         harm.

         Kind regards

         Dr N Dove MB ChB

         10/04/2014 Anxiety depression Dr N Dove

         26-year-old Muslim girl who presented in a  distressed  state  with
         symptoms of anxiety and  depression  with  episodes  of  self-harm.
         Lives with parents and brothers.  Left school after  O  levels  but
         has not worked, and cared  for  Mother  who  is  diabetic  and  has
         mobility problems.  She has episodes of  anxiety  and  fights  with
         everybody.  In addition, she suffers from memory lapses which  have
         caused problems whilst looking after Mother's insulin requirements.
          She reports thoughts of suicide and has self-harmed on  more  than
         one occasion with broken glass which she stood on.   She  said  she
         enjoys being hurt but does not want to kill herself and has a  fear
         of losing her Mother as this would be the end of her existence too.
          Appetite disturbance - overeating and sleep poor -  insomnia  with
         upsetting thoughts.  The family are originally from Dubai."

127. The next medical evidence in the bundle is a report by Dr Raj  Persaud,
    FRCPsych, MSc, MPhil, BSc DHMSA a consultant psychiatrist and  Emeritus
    Visiting Gresham Professor for the public understanding of  psychiatry.
    He has  over  20  years'  experience  within  the  NHS  and  a  stellar
    reputation and professional history at the Bethlem Royal  and  Maudsley
    Hospitals  Trust,  the  Institute  of  Psychiatry,  the  Institute   of
    Neurology, the University  of  London,  and  Johns  Hopkins  University
    Medical School and Hospital in the United States.

128. Dr Persaud's report is brief and was based on one  appointment,  on  17
    April 2014.  The appellant was accompanied to the appointment by one of
    her brothers, who did most of the talking.  At that time, she had  been
    prescribed  Buspirone,   an   anti-anxiolytic   and/or   antidepressant
    prescription medication by her treating psychiatrist.  His  report  was
    based on what the appellant and her brother told him,  with  access  to
    corroborating information.  Dr  Persaud  noted  her  history,  recently
    begun, of  self-harm  by  cutting  with  broken  glass.  He  noted  the
    closeness of the appellant's relationship with her Mrs [P] and her fear
    of separation, as well as the intensive care  the  appellant  gave  her
    mother.  The report continued:

         "The issue that then arises is how would she cope if separated from
         her mother by being deported.  A  real  question  arises  over  her
         ability to fend for herself, and  survive  psychologically  without
         her mother.  Given the family constellation is such that there  are
         four brothers and she is the only woman,  it  does  make  intuitive
         sense that the burden of care of the  disabled  mother  would  have
         fallen largely on the [appellant's] shoulders  given  the  cultural
         dynamics.

         OPINION

         My  conclusions  are  that  this  lady  suffers  from  anxiety  and
         depression with suicidal impulses, but the precise  reasons  remain
         somewhat unclear.  Extreme dependency of the kind  being  described
         here and alleged to exist between her  mother  and  the  client  is
         difficult to prove exists,  particularly  as  the  two  people  who
         appear to be mutually interdependent are  not  yet  separated  from
         each other - which in a sense is the acid test.

         I have based my opinion on what the [appellant] has told  me,  with
         access to corroborating  information,  and  my  report  has  to  be
         interpreted in that light.  I was impressed with the  vividness  of
         her descriptions and the  intensity  of  her  emotional  reactions,
         rendering [sic] me to believe it is highly unlikely that  the  core
         parts of her accounts are fabricated or exaggerated."

129. During 2014 and early 2015, the appellant saw Dr Robert I Cohen,  MBBS,
    LRCP, DRCOG, MRCPsych, Dip Crim, a consultant psychiatrist who works in
    the private sector.  The bundle contains letters from him written on 27
    November 2014, 13 February 2015, and 2 April 2015, together  with  copy
    prescriptions and private medical bills, and various other  contractual
    documents.

130. Mrs [P] accompanied the appellant to the 26 November  2015  appointment
    with Dr Cohen. On 27 November 2014, Dr Cohen wrote:

         "As her mother had accompanied [the appellant]  to  the  Clinic,  I
         invited her into the consultation.  Although she does have a number
         of aches and pains and some back problems, she is, to  all  intents
         and purposes, reasonably fit and well and  can  certainly  function
         independently.

         The reality is that [the appellant] is totally dependent  upon  her
         and somewhat worryingly continues to share a  bed  with  her.   She
         also expressed abject terror of something happening to her  parents
         and said that if her mother died she would have no alternative  but
         to take her life.

         [The appellant] remains profoundly agoraphobic and cannot really go
         out or do anything unaccompanied. Although she  initially  insisted
         that what she wanted was to dedicate her  life  to  her  mother,  I
         reminded her that she was already achieving that objective  and  it
         therefore made no sense that she would be seeking help if  she  was
         happy with that role.

         I  suggested  that  her  intermittent  outbursts  of  anger  are  a
         reflection of her frustration of not having enough in her life that
         she values.  Eventually, she said that she would like to be able to
         go out on her own, to sleep in her own room, and to have a  career,
         although  she  cannot  contemplate  a  relationship  due   to   her
         difficulty in being able to trust people. ...

         I am going to try and work with her with the intention  of  helping
         her to make small, hopefully sustained changes,  and  to  start  on
         increasing her confidence to going out and about on her  own  using
         behavioural techniques. "

    The letter recorded that the appellant had  seen  Dr  Raj  Persaud  and
    Helen Backhouse but 'neither intervention was particularly successful'.



131. On 12 December 2014, Ms Helen Backhouse, psychotherapist, wrote to  the
    appellant after she  had  attended  three  sessions  of  psychotherapy,
    recording that 'you acknowledged that  you  didn't  want  to  make  any
    changes,  stating  that  it  was  others  who  felt  that  you   should
    change...the therapy was not helping and that you  wished  to  end  the
    therapy'.

132. On 13 February 2015, Dr Cohen wrote a 'To whom it may  concern'  letter
    in which he said that:

         "[The appellant] is currently under my care receiving treatment for
         depression and agoraphobia.  The nature of her  condition  is  such
         that she cannot venture out of her house on her own, and  needs  to
         be accompanied by a relative when attending  all  forms  of  social
         activity."

133. On 2 April 2015, Dr Cohen wrote a medical report, which  was  addressed
    to the appellant and based on 5 sessions  with  him,  the  last  on  26
    January 2016. The appellant had come to see him first on 17 April 2014,
    then there was a gap of 7 months, during which time she saw Dr  Persaud
    and  Dr  Backhouse.  In  the  intervening   months,   her   agoraphobia
    deteriorated. In November 2014, the appellant returned to Dr Cohen, who
    had continued to be involved with her care thereafter.

134. The appellant had an underactive thyroid  gland,  for  which  she  took
    Levothyroxine.  The appellant had no  history  of  psychiatric  illness
    before 2014, and there was no family history of  psychiatric  disorder.
    The  appellant's  agoraphobia  had  become  evident  in  2014  and  had
    increased over the six months before she saw Dr Cohen in November 2014.



135. On her own account, the  appellant  had  been  an  anxious  and  clingy
    child, bullied at school in Dubai because she wore glasses. At  school,
    she had dreamed of being a fashion designer. The appellant as an  adult
    was teetotal, a non-smoker, and did not use illicit drugs.   Since  her
    mid-teens, the appellant had cared for  her  mother,  as  a  result  of
    which, she had only limited  opportunity  to  develop  emotionally  and
    socially. She had not  had  any  relationship  with  a  member  of  the
    opposite sex, though she did want to have a husband and  a  family  one
    day.  At home, living with her  parents  and  brothers,  the  appellant
    spent her day online shopping and helping one of her brothers with  his
    sales on eBay.

136. The appellant had not managed to separate from Mrs [P] and  her  family
    to any greater extent,  despite  being  prescribed  an  anti-anxiolytic
    medication which did help somewhat with her anxiety.  By November  2014
    the  appellant  had  developed  panic  attacks,  and  was  experiencing
    blackouts, during one of which she had fallen downstairs.  Her symptoms
    were not typical of fainting or epilepsy.

137. On occasion, the appellant became overwhelmed with  her  situation  and
    angry, throwing objects at walls and treading on broken glass. She  had
    never worked and had no social connections outside her immediate family
    in the United Kingdom. She did still enjoy life on  occasion,  watching
    films on television or going on family picnics, but there were fewer of
    those now that all her brothers and all her sisters-in-law had jobs.

138. The appellant had difficulty sleeping, partly  because  of  back  pain,
    for which she took Co-dydramol, and partly because she feared a tragedy
    in the house.  She was comfort eating and had put  on  about  3  kg  in
    weight.  She was tired all the time, tearful, and  saw  the  future  as
    dark.  She did not have suicidal feelings because she  needed  to  care
    for her mother.  The appellant wanted to dedicate her life to Mrs  [P]:
    she was in 'abject terror of something happening to her parents and how
    [she] would cope if her mother died'.

139. When pressed at the November 2014 meeting, the appellant admitted  that
    she would like to be able to go out on her own, sleep in her  own  room
    and have a career, but that trust issues prevented her  from  having  a
    relationship.

140. At the beginning of December 2014, Dr Cohen saw  the  appellant  again.
    They  discussed  the  principles  of  exposure  therapy,  to  help  the
    appellant overcome her fear of going out and about on her own.  She was
    prescribed  an  anxiolytic  drug,  Pregabalin,   to   help   with   her
    'intolerably high' levels of anxiety.

141. The next appointment was in early  January  2015.   The  appellant  had
    made no progress  in  going  out  and  about,  but  reported  that  the
    Pregabalin had a noticeable impact in reducing  her  anxiety  at  home.
    Mrs [P] had slipped a disc since the December 2014 appointment and  the
    appellant felt herself even more needed.   She  could  not  contemplate
    working  through  any  of  the  issues  discussed   in   the   previous
    appointments while Mrs [P]'s need for her was so acute.

142.  At  the  last  appointment  on  26  January  2015,   the   appellant's
    accompanying brother voiced the family's concerns  that  the  appellant
    remained unwilling to begin to separate from Mrs [P], as  discussed  in
    therapy.  Dr Cohen  suggested  that  the  appellant  try  small  steps,
    initially sleeping in a different bed  in  Mrs  [P]'s  room,  gradually
    working up to being able to sleep alone.   It is  unclear  whether  the
    appellant saw Dr Cohen again after that.

143. Since the autumn of 2015, the appellant has been treated by  Dr  Rozmin
    Halari MSc DClin Psychiatric, DClinHyp, C.Psychol,  AFBPSs,  Consultant
    Clinical (Neuro)  Psychologist  and  Honorary  Lecturer  Kings  College
    London.  A letter  from  her  on  2  November  2016  records  that  the
    appellant is receiving  psychotherapy  for  long-standing  anxiety  and
    moderate to severe depression.

         "[The appellant] continues to suffer from  severe  agoraphobia  and
         she is not able to  go  out,  even  short  distances,  without  her
         brother and father.  She continues to be heavily dependent  on  her
         family, in particular her brothers,  for  practical  and  emotional
         support.

         [The  appellant's]   difficulties   have   been   precipitated   by
         significant feelings of low mood,  anxiety,  stress  and  pressure,
         which has led to feelings of low self-worth and low self-esteem.

         She is currently engaging well in psychological therapy and she  is
         working on different ways to manage  her  stress  and  agoraphobia.
         She continues to be very  anxious  about  her  current  immigration
         situation and how she would cope without her  family.   Her  father
         has recently had a triple bypass operation and this  has  caused  a
         significant increase in her levels of anxiety and depression.   She
         spends all her time at home with her parents and she  continues  to
         care for them and is dependent on them emotionally.

         In  my  clinical  opinion,  [the  appellant]  would  experience   a
         significant deterioration in her mental state if she were not  with
         her family.  Her symptoms of anxiety and low mood  can  affect  her
         ability  to  vocalise  her  thoughts  and   feelings,   focus   and
         concentration.  She has a very strong attachment to her family  and
         she  is  the  primary  carer  for  her  mother  who  suffers   from
         significant physical health difficulties.   [The  appellant]  would
         really struggle without her family and  she  would  most  certainly
         deteriorate in her mental state if she were to be removed from  the
         United Kingdom."

    The evidence of the  family  is  that  the  appellant  sees  Dr  Halari
    fortnightly, on Saturdays, and finds it helpful,  but  that  she  still
    refuses to leave the house alone or let them out of her sight.

Submissions

144. For the respondent, Ms Ahmad relied  on  the  refusal  letter  and  the
    respondent's reasoning therein.  The appellant's private  life  in  the
    United Kingdom had been irregular, with the exception of 6 months as  a
    visitor.  Applying Miah (section 117B NIAA 2002 - children) [2016] UKUT
    131, the appellant's age, vulnerability and immaturity  must  be  taken
    into account, and the respondent's Immigration Directorate Instructions
    (IDIs), while subservient to primary and secondary legislation,  ranked
    as a relevant consideration to be taken into account by decision makers
    where they applied. The respondent would rely on paragraph  8.2.3.4  in
    relation to the high test for  'very  significant  obstacles'  and  the
    ability of the appellant to form an adequate private life in Pakistan.

145. In this case, the  evidence  was  that  the  appellant  had  a  medical
    condition which prevented her from socialising  outside  her  immediate
    family.  The Upper Tribunal should approach the medical  evidence  with
    caution, applying JL (medical reports-credibility)  China  [2013]  UKUT
    145 (IAC).  Judge Kebede had made a decision that the evidence  of  the
    appellant and her family members was unreliable and the Court of Appeal
    had rejected robustly the appellant's challenge to that evidence.

146. The present appeal arose from a different application; the evidence  of
    the appellant and her family that she was able to support and care  for
    her mother, and monitor and provide her  parents'  medication,  despite
    her depression, was contradictory.  The  family's  evidence  about  the
    ties in Pakistan lacked credibility,  particularly  Mr  [S]'s  lack  of
    sensibility to Mrs [P]'s reaction to her brother's death.  It  was  not
    credible that Abideen had not learned of the existence of his  paternal
    uncle until the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

147. If the appellant  were  returned  to  Pakistan,  there  would  be  help
    available for her there, as set out  in  the  respondent's  Country  of
    Origin report of 25 February 2015.  Ms Ahmad did not produce a copy  of
    that report.

148. The Upper Tribunal should not  be  prepared  to  find  that  there  was
    Kugathas dependency such that family life continued  to  exist  between
    the appellant and her family members.  The  evidence  was  self-serving
    and her ties to her parents and brothers did not in reality  go  beyond
    mere emotional ties.  Ms Ahmad referred me to the decision of the Court
    of Appeal in Rhuppiah v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2016] EWCA Civ 803, which held that both  financial  independence  and
    the ability to speak English were neutral factors in  consideration  of
    the public interest under section 117B of the Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended).  This appellant could  speak  English
    but was, Ms  Ahmad  accepted,  financially  dependent  on  her  family.
    Properly considered, nothing turned on either factor.  Her  removal  to
    Pakistan would be proportionate and the appeal should be dismissed.

149. For the appellant, Mr Nicholson relied on his  skeleton  argument.   In
    that document, he asserted that the appellant was entitled to leave  to
    remain under paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules  HC395  (as
    amended)  because  there  were  very  significant  obstacles   to   her
    integration into Pakistan if she were  required  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom.  The respondent's reliance on paragraph 322(1) was  misplaced:
    the appellant would suffer ostracisation and social stigma in Pakistan,
    both of which were  inimical  to  integration.   The  respondent's  own
    Country of Origin Report in July 2014 entitled 'Country information and
    guidance Pakistan: Women' at paragraph 1.3.14  assessed  that  internal
    relocation was likely  to  be  unduly  harsh  for  many  women  and  at
    paragraph 2.4 that it was  'next  to  impossible'  and  'generally  not
    socially acceptable' for women to live alone.

150. Mr Nicholson argued therefore that the appellant should be treated,  on
    the evidence before the Tribunal, as a woman who would be a lone  woman
    if returned to Pakistan, even if  her  profound  agoraphobia  were  not
    taken into account, and that  applying  the  Upper  Tribunal's  country
    guidance, by Upper Tribunal Judges Gleeson  and  Kebede,  in  SM  (lone
    women - ostracism) (CG) [2016] UKUT 67 (IAC),  on  the  facts  of  this
    appeal,  she  would  not  be  able  to  exercise  internal   relocation
    successfully in Pakistan because she has no male protector (husband  or
    relative), is agoraphobic, and would be liable to suffer a  significant
    deterioration in her mental state if separated from her family.

151. In relation to Article 8 ECHR, Mr Nicholson's skeleton argument  relies
    on Huang v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2007] UKHL 11 at
    paragraph 18: the appellant and her parents  are  vulnerable  and  that
    vulnerability needed to be taken into account. It was  now  established
    that the Secretary of State had a duty to consider the exercise of  her
    discretion outside the Immigration Rules in Article 8 ECHR cases  where
    there were exceptional compelling or  compassionate  circumstances  not
    sufficiently    recognised    within    the    Rules     (Nagre/Gulshan
    exceptionality).

152. Although Devaseelan applied to the  findings  of  Judge  Kebede,  there
    were important changes here, in  particular  the  grant  of  indefinite
    leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  to  the  appellant's  elderly
    parents, the medical and psychiatric evidence adduced, and  the  social
    worker's report.  Judge Kebede's decision had been overtaken by events.



153. In his oral submissions, Mr Nicholson  repeated  those  arguments.   He
    relied on the decision of the Upper  Tribunal  in  SM  (Pakistan).   He
    noted that there was in fact no finding by Upper Tribunal Judge  Kebede
    that  the  appellant  had  family  members  in  Pakistan.    Once   the
    aggravating factor of the appellant's health was  taken  into  account,
    the evidence  reached  the  standard  of  insurmountable  obstacles  to
    return: the prospect of  return  for  this  woman  was  far  more  than
    'difficult  or  challenging'.   Accordingly,  the   decision   of   the
    respondent was not in accordance with the law and the appeal should  be
    allowed.

154. I reserved my decision, which I now give.

Discussion

155. I remind myself that the decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede  based
    on the evidence before  her  on  2  February  2012  is  the  Devaseelan
    starting point.  Much of the evidence before  me  now  was  not  before
    Judge Kebede when she made that decision.  In particular,  the  changes
    in the appellant's health, and the  evidence  of  her  parents'  health
    problems, were matters of which Judge Kebede  was  not  aware,  because
    they occurred  later.   There  is  also  the  change  in  the  family's
    immigration status, in particular that of Mr [S] and Mrs [P], which are
    not what Judge Kebede thought would happen.

156. I have seen and  heard  the  appellant  and  her  family  members  give
    evidence, and I have reviewed the medical and social work evidence with
    care.  In the light of all the evidence before me,  in  particular  the
    evidence of a number of specialist doctors  with  long  experience  and
    appropriate qualifications, I take a different view of the  credibility
    of the appellant and her  family  from  that  which  was  taken,  quite
    properly, on the limited evidence before Judge Kebede.  I am  satisfied
    that the evidence of the appellant,  her  family  members,  the  social
    worker and the doctors presents a broad, credible core upon which I may
    base my decision in this appeal.

157. I therefore find the following facts and matters to be established,  to
    the  general  civil  standard  of  balance   of   probabilities.    The
    appellant's family has no real connection  with  Pakistan:  her  father
    left there to work in Dubai in 1973 and has not lived in Pakistan since
    then.  All of the appellant's grandparents in Pakistan have  died,  and
    there is no family property there.  Mrs [P] lost contact with  her  own
    brother when she married, and he is now dead.

158. The appellant's family has only  one  relative  who  may  still  be  in
    Pakistan, Mr [S]'s brother, who when last heard from in 2007 was living
    in an overcrowded flat in poor conditions with his wife  and  children.
    He is not prosperous; Mr [S]'s parents rented the flat originally,  and
    when Mr [S]'s mother died and he brought his father to join the  family
    in Dubai in 1990, it seems  that  Mr  [S]  continued  helping  out  his
    brother financially.  In 2007, when Mr [S] told  his  brother  that  he
    could not do so any longer as he had lost  his  job,  the  relationship
    between the brothers came to an abrupt end and they are not in contact.
    The appellant has never had a home in Pakistan and has visited only for
    short periods, for visa purposes mainly.

159. The appellant lived in Dubai until the age of 17, then for  some  years
    itinerantly between the United Kingdom, the United  Arab  Emirates  and
    Pakistan, before settling with her family in Pakistan.  It may be  that
    her mental health was always fragile: her doctors record that  she  was
    an anxious and clingy child who was bullied at school.  Be that  as  it
    may, the appellant coped and got a number of 'O'  level  qualifications
    in 2005, when there was a major family crisis.   Her  father  lost  his
    banking job in Dubai and her mother became ill.

160. The appellant was then only 17 and from that time,  she  has  been  her
    parents' carer. The family came to the United Kingdom and the appellant
    looked after the home and her nephew, cooking for  her  parents,  doing
    their cleaning and laundry, and sometimes cooking for the whole family,
    until her mental health broke down in 2014.  She has not left the house
    unaccompanied since early 2014  and  she  now  is  constantly  tearful,
    sometimes angry enough to throw things, gets panic attacks, self-harms,
    and can only cope with assisting her parents to  a  much  more  limited
    extent.  It is a long time since she cooked for  the  family.   She  is
    extremely interdependent with Mrs [P], who is now  very  disabled,  and
    her father also is not at all well.  The appellant has  never  had  the
    opportunity to mature into a fully adult woman and still sleeps in  her
    mother's bed, having panic attacks at the thought of anything happening
    to her parents.

161. The family all live together; the appellant's brothers and Mr [S]  have
    done their best to encourage the appellant  to  leave  the  house,  but
    without success.  Her distress is so great that  Mr  [S],  and  perhaps
    other family members, have stopped trying to make her leave the  house.
    The appellant has to have some member of family in sight at all  times,
    otherwise she feels lonely  and  panicky  and  sometimes  has  suicidal
    thoughts. That account emerges with great consistency from the evidence
    before me.

162. Private and family life within the Immigration  Rules  is  governed  by
    paragraph 276ADE, and in relation to adults, paragraph 276ADE (1) (vi):




       "276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to
       remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the date
       of application, the applicant:

         (i)  does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in  Section
         S-LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. to  S-LTR.4.4.  in  Appendix
         FM; and  ...

         (vi) ... is aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously  in  the
         UK for less than 20 years (discounting any period of  imprisonment)
         but there would be very significant obstacles  to  the  applicant's
         integration into the country to  which  he  would  have  to  go  if
         required to leave the UK."

163. The respondent's reasoning under paragraph 276ADE in her letter  of  27
    August 2014 fails to engage with  the  'significant  obstacles'  point,
    save to assert that:

         "You are aged 27 years and entered the United Kingdom  as  recently
         as September 2010, therefore you have a length of residency here of
         only 4  years.   When  considering  the  requirements  outlined  in
         paragraph 276ADE, it is noted that you have not lived  continuously
         in the United Kingdom for at least 20 years.   Furthermore,  whilst
         you have  not  lived  in  Pakistan  for  4  years,  are  not  in  a
         relationship with either a 'settled' person or British citizen,  or
         have children  whom  are  either  British  citizens/settled,  there
         wouldn't  be  any  significant  obstacles  experienced  upon   your
         return."

    There is no consideration in that very brief  reasoning  regarding  the
    appellant's mental health  problems,  which  are  acknowledged  in  the
    earlier part of the letter, or the extent to which they  amount  to  an
    obstacle on return.

164. Applying section 117B(1) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 (as amended), the maintenance of effective immigration control
    is in the public interest.  I accept  that  the  effect  of  paragraphs
    117B(2) and 117B(3) is neutral for the purposes of this appeal.  Almost
    all of the appellant's private and family life in  the  United  Kingdom
    has developed while she was here unlawfully.  If all  she  has  in  the
    United Kingdom is private life, I can give that little weight, pursuant
    to section 117B(4).

165. However, section 117B(4) only requires me  to  give  little  weight  to
    private life, or a relationship with a  qualified  person,  established
    while a person is in the United Kingdom unlawfully, as  this  appellant
    has certainly been.  The statutory presumption which it raises does not
    apply to other types of family life, to which the Razgar test continues
    to apply.

166. I considered, therefore, whether the appellant's  level  of  dependency
    on her family is such that she has family  life,  rather  than  private
    life, with them, and  in  particular  with  Mrs  [P].   In  Kugathas  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ 31, at [24]-
    [25], Lady Justice Arden expressed the test for family life (as opposed
    to private life) between adult children  and  their  families,  in  the
    following way:

         "24. There is no presumption that a person has a family life,  even
         with the members of a person's immediate family. The court  has  to
         scrutinise the relevant factors. Such factors  include  identifying
         who are the near relatives of the  appellant,  the  nature  of  the
         links between them and the appellant, the  age  of  the  appellant,
         where and with whom he has resided in the past, and  the  forms  of
         contact he has maintained with the other members of the family with
         whom he claims to have a family life.

         25.  Because there is no presumption of family life, in my judgment
         a family life is not established between an  adult  child  and  his
         surviving parent or other siblings  unless  something  more  exists
         than normal emotional ties: see S v United Kingdom (1984) 40 DR 196
         and Abdulaziz, Cabales and Balkandali v  United  Kingdom  [1985]  7
         EHRR 471. Such ties might exist if the appellant were dependent  on
         his family or vice versa. It is not, however,  essential  that  the
         members of the family should be in the same country. The  Secretary
         of State accepts that that possibility may exist,  although  in  my
         judgment it will probably be exceptional. Accordingly there  is  no
         absolute rule that there must be family life in the United Kingdom,
         as the Immigration Appeal Tribunal held."

167. The Upper Tribunal considered the question to be one of  fact,  as  set
    out in MM (Article 8, family  life,  dependency)  Zambia  [2007]  UKAIT
    00040 at [8]:

         "8.  We remind ourselves  that  the  mere  existence  of  a  family
         relationship is not sufficient for the applicability of Article  8.
         In the case of relationships other than that between a parent and a
         natural child who is still a minor, family life within the  meaning
         of Articled 8 will only  arise  if  there  are  sufficiently  close
         factual ties. In order to establish family life, it is necessary to
         show that there is  a  real,  committed  or  effective  support  or
         relationship between the family members. The normal emotional  ties
         between a mother and an adult son or  daughter  will  not,  without
         more, be enough: Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31, Advic v UK (1995)  20
         EHRR CD 125, [1995] ECHR 57, Marckx v Belgium  (1979)  2  EHRR  330
         para 31."

168. I am satisfied, on the evidence before me  and  in  the  light  of  the
    findings  of  fact  and  credibility  which  I  have  made,  that   the
    appellant's immaturity, ill health, and extreme dependence on  Mrs  [P]
    and other family members, as well as Mrs [P]'s dependence upon her  for
    practical help, are capable of amounting to Kugathas dependency.   That
    will not be the case in every  family  which  lives  together  as  this
    family does, but the particular facts  of  this  appeal  fall  squarely
    within the test of 'more than normal emotional  ties'  referred  to  in
    Kugathas. I am satisfied, therefore, that family  life  exists  between
    the appellant and her family members, and in particular, the  appellant
    and Mrs [P], and that this is a circumstance for which the  Immigration
    Rules do not expressly provide.

169. The respondent's reasoning on Article 8 outside the Rules, that  is  to
    say,  whether  there  are  exceptional  compelling   or   compassionate
    circumstances for which the respondent should consider  granting  leave
    to remain, is expressed in the refusal letter in two short  paragraphs,
    one of which is incomplete:

         "Your case has been considered on an exceptional basis outside  the
         Immigration Rules, taking account of the factors you have raised in
         your application and submissions.

         Regard  has  been  given  to  all  the  representations  you   have
         submitted: however, for the reasons given above, it  is  considered
         that your removal from the United Kingdom is appropriate.

         Your  application  for  Leave  to  Remain  on  the  basis  of  your
         representations  is  refused  and  is  hereby  recorded  as   being
         determined on [left blank].  You have now been served  form  IS151A
         informing you of your immigration status and liability to detention
         and removal."

170. That reasoning is no reasoning at all. The 'reasons given  above'  were
    the reasons for considering  the  application  within  the  Immigration
    Rules.  If the appellant's appeal  does  not  succeed  under  paragraph
    276ADE, the respondent has not explained why she considered that  there
    are  no  exceptional  compelling  or  compassionate  circumstances  for
    allowing the appellant to remain in the United Kingdom.

171. On the contrary, it seems  to  me  quite  clear  that  there  are  such
    circumstances.   This  appellant,  although  an  adult,  is   immature,
    unqualified, and strongly attached to her family and in  particular  to
    Mrs [P].  She is agoraphobic and never out of sight of a family member.
     She has never lived in Pakistan, has only basic Urdu,  and  has  never
    lived alone in her life.  She cannot even get as far as the garden gate
    unaccompanied in her present state of mental health.

172. She would not be returning with any of her family members: by  granting
    them British citizen status,  the  respondent  has  accepted  that  the
    appellant's family members will make their lives in the United Kingdom,
    where their British citizen children are entitled to grow  up  in  that
    citizenship.  Her brothers have  stated  clearly  that  they  will  not
    accompany  the  appellant  and  risk  their  marriages   and   parental
    relationships.

173. Nor is there any consideration of the position of the  appellant  after
    her return, as a lone  woman  in  Pakistan.   She  does  not  know  her
    Pakistani uncle, even if he is still alive, and the evidence is that he
    lives in an overcrowded flat and has financial problems, also that  the
    family rift is severe and has now endured for 9 years.  The  respondent
    is not entitled to assume that this amounts to available  male  support
    for the appellant's return to Pakistan.

174. The  Upper  Tribunal  has  recently  given  country  guidance  on  this
    question, which would not have been  available  to  the  respondent  in
    2014, in SM (lone women - ostracism) (CG) [2016]  UKUT  67  (IAC).  The
    guidance was designed to deal with the situation of women  at  risk  of
    persecution in Pakistan, but it emerges clearly from the decision  that
    the level of education, maturity and personal independence of  a  woman
    is crucial to her success in returning to a country where women are  at
    a disadvantage socially and subject to family control.

175. The evidence in this appeal  does  not  support  a  finding  that  this
    appellant can be returned to Pakistan, where she has never lived.   The
    interference with her private and family life,  and  her  physical  and
    moral  integrity,  will  be  severe,  and  is  disproportionate.    The
    appellant should be permitted to remain in the United Kingdom, with the
    rest of her family members, who can continue to support her  while  she
    tries to recover from what has been a  very  severe  breakdown  in  her
    mental health, leading to agoraphobia, dysphoria, and depression.



DECISION

176. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law.   I set aside the  previous  decision.   I  remake  the
    decision by allowing the appeal.


Date:    9 November 2016   Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson
     Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson


