
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39847/2014
                                                               IA/39852/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at FIELD HOUSE                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26TH January 2016                 |On 1st February 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                                  G A BLACK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MR SURENDAR CHINTAGINJA
                             MR SURYA MANNEPALLI
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss J Isherwood (Home officer presenting officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr A Slatter (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This matter comes before me for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge O'Malley) (FtT) promulgated on 4th August 2015 in which
    the appeal was dismissed on immigration  grounds  but  allowed  to  the
    extent that the FtT found the removal decision made  under  section  47
    Immigration  Asylum  &  Nationality  Act  2006  ("section  47")  to  be
    unlawful. This is a cross appeal in which both parties have applied for
    permission on the  section  47  point.   I  refer  to  the  parties  in
    accordance with the proceedings before the FtT.

Background

2.   The appellants application  for  leave  to  remain  under  Tier  1  was
    refused on the grounds that they  failed  to  meet  the  point  scoring
    provisions as to Attributes under  paragraph  41  SD(e).   Specifically
    they failed to produce evidence in the specified form under (d) (iv) of
    Table 4 Appendix A of the Immigration Rules; the  advertising  material
    did not cover the specified period prior to  the  application  and  the
    documents produced did not carry dates.  The Face book  entry  was  not
    acceptable as is was dated 11th  July  2014  and  failed  to  show  the
    required information, and there was no  documentary  evidence  to  show
    that the website domain was owned by the appellants, who  had  produced
    the print outs  of  the  company  website.  The  contract  between  the
    appellants business and 'A Tech IT'  did  not  show  any  duration.  In
    relation to the second appellant the trading contract was not signed.

3.   The FtT found that the appellants were directors of 'SRM  Software  and
    Business Solutions' [30] and that the business was not web based  [31].
    The FtT found that an invoice showing the date 4th July 2014 raised for
    the production of business cards and leaflets was  capable  of  showing
    that the advertising requirements were met as to the continuous  period
    of time under (iii)  para  41SD(e)  [33].  However,  as  the  date  was
    obscured the FtT could not be satisfied that this  information  in  the
    document was visible to the decision maker for the Respondent [32]. The
    FtT took the view that the evidential flexibility policy  in  paragraph
    245 AA could not be applied to any error on photocopying which was  the
    responsibility of the appellants [34 &  35].  The  FtT  concluded  that
    paragraph 41(e)(iii) was not met.   It  found  that  the  contract  did
    contain a reference to duration in that it was "indefinite" at clause 8
    [38], but that there was no definition of the  "effective  date"  which
    was to be the start date for the proposed trading.  In considering  the
    absence of the second appellant's signature the FtT was unable to apply
    paragraph 245AA as there had been no verification  checks  carried  out
    and so it was not  possible  to  exercise  the  evidential  flexibility
    provision [41-45].  As to the application of section 47, the FtT relied
    on Ahmadi (section 47 deicsison; validity:Sapkota)  [2012]  in  finding
    that the removal decision was unlawful.

Grounds for permission

4.   Both parties argued that the FtT erred by misdirecting  itself  and  in
    failing to apply the lawful position post  8.5.2013  to  a  section  47
    removal decision, as per section 51 of the Crime & Courts Act 2013.

5.    The  appellant  argued  that  the  reasoning  given  by  the  FtT  was
    inadequate as to finding that the documents were not dated but that the
    invoice was capable of supporting that the documents were available for
    the period.  Further that the FtT erred by failing to  apply  paragraph
    245AA.  It was argued that the FtT was wrong to find that the  contract
    did not establish a  duration  and  that  the  absence  of  the  second
    appellants name could not be considered under paragraph 245AA.

Permission

6.   The grant of permission was made in respect of the  section  47  point.
    As to the further grounds relied on by the appellant the reasons in the
    grounds state that the decision "is arguably inflexible".   It  is  not
    entirely clear whether the permitting Judge  was or  was  not  granting
    permission.

Error of law hearing

7.   Miss Isherwood and Mr Slatter agreed  that  the  FtT's  decision  under
    section 47 was unlawful in light of the amendment made  by  section  51
    Crime & Courts Act 2013. It was entirely proper for  the  Secretary  of
    State to make such a decision which shall stand. In that  regard  I  am
    satisfied that the FtT erred.  Accordingly I set aside that part of the
    decision and substitute a decision that the appeal under section 47  is
    dismissed.

8.   Turning to the substantive grounds, I heard  and  have  considered  the
    lengthy submissions made by Mr Slatter and those from  Miss  Isherwood.
    However, I am satisfied that there is no material error of law  by  the
    FtT in dismissing this  appeal.   Whilst  acknowledging  that  the  FtT
    decision was at times muddled in its approach in particular towards the
    application of paragraph 245AA, having considered  the  decision  as  a
    whole I am satisfied that no material error are disclosed. I find  that
    none of the  advertising  material  produced  was  dated  and  even  if
    reference had been made to the invoice bearing the date 4th July,  this
    did not show a continuous period as required under the rules. It  seems
    clear that the  originals  were  in  the  Respondent's  file  and  were
    produced before me by Miss Isherwood. They were separated and each page
    properly visible. However this makes no difference to  the  failure  to
    meet the requirement for a continuous period, and is thus fatal to  the
    application.

9.   I find that the contract did not establish what  "the  effective  date"
    was. The FtT accepted that the term "indefinitely" was a duration,  but
    in the absence of any specific date or  definition  of  the  "effective
    date", there was no evidence that the company  were  trading  over  the
    required period.  This  ground  amounts  to  a  disagreement  with  the
    findings and decision made by the FtT which was entirely sustainable on
    the evidence before it. The only date shown on  the  contract  was  4th
    July 2014 which was the date that the agreement was signed.

10.  I am  satisfied  that  the  contract  did  not  show  the  name  and/or
    signature of the second appellant.  The requirements of the  rules  are
    for the names of the applicants and the name  of  the  business  to  be
    shown on the contract.  The appellants did not meet the requirements of
    the rules and whether or not such information (the name) was verifiable
    from other potential sources, the fact is that  the  contract  did  not
    show the name of the second appellant.



Decision

11.  I find that the grounds pursued by the appellant  have  not  been  made
    out. There is no material error of law  disclosed  in  the  substantive
    decision which shall stand. The decision is remade as to the section 47
    decision, which is dismissed.




                               Signed   Date 29.1.2016


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal






                               NO ANONYMITY ORDER
                               NO FEE AWARD




                               Signed   Date 29.1.2016


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


