
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39447/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 26th September 2016                    |On 10th October 2016              |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                 ZEESHAN [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Aslam (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Pakistan, who was  born  on  27th
    August 1991.  He  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the
    decision of the Respondent, taken on 17th September 2014  refusing  him
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a spouse of a  person  present
    and settled in the UK.

 2. The Appellant's appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Majid  at
    Taylor House.  At paragraph 9, and under the  heading  "Relevant  Law",
    the judge went on to consider  the  law,  as  it  would  relate  to  an
    Appellant here with their 2 year old child, by reference to the case of
    ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4, and observed that "the  child  had  to  be
    considered and given paramount weight as  part  of  the  assessment  of
    proportionality under Article 8 ECHR" (paragraph 9(b)).

 3. It was agreed by both Mr Aslam, appearing on behalf  of  the  Appellant
    and, by Mr Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer, that this  was
    an incorrect exposition of the law, because the best interests  of  the
    child are a "primary" consideration under the law.

 4. Furthermore, in circumstances where the Appellant has  married  a  Thai
    lady, by the name of [WP], and there is a  2  year  old  daughter,  the
    judge referred to how, this girl has British nationality and to  expect
    her to go an alien  culture  is  definitely  'disproportionate  in  the
    application of the ECHR' (paragraph 11).  This was, as Mr Tufan pointed
    out, factually incorrect, as the Thai wife of the Appellant, was not  a
    British citizen, and could not have passed on citizenship to the 2 year
    old child, who also did not have British nationality.

 5. In addition, Mr Tufan pointed out that, given that  both  parents  were
    not settled in the UK, the case of EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874
    was not given proper consideration.  That, of course, was a case  which
    held that despite a finding, in a family's appeal against the  decision
    to remove them, that the best interests of the child lay in  continuing
    their education in the United Kingdom with both parents also  remaining
    in the United Kingdom, the Tribunal was perfectly entitled to find that
    the need to maintain immigration control outweighed the children's best
    interests.

 6. Mr Aslam, however, argued that be this as is  may,  the  fact  remained
    that in July 2013 the daughter was born and at the time of  the  appeal
    she was 2 years old and, whilst it was accepted  that  she  was  not  a
    British national, the Thai wife of the Appellant had come to the UK  in
    2001 when she was only 10 years old, and requiring her now to  go  with
    the Appellant to his country would be disproportionate and unduly harsh
    for her.

 7. The Appellant's wife's mother was a British national,  and  so  on  the
    wife's side there was a considerable amount that could be said  in  her
    favour, such that she should not be required to accompany the Appellant
    to his own country in Pakistan.

 8. In short, Mr Aslam  submitted,  that  the  judge  had  done  enough  to
    demonstrate that it  would  be  disproportionate  to  make  a  decision
    adverse to the Appellant.

 9. In reply, Mr Tufan submitted that there had been no consideration given
    to Section 117 of the 2002 Act and matters of immigration  control  are
    in the public interest and this had not been properly  factored  in  at
    all.

My Consideration of the Appeal

10. I have concluded that the determination cannot stand.  There are  three
    clear reasons.  First, the judge has not accurately stated the level at
    which the best interests of a child are to be determined by saying that
    they must be "paramount" which is not the case.   Second,  there  is  a
    factual error in that the child is not a  British  citizen  and  third,
    both these matters have a  direct  impact  on  the  way  in  which  the
    principle in  EV  (Philippines)  has  to  be  interpreted  and  applied
    because, taken in the real world, and taken the facts as they  are,  it
    is plain that with neither Appellant having a right to  remain  in  the
    UK,  and  the  child  not  being  a  British  citizen,  especially   in
    circumstances where the child has not formed an independent family unit
    of her own, the judge's determination cannot be said to be sustainable.
     I conclude that the appeal should be remitted to a First-tier Tribunal
    Judge for a fresh consideration under Practice  Statement  7.2  on  the
    basis that the nature or extent of any judicial fact-finding  which  is
    necessary in order for a decision in the appeal to be re-made  is  such
    that it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    The appeal is to be heard by a judge other than the original judge  who
    will need  to  make  clear  findings  in  respect  of  the  Appellant's
    circumstances.

Notice of Decision

11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such as it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the  decision  of
    the original judge.  I re-make the decision as follows.  This appeal is
    submitted back under Practice Statement 7.2(b) to a  judge  other  than
    Judge Majid to be re-heard again.

12. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 10th October 2016


