
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39857/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 January 2016                   |On 24 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                           DEPUTY JUDGE DRABU CBE


                                   Between

                                NAVEED ANJUM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Atta, Legal Representative from Ata & Co,
Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal has been brought by Mr Naveed Anjum, a citizen of  Pakistan
    against the decision of Judge Ian Howard who dismissed  the  appeal  he
    had brought against the respondent's decision to remove him pursuant to
    Section 47 of the IAN 2006. The First Tier Judge Ian Howard sitting  at
    Hatton Cross heard the appeal on 1 June 2015 but for reasons  given  in
    his determination dated 3 August 2015 concluded that the appellant does
    not qualify to remain either under Immigration Rules or under Article 8
    of the ECHR. The appellant was granted permission to  appeal  by  First
    Tier Judge Frankish on 1 December 2015.

 2. At the hearing before me Mr Staunton after hearing submissions from  Mr
    Ata agreed that Judge I Howard had made a material error of law in that
    he had used the date of the impugned decision rather than the  date  of
    the appeal for his findings. By that time the couple had cohabited  for
    over two years and their first child was  due  in  4  weeks'  time.  Mr
    Staunton quite properly conceded that the grounds upon which permission
    had been granted are made out and that since material facts are not  in
    dispute I should proceed to determine the appeal on its merits.

 3. I do so and allow the appeal as by the time the appeal he  had  brought
    under Section 82 of the IAN Act 2006, the  appellant  had  been  living
    with his wife for more than two years and her status in the UK was that
    of a refugee and hence there are insurmountable obstacles in continuing
    her family life in either Afghanistan or Pakistan. The appellant  meets
    the requirements of E-LTRP.1.2 to 1.12 and paragraph 276ADE.


K Drabu CBE
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal.
15 February 2016


