
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39344/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 25 July 2014                                 |On 05th Aug 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON

                                   Between

                           MR ABDUL QAVI CHAUDHARY
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Robinson
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a Pakistani national who appealed the decision of  the
    respondent to refuse to grant him leave to remain in the United Kingdom
    on human rights grounds.

 2. Following refusal the appellant appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    In a determination promulgated on  9  April  2014  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Randall dismissed the appellant's appeal.  In fact  that  is  not
    entirely correctly because initially the appeal was said to  have  been
    dismissed under the Immigration Rules re: long residence but the appeal
    allowed in respect of Article 8.  An amending determination  under  the
    "Slip Rule" was subsequently promulgated and this made clear  that  the
    judge did and had always intended to dismiss the appeal under the Rules
    and on human rights grounds.

 3. The appellant sought permission to appeal  that  decision.   The  judge
    granting permission found it arguable that having  concluded  that  the
    appellant could not meet the "suitability requirements"  for  leave  to
    remain under paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules (because he  has
    a  criminal  conviction)  the  Tribunal  ought  nevertheless  to   have
    considered the extent to which the appellant had  social,  cultural  or
    family ties to his country of origin (it being his  case  that  he  has
    none) when considering the appellant's case under Article 8  ECHR.   It
    was found further arguable that the Tribunal was wrong  to  contemplate
    the appellant's relocation to Spain in circumstances where it  was  the
    respondent's intention to remove him to Pakistan.

 4. The respondent lodged a Rule 24 response.  The response submitted  that
    the judge's finding in respect of paragraph  276ADE  is  correct.   The
    appellant cannot succeed under paragraph S-LTR  given  that  he  had  a
    prison sentence of eleven years.  Even if the appellant  could  satisfy
    paragraph 276ADE both limbs of paragraph 276ADE i.e.  276(i)  and  (vi)
    would have to be satisfied.

The Judge's Findings

 5. Summarising  a  little  of  the  appellant's  immigration  history  the
    appellant was granted leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  on  the
    basis of his relationship with his wife (who  is  a  dual  Spanish  and
    British national) following a successful appeal.  It appears  that  the
    appellant is still married to her although they are separated.  He  has
    been in the UK for eighteen years.  He  resided  with  his  spouse  for
    almost eight years and they have a son whom the appellant visits in the
    holidays.  The appellant has many  friends  in  the  UK  and  is  fully
    engaged in the "British lifestyle".  He is self-employed and  has  been
    working since 2006.  He left Pakistan eighteen years  ago  and  has  no
    family there except his terminally ill mother.  His father and  brother
    passed away in 2012/2013 respectively.

 6. As set out by the judge the appellant  maintains  that  he  would  lose
    contact with his son, who lives in Spain with his  mother,  if  he  was
    removed from the UK as his son and wife would be unable  to  travel  to
    Pakistan.  They are unable to move there due to language, cultural  and
    social barriers.

 7. The judge refers to an appeal in 2006 against the  decision  to  deport
    the appellant who was convicted in 2000  for  conspiring  to  supply  a
    Class A drug for which he received a sentence  of  eleven  years.   The
    appellant succeeded in his appeal against the decision to  deport  him.
    The judge noted that since that successful appeal the appellant's  wife
    and their son moved to Spain and thus his wife is no longer  exercising
    treaty  rights  in  this  country  and  has   embarked   upon   another
    relationship within which she has had a child.

 8. The judge found that the relationship between the appellant and his son
    has been "somewhat exaggerated" and gave as reason for this that  there
    was only one recent trip to the UK prior to the trip at the time of the
    appeal hearing and the appellant has never visited his son even when he
    had a residence permit.  The judge found also that it remains uncertain
    that the appellant's relationship  with  his  wife  will  ever  be  re-
    established and also that his wife exaggerated  her  fears  as  to  the
    dangers of her son visiting or living in Pakistan.

 9. The judge further found that there is family life between the appellant
    and his son and although contact between them  has  only  recently  re-
    started that nevertheless amounts to family life despite  there  having
    been difficulties in the past. The judge considered Section 55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration  Act  2009  (duty  regarding  the
    welfare of children) and at paragraph 32 of the determination sets  out
    his findings as to the relationship between the appellant and his  son.
    Although the appellant's son has plans to study in the  United  Kingdom
    the judge found that they are "no more than plans".  It was  not  clear
    to the judge when or whether the appellant's son will ever come to  the
    United Kingdom to live or to study and what age he would be if and when
    he did.

The error of Law Point

10. The appellant takes issue with the judge's conclusion that he was given
    no practical or legal reason why the appellant could  not  relocate  to
    Spain, from Pakistan.  Given that father and son both wish  to  develop
    their relationship and they communicate primarily by  electronic  means
    in any event the judge found that given the uncertainty as  to  whether
    the son would ever come to the UK to live or study it would be open  to
    the appellant  and  the  son  to  develop  their  relationship  by  the
    appellant moving to Spain via Pakistan, by making an application for  a
    family permit to the  Spanish  authorities.   He  concluded  "Thus,  in
    considering the best interests of (the son)" it would be  in  his  best
    interests to develop a relationship with his father, but this can  best
    be done by them being together in Spain.

11. At paragraph 42 of the determination the judge comments that  the  case
    was presented to him as if the only way the family  could  enjoy  their
    family and private life is for the appellant to be allowed to remain in
    the UK.  The judge found that there  is  a  lack  of  certainty  as  to
    whether the child and/or the appellant's wife would ever  live  in  the
    UK. The little recent physical contact that the son has  had  with  his
    father, and the  absence  of  any  suggestion  as  to  the  appellant's
    inability to obtain a family permit for Spain  from  Pakistan  led  the
    judge to find that it is not only by the appellant remaining in the  UK
    that the family would be able to enjoy its  family  and  private  life.
    The appellant could go to Spain and enjoy his family and  private  life
    there. The appellant's representative had submitted that it was in  the
    child's best interests for his father to remain in the UK but the judge
    rejected that stating that he found that it would  be  in  the  child's
    best interests for his father to migrate to Spain.

12. In paragraph 45 of the determination the judge has this to say:-

         "...  The  question  is  whether  the  Appellant  has   established
         family/private life in the UK which could be interfered with by the
         decision to remove.  For the reasons set out above I find,  on  the
         balance   of   probabilities,   that   he   has   established   his
         family/private life in the UK, in terms of his long  residence  and
         friendships here, and his relationship with his  son,  albeit  that
         the latter is conducted mainly by electronic means.  However I find
         that  his  removal  to  Pakistan  will  not  interfere   with   the
         Appellant's family and private life  because  in  the  short  term,
         electronic communication between the  Appellant  and  his  son  can
         continue  as  now,  and  subsequently  because  the  appellant  can
         relocate to Spain with a family permit and  enjoy  his  family  and
         private life  there.   In  those  circumstances  I  find  that  the
         decision to remove will not interfere with the family  and  private
         lives of  the  parties.   In  the  alternative,  if  there  is  any
         interference with the private and family life of the parties caused
         by a decision to remove, I find that it would be in accordance with
         the law, and that, for the reasons set out above, and  particularly
         because  of  the  option  of  going  to  Spain,  it  would  not  be
         disproportionate for the Appellant to be removed  to  Pakistan,  in
         the particular circumstances of the case."

My Conclusions

13. It is clear enough from the paragraph above that the  judge  has  found
    that the appellant enjoys family life with his son and his private life
    includes his friendships, work, etc. here.  It is  equally  clear  that
    the family life has only recently become more  established,  having  at
    one time and for a long period been extremely tenuous, but that much of
    that family  life  is  conducted  by  "electronic  means".   The  judge
    concludes that the decision to  remove  will  not  interfere  with  the
    family and private lives of the parties by the appellant's  removal  to
    Pakistan.  However in the alternative if  there  is  such  interference
    then it would be in accordance with the law.

14. The judge may or may not be correct in stating that the  appellant  has
    the option of going to Spain which leads him to conclude that it  would
    not be disproportionate for the appellant to be  removed  to  Pakistan.
    The judge does not deal with the scenario where the  appellant  is  for
    whatever reason not able to  move  to  Spain  either  to  visit,  on  a
    temporary basis or more permanently but I am  not  persuaded  that  any
    such error as they might be could  be  material.   There  was  no  good
    evidence before the judge that the appellant could not visit Spain  and
    it seems preposterous on the facts to  suggest  that  the  private  and
    family life findings made by the judge could result  in  the  appellant
    succeeding under Article 8 to remain in the UK.

15. The judge did not make specific findings in relation to the appellant's
    social, cultural and  family  ties  with  Pakistan  but  he  does  make
    reference  to  the  appellant's  family  in  Pakistan  and   the   very
    significant period of time that the  appellant  has  been  in  the  UK,
    albeit six years of that was spent in prison.

16. The judge notes that the case presents an unusual set of facts  but  it
    is clear to him and,  I  find,  to  anyone  else,  that  there  are  no
    exceptional circumstances (see paragraph  36)  that  would  lead  to  a
    conclusion different to that to which the judge comes.

17. This is a carefully reasoned decision.  The judge could be wrong in his
    apparent conclusion that the appellant could move to Spain but  in  all
    the circumstances any such error is not material.

Conclusion

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  stands  and  the  appeal
    remains dismissed under the Immigration Rules and under  Article  8  of
    the ECHR.

Anonymity

19. I have not addressed on the matter of anonymity but the  facts  do  not
    suggest that an anonymity direction is required and I do not make one.





Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton

