
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/39396/2014
                                                               IA/39398/2014
                                                               IA/39399/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 November 2015                   |On 9 November 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    V C P
                                    R J P
                                     D P
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    Ms Jones, Counsel, instructed by Malik Law Chambers


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This matter comes before me for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law in  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Munro ("the FTTJ") promulgated on 4 June 2015, in  which
    she allowed the respondents' (hereinafter called the claimants) appeals
    against the refusal of leave to remain outside  the  Immigration  Rules
    and to remove them under s10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

 2. Given my references to the third claimant, who is a child, an anonymity
    order is appropriate.

Background

 3. The claimants are citizens of India.  The first  and  second  claimants
    are married and the parents of the third claimant, who was born  on  12
    September 2005. The child was aged 9 at the  date  of  hearing  (7  May
    2015).

 4. On 22 September 2014 the Secretary of State refused  leave  to  remain.
    The FTTJ decided as a preliminary issue that the claimants each  had  a
    right of appeal in country and that finding is not challenged by either
    party. The FTTJ dismissed the appeals under the Immigration Rules; that
    decision is not the subject of a cross-appeal by  the  claimants.   The
    sole issue is whether there is a material error of law  in  the  FTTJ's
    decision to allow the appeal on human rights  grounds.   Permission  to
    appeal was granted because it was arguable that the FTTJ ought to  have
    considered more carefully the guidance in Azimi-Moayed & Ors (Decisions
    affecting children: onward appeals) [2013] Imm AR 4 and Zoumbas v  SSHD
    [2013] UKSC 74, both of which stated, in essence, that 7  school  years
    for an older child, ie attending secondary school, were more  important
    than the first 7 years of life. Moreover, it was also arguable that the
    FTTJ had failed to consider all the mandatory elements of s117A-D.

Error of Law Submissions

 5. Mr Kotas conceded that he did not challenge the FTTJ's decision to make
    an Article 8 assessment outside  the  Immigration  Rules.  However,  he
    submitted that the FTTJ had erred in  law  in  failing  to  follow  the
    guidance in Azimi-Moayed, albeit she had cited the headnote it  in  her
    decision.  The findings of the FTTJ on the child's best interests  were
    "short" (paragraph 37).  The  decision  was  devoid  of  reasoning  and
    findings as regards the child's ties.   Furthermore,  the  guidance  in
    Zoumbas had been misapplied in that the FTTJ had sought to  distinguish
    that case; she had also misconstrued the guidance it contained.  Whilst
    Mr Kotas did not go so far as to submit that the failure to refer to EV
    (Philippines) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874 amounted to an error  of  law,
    paragraph 58 of that judgment was relevant: the best interests  of  the
    child were not to be decided in a vacuum. This  was,  according  to  Mr
    Kotas, what the FTTJ had done: there was no reference to the status  of
    the parents and the reasonableness of  the  child  returning.  Nor  was
    there any analysis of the prospect of family life continuing in  India;
    the FTTJ had just looked at the  status  of  the  parents  in  the  UK,
    concluding that it was  disproportionate  to  uproot  the  child.   The
    reasonableness issue was echoed, he  said,  in  s117D  and  s117B(6)(b)
    which had not been applied.  This was fatal to the  FTTJ's  assessment.
    Little weight should have been given to  the  lead  claimants'  private
    lives which had  been  established  while  they  were  here  unlawfully
    (s117B(4) referred).  He also submitted  that  the  references  to  the
    child  moving  to  secondary  school  and  being  entitled  to  British
    citizenship were speculative and ought not  to  have  been  taken  into
    account. The public interest had been given only cursory  mention.   In
    conclusion,

 6. For the claimants, Ms Jones  submitted  that  the  Secretary  of  State
    merely disagreed with the factual findings; there was no error of  law.
    The FTTJ had taken into account (paragraphs 22-23) the poor immigration
    history of the parents; she had not given significant weight  to  their
    private life: she determined that, were  it  not  for  the  child,  the
    parents could have returned  to  their  country  of  origin.  Ms  Jones
    submitted that, given that the guidance in Azimi-Moayed and Zoumbas was
    set out in the decision, it could be assumed that the guidance in those
    cases was in her mind; there was nothing to suggest  that  it  was  not
    taken into account and the content of paragraph 37 indicated  that  the
    FTTJ had conducted a proper analysis of the  relevant  issues.  It  was
    accepted the FTTJ could have expanded her reasoning  but  it  had  been
    sufficient: she had borne in mind the best interests of the  child.  It
    had been appropriate to distinguish the Zoumbas because, in that  case,
    the parents had employed dishonesty and claimed benefits  whereas  that
    was not the case with these claimants.  The  FTTJ  had  identified  the
    relevant s117B public interest considerations in paragraph 38.  Insofar
    as the issue of reasonableness was  concerned,  it  was  implicit  from
    paragraph 39 that this had been considered.  It was submitted that  the
    FTTJ had given weight to the fact that, with effect from the  September
    after the hearing in June, the child would be  entitled  to  apply  for
    British citizenship.  Following the hearing, the child  had  made  that
    application on 28 September 2015. Thus the issue was not a  speculative
    one at the date of hearing; furthermore, if the FTTJ had made an  error
    of law, it was not material because  the  child  was  now  entitled  to
    British citizenship.

 7. In response, Mr Kotas submitted that, as at  the  date  of  the  appeal
    hearing, the matter of the child's entitlement to  British  citizenship
    was a prospective issue. The facts should,  he  said,  be  confined  to
    those at the date of hearing.  If the decision were to be remade  (with
    findings of fact) the child's application should be taken into account;
    until then, it was of no relevance to the issue of materiality  of  any
    error of law; nor was it evidence before the FTTJ  at  the  hearing  in
    June 2015.

Error of Law

 8. There is no challenge to the  FTTJ's  decision  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.

 9. As regards her decision on human rights grounds, I am unable to  accept
    Ms Jones' submission that the FTTJ gave sufficient consideration to the
    public interest factors  identified  in  s117A-D  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  Whilst the FTTJ has cited  s117A  and
    s117B at paragraph 38 and noted that she is required to apply "s117  of
    the Immigration Act 2014" [sic]  to  the  appeal,  she  has  failed  to
    demonstrate in her analysis of the facts that she has done so.   Whilst
    I note Ms Jones' references in  her  submissions  to  those  paragraphs
    which might be considered to address the public  interest  factors,  in
    fact the only brief references to the poor immigration  status  of  the
    parents are in the context  of  the  FTTJ's  analysis  of  whether  the
    parents fulfil the criteria in the Immigration Rules and in relation to
    considering the best interests of the  child  in  the  context  of  the
    guidance in Zoumbas (paragraph 37).  These limited references cannot be
    taken, even implicitly, to be part of her analysis  outside  the  Rules
    for the purposes of assessing proportionality  or  in  the  context  of
    considering of the public interest in immigration control.

10. Whilst s117A and 117B are cited in full, there is no  analysis  of  the
    facts in the light of these  mandatory  considerations.   There  is  no
    recognition  in  the  decision  that  the  maintenance   of   effective
    immigration controls is in the public interest (s117B(1)). There is  no
    reference in the consideration of proportionality to the fact that  the
    parents used a court interpreter to give their evidence (paragraph  23)
    (ss117B(2)). Nor can it be said that the FTTJ has given  little  weight
    (as required by s117B(4) and/or  (5))  to  the  parents'  private  life
    having been established at a time when  their  immigration  status  was
    unlawful/precarious.  It is particularly relevant that, whilst the FTTJ
    refers at paragraph 39 to the definition of "qualifying child", she has
    failed to take into account all  the  relevant  criteria  in  s117B(6),
    namely not only  that  each  claimant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with a qualifying child, but also that "it  would
    not be reasonable to expect the child to  leave  the  United  Kingdom".
    Furthermore, in her paragraph 40, the FTTJ finds that the "right of the
    [Secretary of State] to operate a firm fair and consistent  immigration
    policy has been outweighed in this case by the particular circumstances
    of this family".  This finding is not  consistent  with  the  terms  of
    s117B(1) which provides that the "maintenance of effective  immigration
    controls is in the public interest".  Thus it is  not  clear  that  the
    FTTJ has applied the right criteria in considering the public interest.
    She has considered the Secretary of State's  "right"  in  weighing  the
    proportionality of  the  interference  with  the  claimants'  protected
    rights,  rather  than  the  "maintenance   of   effective   immigration
    controls": as is required by s117B(1).  In this regard, I bear in  mind
    the guidance in Forman (ss 117A-C considerations) [2015] UKUT 412 (IAC)
    and cite headnote (iii): "In cases where  the  provisions  of  sections
    117B-117C of the 2002 Act arise, the  decision  of  the  Tribunal  must
    demonstrate that they have been given full effect". That has  not  been
    demonstrated in the FTTJ's decision.

11. For these reasons, I am satisfied that the FTTJ erred in law in  making
    her decision: her reasoning is flawed and inadequate. I do  not  accept
    the submissions of Ms Jones that, given  the  child  has  now  made  an
    application for British citizenship, the error of law is not  material.
    The issue is whether the error could have  made  a  difference  to  the
    outcome, on the evidence available to the FTTJ at the hearing. I reject
    the submission that the child's current (post-hearing) ability to apply
    for British citizenship is a reason for finding that the error  of  law
    is not material; this would, in effect,  put  the  child  in  a  better
    position than she would have been in at the date of hearing, ie at  the
    time of the impugned decision.  Rather, the issue is whether,  were  it
    not for the error of law, the FTTJ  might  have  come  to  a  different
    decision on the facts.

12. I find that it could: given that the best interests of the child are  a
    prime consideration but not the prime consideration, had the FTTJ given
    due weight to the relevant public interest considerations, the  outcome
    may have  been  different.   Furthermore,  as  Lady  Hale  said  in  ZH
    (Tanzania) (FC) (Appellant) v SSHD (Respondent) [2011] UKSC 4 "Although
    nationality is not a "trump card" it is  of  particular  importance  in
    assessing the best interests of any  child".  For  these  reasons,  the
    decision to allow the appeal on human rights grounds must be set aside.

13. It was submitted by both parties that, in the event  of  my  finding  a
    material error of law, the matter should be remitted to the First tier-
    Tribunal for a fresh hearing on all grounds.  Mr Kotas  submitted  that
    paragraph 276ADE was the starting point; there was an  argument  to  be
    had as to whether there was a need for consideration outside the Rules.
    Ms  Jones  submitted   that  there  was  a  contradiction  between  the
    requirement of the  Rules  for  findings  to  relate  to  the  date  of
    application (as with regard to the requirement for the  child  to  have
    resided in the UK for 7 years prior to the date of application) and the
    statutory provision for facts to be found at the date of hearing.

14. I do not accept the submissions that this matter should be remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.  That  is  an  option  which  should  be  used
    sparingly and is  inappropriate  in  this  case  because  there  is  no
    challenge to  the  FTTJ's  findings  under  the  Immigration  Rules.  I
    consider it appropriate to preserve the findings of fact  of  the  FTTJ
    and remake her decision on the human rights appeal.

Findings

15. Mr Kotas did not challenge the decision  of  the  FTTJ  to  decide  the
    appeals in accordance with  the  Article  8  jurisprudence.  I  proceed
    therefore to apply the guidance in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.

16. I particularly bear in mind  that  the  best  interests  of  the  third
    claimant, who was aged  9  at  the  date  of  hearing,  are  a  primary
    consideration.  In that regard I adopt the findings of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge at her paragraph 37. I summarise those  by  saying  that
    her best interests are to remain within the family unit and to continue
    her schooling in this country, including  moving  to  secondary  school
    here in September 2015. It is  also  relevant  that,  at  the  date  of
    hearing, she was three months away from being  entitled  to  apply  for
    British nationality.  In that regard, I repeat the guidance  in  ZH  to
    the effect that "Although nationality is not a "trump card"  it  is  of
    particular importance in assessing the best interests  of  any  child".
    In the present case, the child claimant is not a British  citizen  but,
    that said, at the date of hearing she was three months from making such
    an application. I proceed on the basis that she would be  granted  such
    citizenship in due course and that it would be in her best interests to
    remain in this country where she was born and has  grown  up  and  been
    educated and to continue her education here with her parents caring for
    her.

17. The Secretary of State's decision is a lawful one. The principal  issue
    arises at the third  step  advocated  in  Razgar,  namely  whether  the
    proposed interference with the protected rights  of  the  claimants  is
    justified and proportionate to  the  Secretary  of  State's  legitimate
    aims. Those aims are set out in (although not limited to) s117A-D.   In
    that  regard  it  is  relevant  that  the  maintenance   of   effective
    immigration controls is in the public  interest;  the  adult  claimants
    came to the UK as visitors and failed to leave when their visits  visas
    expired; they only sought to rectify their lack of  immigration  status
    in 2012.  The adult claimants gave their oral evidence at  the  hearing
    in June 2015 in their own language but their daughter's chosen language
    is English. The claimants are not  themselves  financially  independent
    but they have the financial support of the  second  claimant's  brother
    with  whom  they  have  a  close  relationship  (paragraph  37  of  the
    decision); they are not  dependent  on  public  funds.   Little  weight
    should be given to the claimants' private lives  because  it  has  been
    largely established, continued and/or developed at  a  time  when  they
    were here unlawfully and/or their immigration status was precarious.

18. I bear in mind the terms of s117B(6)  which  provide  that  the  public
    interest does not require the removal of  the  adult  claimants  if  it
    would not be reasonable to expect  their  child  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom.

19. I have set out the child's best interests  above.  Her  best  interests
    also entail her continuing to live with her parents in the family unit.
    They would be removed together as a family unit.  The  adult  claimants
    would be able to  re-integrate  into  society  in  their  home  country
    (paragraph 23 of the decision); there is no evidence that it  would  be
    impossible for them to live in Gujarat away from  the  family  village,
    their families having disowned them due to  their  marriage  (paragraph
    23).  The adult claimants would not face very significant obstacles  to
    their integration on return (again, paragraph 23).

20. Whilst it is not in the best interests of the child to return to India,
    she would have the support of her parents on return. She would be  able
    to continue her schooling there. Her schooling is  not  at  a  critical
    stage albeit she was due to go to  secondary  school  at  the  date  of
    hearing. She is not at the stage  of  taking  significant  examinations
    which would impact on her career choices.  The  adult  claimants  speak
    Gujarati at home and the child is not  therefore  unfamiliar  with  the
    language, albeit English is her language of choice (paragraph 37).  The
    child is familiar with Gujarati culture, language and  customs,  having
    been brought up in a Gujarati household, albeit in  the  UK.  Thus  she
    could adapt relatively easily to living in Gujarat.   I  reiterate  her
    entitlement to British nationality shortly and all  the  benefits  that
    would give her including a right of residence, free education and  free
    healthcare.

21. I accept that the removal of the child claimant would entail disruption
    to her  education  and  her  social  life.  She  would  also  lose  the
    opportunity of gaining British nationality. That loss would not  be  in
    her best interests.  However, given that she would be removed with  her
    parents and that they would be able to provide for the family in India,
    her country of current nationality, I consider it would  be  reasonable
    to expect her to leave the UK  with  her  family,  notwithstanding  the
    significant disruption to her private life.  Her parents  would  assist
    her in adjusting to life in India.  She would  continue  her  education
    and have access to healthcare,  albeit,  in  both  cases,  not  to  the
    standard she might have received in the UK. I accept she has never been
    to India and that she would find the transition difficult in the  short
    term, particularly with the loss of personal contact with  friends  and
    school. However she would be able to maintain some contact with friends
    in the UK via the internet, telephone, text and  visits.   It  is  also
    relevant that she has grown up in an Indian family and  thus,  to  some
    extent, she is familiar with Indian  customs  and  culture;  this  will
    assist her in settling into life in India.

22. The adult claimants must have appreciated that they could be removed at
    any time after their visas expired in 2005.  Whilst the child cannot be
    blamed for her parents' failure to rectify  their  immigration  status,
    she was due, at the date of hearing, to leave her primary school within
    a  matter  of  weeks.   It  was  therefore  an  appropriate  time,   in
    educational terms, for her to move to a new school and she can do  this
    in her country of current nationality.

23. For these reasons, notwithstanding the best interests of this child are
    for her to remain in the UK and to acquire British  nationality,  I  am
    unable to find that the degree  of  interference  with  the  claimants'
    protected Article 8 rights is justified and proportionate to the public
    interest in maintaining effective immigration control.

Decision

24. I do not set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  to  dismiss
    the appeal under the Immigration Rules. That decision stands.

25. The making of the decision  on  human  rights  grounds  did  involve  a
    material error of law.

26. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the appeal
    on human rights grounds and remake it, dismissing the appeal.


Signed      Date 2 June 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Fee Award

The FTTJ did not make a fee award and,  the  appeal  having  been  dismissed
there can be no fee award now.


Signed      Date 2 June 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black
