
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/40899/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 September 2015                  |On 7 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                        olufunmilayo adedayo oyeyemi
                          (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr Duffy, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Olufunmilayo Adedayo Oyeyemi, was  born  on  5  December
    1981 is a female citizen of Nigeria.  She appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Charlton-Brown) against the decision of the  respondent
    dated 3 October 2014 to refuse  her  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom and to give directions for her removal under Section 47 of  the
    2006 Act. Her appeal was dismissed. She now appeals,  with  permission,
    to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant entered the United Kingdom in October 2005 as a  student.
    There followed a number of extensions to her leave to remain until 2012
    when she re-entered the United Kingdom as a Tier 1 Partner having  left
    the United Kingdom to return to Nigeria.  The  appellant  has  a  child
    born in the United Kingdom in 2006.  He is  a  Nigerian  citizen.   The
    appellant's husband (Mr Oyeyemi) is not settled in the  United  Kingdom
    nor does he have leave to remain as a  refugee  or  as  a  person  with
    humanitarian protection.  Further, since the appellant  lives  with  Mr
    Oyeyemi, she does not have sole responsibility for her child.

 3. In her decision and reasons, Judge  Charlton-Brown  correctly  observed
    that the appellant  was  excluded  under  the  Immigration  Rules  from
    obtaining leave to  remain  under  both  the  "parent  route"  and  the
    "partner route".  As regards family life with a child, the  Judge  also
    dealt in some detail [12] with the reasons given in  the  Secretary  of
    State's refusal letter for concluding that it was  reasonable  for  the
    appellant and her child and husband to relocate to Nigeria.  The  Judge
    noted that there was no suggestion that the  family  had  lost  contact
    with other family members in Nigeria or that  there  were  no  relevant
    health issues affecting any of the individuals involved.   Although  Mr
    Oyeyemi has no proper "settled" status in the United  Kingdom,  he  has
    bought a property here and is in  employment.   The  Judge  had  proper
    regard to those facts and it is also clear that she has considered  all
    relevant evidence in reaching a conclusion which was patently available
    to her on the facts,  namely  that  it  would  be  reasonable  for  the
    appellant and her family to return to live together in Nigeria.  It  is
    possible that the Judge made an error  of  fact  [15]  as  regards  her
    finding that the appellant had previously had "gainful  employment"  in
    Nigeria but it is difficult to see how that error may  be  material  to
    the outcome of the appeal.  Furthermore,  as  Mr  Duffy  observed,  the
    Immigration Rules are now formulated to address the best interests of a
    child as required  by  Section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009. The Judge was  very  clear  [16]  that  the  best
    interests of the child would be "achieved by returning to Nigeria  with
    his mother [the appellant]".

 4. Granting permission, Judge Simpson, considered  that  it  was  arguable
    that the Judge had failed to apply paragraph 117B(6) of  the  2002  Act
    (as amended). However, as the Secretary of State's Rule 24 letter of 28
    July 2015 points out, Judge Charlton-Brown  had  fully  considered  the
    question as to whether it was reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
    the  United  Kingdom  in  a  consideration  of  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration  Rules.   Whether  considered  under  the  Statute  or  the
    Immigration Rules, the Judge's conclusion (that it would be  reasonable
    to expect the child to leave with the appellant) remains valid.

 5. Judge Simpson was also concerned that  there  was  no  Article  8  ECHR
    determination.  At [19] Judge Charlton-Brown stated  that,  as  regards
    human  rights  issues,  she  had  "already   dealt   with   issues   of
    reasonableness and the lack of any exceptional circumstances."  She has
    not  proceeded  to  conduct  a  separate  Article   8   proportionality
    assessment.  There was no need for her to do so in  the  circumstances.
    The very point of the judgment in Gulshan (Article 8-new  rules-correct
    approach) [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC) is that, where  the  Immigration  Rules
    adequately deal with an  appellant's  circumstances,  nothing  will  be
    gained at all by making a separate assessment  under  Article  8.   The
    circumstances of this family fell squarely within the parameters of the
    Immigration  Rules;  there   were   no   additional   and   exceptional
    circumstances not covered by the Rules which required the Judge to make
    an Article 8 assessment. The First-tier Tribunal did not err in law  by
    refraining from making such an assessment.  In the  circumstances,  the
    appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 28 November 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 28 November 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

