
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/40504/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 October 2015                    |On 15 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        Mr Oluwaseun Yomade Awotunya
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B Oyanrinde, Babs & Co. Legal Practitioners


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal brought by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department in respect of a determination made  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge O'Flynn, promulgated on 11 May 2015.

2.   The background is as follows.  The applicant (as I shall  call  him  to
    avoid confusion with the term appellant since that properly belongs  to
    the Secretary of State) is a citizen  of  Nigeria  born  in  2006.   He
    entered the United Kingdom in May 2011 on a Tier 4 Student  visa  which
    expired at the end of July 2013.  Further leave  was  granted  in  that
    capacity but this was curtailed on 29 August 2013.

3.   The applicant had applied for a residence card confirming his right  to
    reside in the United Kingdom under the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations
    2006.  This was refused on 27 November 2013 and there  was  no  appeal.
    On 10 February 2014 the applicant made  a  further  application  for  a
    residence card under the Regulations and this was refused on 13 October
    2014.  The applicant appealed that refusal to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    which allowed his appeal. It is this decision which  the  Secretary  of
    State now appeals.

4.   The substance of the issue before the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was
    the extent to which the applicant was  in  a  subsisting  relationship.
    Regulations 20B(1)(b) and 20B(2)(b) caused the Home  Office  to  invite
    the applicant and his spouse to attend interview.  They failed to do so
    and no adequate reason was given.  There was then contact with the Home
    Office indicating that  the  spouse  was  ill.   Thereafter  a  further
    invitation was made to attend for interview on 16 September 2014. Again
    there was a failure to attend.

5.    These  successive  instances  on  non-attendance  brought  into   play
    Regulation 20B(4) which states:

         "If, without good reason, [persons] fail to provide the  additional
         information requested or fail to attend an interview  on  at  least
         two occasions if so invited, the Secretary of State  may  draw  any
         factual inferences about [their] entitlement to a right  to  reside
         as appears appropriate in the circumstances."

    The Secretary of State clearly did draw adverse inferences  as  appears
    in the terms of the refusal letter but those  adverse  inferences  were
    not the sole reason why the Secretary of State had issued  the  refusal
    letter.  On the first page of that  refusal  letter  the  following  is
    stated:

         "After assessing the above documentation the Home Office noted that
         you have not held any valid leave to remain in the UK since  August
         2013 when your student leave was curtailed.  Also the documentation
         submitted along with your application form  for  a  residence  card
         does not demonstrate that of a  subsisting  relationship."(emphasis
         added)

6.   In reaching his conclusions the First-tier Tribunal Judge had  occasion
    to consider the burden of proof.  He made reference to the decision  in
    IS (marriages of convenience) Serbia [2008]  UKAIT  00031.   He  quoted
    from the head note which reads:

         "The burden of proving that  a  marriage  is  not  a  'marriage  of
         convenience' for the purposes of the EEA Regulations rests  on  the
         appellant: but he is not required to discharge it in the absence of
         evidence of matters supporting a suspicion that the marriage is one
         of  convenience  (i.e.  there  is  an  evidential  burden  on   the
         respondent)."

7.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge said the following at  paragraph  17.  It
    is with his choice of phraseology that this appeal has been  concerned.
    He said:

         "What seems to be the case, then, is that the  respondent  may  not
         rely solely on failure to attend an interview  (Regulation  20B(6))
         and the appellant is not required to prove that the marriage is not
         a marriage of convenience in the absence  of  evidence  of  matters
         supporting the respondent's submission.  It certainly appears  that
         the main reason advanced by the respondent is the  appellant's  and
         his wife's failure to attend the three interviews."(emphasis added)

    This paragraph appears to give the impression that the burden of  proof
    rested on the Home Secretary because there had been no discharge of the
    evidential burden which would have passed the  legal  burden  onto  the
    applicant.  It was  a  misstatement  on  the  part  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge because it failed to take into  account  the  additional
    material beyond non-attendance upon which the Home Secretary had  based
    her refusal letter.

8.   The judge then went on to consider the disposal of the  matter  but  he
    did so in the context of an  indication  implying  a  reversal  of  the
    burden of proof.  This is so fundamental to any determination  that  it
    can only be categorised as a material error of law.

9.   In the circumstances, there is no alternative  but  to  set  aside  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  Having  done  so,  and
    with the concurrence of the representatives of the applicant and of the
    Home Secretary, it is for me to remake the decision.

10.  As Ms Everett quite properly concedes on the Home  Secretary's  behalf,
    there was a substantial bundle of documentation before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge which clearly  indicated  that  the  applicant  and  his
    spouse were living together at the  same  address  over  a  substantial
    period spanning some two years.  This evidence included individual bank
    statements, joint bank statements, correspondence  with  Her  Majesty's
    Revenue & Customs, utility bills, credit card bills, council tax bills,
    insurance documents in joint  names,  electoral  register  cards,  wage
    slips and a tenancy agreement  in  joint  names.   I  take  fully  into
    account that the wife was described as being something  of  a  "shadowy
    figure" by the First-tier Tribunal Judge but it is important to look at
    the matter in  the  round  and  the  substantial  body  of  documentary
    evidence which all points in one direction.

11.  Properly applying the burden of proof which  is  that  it  is  for  the
    applicant to demonstrate that his is not a marriage of convenience  and
    to do so on the civil standard, I am of the view that  that  burden  is
    discharged.   The  documentation  and  the  surrounding   circumstances
    indicate that this was not a marriage of convenience but a genuine  and
    subsisting relationship.

12.  In all those circumstances, having  remade  the  decision,  I  formally
    allow the appeal under the EEA Regulations from the refusal granted  by
    the Secretary of State.

Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed

The decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  is  set  aside  and  remade  as
follows

The substantive appeal of the Oluwaseun Yomade Awotunya is allowed  and  the
decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge affirmed

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Mark Hill QC  Date 12 October 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC

