






UPPER Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/40854/2013
                                                               IA/49730/2013
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 30 July 2014                              |On: 01 September 2014        |
|Prepared:  28 August 2014                     |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                       Mr Fabrice Apollinare Samba (1)

                           Ms Sunita Maharjan (2)
                         no anonymity direction made

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellants:    Mr A Mahmood, Solicitor, Sunrise Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

     1.   The first appellant is a national of Congo, and his  partner,  the
        second appellant, is a national of Nepal. They appealed against  the
        decision of the respondent refusing their applications for leave  to
        remain in the UK on the basis of Appendix FM and paragraph  276  ADE
        of the rules.


     2.   With regard to the second appellant, it was noted  that  paragraph
        EX.1 did not apply.


     3.   The appellants' child's birth  certificate  was  produced  showing
        that he was born in Hillingdon on 7th August 2011.   The  child  did
        not meet the residence criteria.


     4.   Removal directions under  s.47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
        Nationality Act 2006 were made.


     5.   Both appellants were issued one stop warnings.


     6.    The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  noted  in   his   determination
        promulgated on 13th May 2014 that he disagreed with  the  contention
        on behalf of the first appellant that he had met the requirements of
        the ten year long residence rule [42]. That is because it is  stated
        by him in his application that he has been in the UK for nine  years
        and five months.


     7.   By the date of hearing, namely 28th April 2014, he had been in the
        UK within 28  days  of  the  ten  year  requirement.  In  the  first
        appellant's case, as at the date of application  he  had  only  been
        here for nine years and five months and the policy guidance required
        that applications received outside  the  28  day  concession  period
        should be refused. Accordingly he was not able to take advantage  of
        the concession in the policy guidance.


     8.   The Judge also considered the submission in the skeleton  argument
        that the appellants' child  is  a  British  citizen.  There  was  no
        evidence that that was the case. In any event, the  appellants  have
        always been subject to restrictions and neither  of  them  has  been
        settled for the purpose of the British  Nationality  Act  1981.  The
        Judge found that the child was therefore not a British citizen [43].


     9.   The Judge went on to find that  neither  appellant  met  the  long
        residence requirements of paragraph 276ADE. The first appellant  had
        not lost ties with Congo. The second appellant is in touch with  her
        family in Kathmandu. Nor could the appellants  avail  themselves  of
        the provisions of EX.1 as they were not involved in  a  relationship
        with a child who is a British citizen.


    10.   Their appeals are also dismissed on human rights grounds.


    11.   On 3rd June 2014,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Reid  granted  the
        appellants permission to appeal on the basis that  it  was  arguable
        that the Judge's conclusions  on  long  residence  at  paragraph  42
        applied the wrong date for calculation  of  the  28  day  concession
        period. The Judge should have considered the first  appellant's  ten
        year long residence application as at the date of the  statement  of
        additional grounds following the one stop notice. The  Judge  failed
        to consider the effect of s.3C of the Immigration Act 1971.


    12.   It was also contended  that  the  decision  dismissing  the  first
        appellant's  additional  grounds  of  appeal  deprived  the   second
        appellant of her argument that she was eligible for leave to  remain
        as the mother of a British child under EX.1.


    13.   Mr Mahmood submitted before me that the  Judge  failed  to  engage
        with the additional grounds of appeal, and  in  particular  to  take
        into account section 3C leave when reaching a decision on the  first
        appellant's eligibility for indefinite leave to remain on the  basis
        of ten years' long residence. He submitted following the decision of
        the Upper Tribunal in MU (Statement of  Additional  Grounds  -  Long
        Residence - Discretion) Bangladesh [2010] UKUT 442 (IAC),  that  the
        appellant had accrued  ten  years'  lawful  leave  (including  leave
        extended by s.3C of the 1971 Act) whilst his appeal was pending.


    14.   Accordingly, it was contended that  the  appellant  had  completed
        more than ten years' lawful continuous residence as at the  date  of
        the appeal decision  and  therefore  the  appeal  should  have  been
        allowed on that ground.


    15.   Insofar as the second  appellant  is  concerned,  she  too  raised
        additional grounds of appeal under cover  of  a  letter  dated  23rd
        April 2014 following the service of the one stop warning, contending
        that in the event that the Tribunal accepted the  first  appellant's
        additional grounds of appeal entitling him to  indefinite  leave  to
        remain on the grounds of ten years' long residence, it would  render
        the appellants' child eligible for registration as a British citizen
        under s.1 (3) of the British Nationality Act 1981.


    16.   The second appellant argued in her additional  grounds  that  this
        would thus entitle her to become eligible for leave to remain  under
        EX.1.


    17.   Accordingly, Mr Mahmood contended that  the  Judge  made  material
        errors in dismissing the first appellant's additional grounds  which
        deprived the second appellant of establishing her case,  namely  her
        eligibility to apply for leave to remain as the mother of a  British
        citizen under EX.1.


    18.   In addition, he submitted in respect of both appellants  that  the
        appellants' appeal should be allowed on  Article  8  grounds,  given
        that she will be the mother of a British child in the event that the
        appeal of the first appellant is allowed under  paragraph  276B  and
        276C of the Immigration Rules.


    19.   In support of those submissions  Mr  Mahmood  submitted  that  the
        Judge failed to  consider  the  effect  of  the  additional  grounds
        following the service of the one-stop warning.  Nor  had  the  Judge
        referred to the authorities of AS (Afghanistan) and NV  v  Secretary
        of State [2009] EWCA Civ 1076 and Patel and Others  v  Secretary  of
        State [2013] UKSC 72 constituting binding  authorities  in  deciding
        all appeals where additional grounds  of  appeal  have  been  raised
        following the service of the one stop warning  under  s.120  of  the
        2002 Act.


    20.   Further, he contended that the Judge erred by failing  to  give  a
        decision on additional grounds even if they had not been  raised  in
        the original application of 10th October 2013.


    21.   In the event the Judge erred in  failing  to  apply  s.3C  of  the
        Immigration  Act  1971  during  the  appeal   process:   the   first
        appellant's  residence  was  lawful  by  virtue  of  s.3C   of   the
        Immigration Act 1971 as confirmed by relevant Home  Office  guidance
        relating to indefinite leave to remain on the basis  of  ten  years'
        long residence.


    22.   I have had regard to the long residence and private life  guidance
        valid from 11th November 2013, which was accepted  as  the  relevant
        guidance for the purpose of this appeal.


    23.   At page 24 of the guidance, reference is made  to  the  fact  that
        s.3C and s.3D of the Immigration Act 1971  both  extend  a  person's
        leave in certain circumstances. Section  3C  extends  leave  when  a
        person with leave to enter or remain makes an in  time  application.
        That must be made before their leave expires. If he has 3C leave and
        the application is refused, 3C leave continues  until  their  appeal
        rights are exhausted.


    24.   It is expressly stated that both s.3C and  s.3D  leave  counts  as
        existing leave to enter or remain in the UK and therefore as  lawful
        residence for the purpose of the ten year long residence rule.


    25.   It is also provided at page 25 that  a  person  may  complete  ten
        years' continuous lawful residence  whilst  they  are  awaiting  the
        outcome of an appeal and submit an application on that basis.


    26.   Mr Mahmood also submitted that as far as the second  appellant  is
        concerned, the Judge erred in assuming that because she has Nepalese
        friends in London who accept her in spite of her status as a  mother
        of a child from an African father, this did not mean,  as  found  by
        the Judge, that the wider Nepalese society would be accepting of her
        despite her status as the mother of such a mixed race child.


    27.   The compassion, empathy and care shown  to  her  by  her  personal
        friends in the UK cannot be taken to be representative of what would
        be visited upon her by the wider Nepalese society were she to return
        there with her child.


    28.   On behalf of the respondent, Ms Everett relied on the  short  Rule
        24  response,  contending  that  the  Judge  appropriately  directed
        himself. Furthermore, he determined the  matters  that  were  raised
        before him and the findings are sustainable. It  was  open  to  both
        parties to relocate to the country of nationality of the  other  and
        it was not a disproportionate interference in their family life  for
        them to do so.


    29.   There were no very compelling circumstances that rendered  such  a
        course unduly harsh.


    30.   Ms Everett submitted that if the decisions fall to be remade,  and
        it is found that the first appellant had satisfied  the  requirement
        of ten years'  continuous  lawful  residence,  the  relevant  public
        policy issues  should  be  determined  and  considered  not  by  the
        Tribunal but by the respondent.


         Assessment


    31.   The relevant legal provisions informing this appeal  are  set  out
        below.


    32.   Paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules sets out the  requirements
        to be met by an applicant for indefinite  leave  to  remain  on  the
        grounds of long residence in the UK;  he must have had at least  ten
        years' continuous lawful residence here, and, having regard  to  the
        public interest there are no reasons why it would be undesirable for
        him to be given indefinite leave to remain on the  grounds  of  long
        residence, taking into account his age, the strength of  connections
        in the UK,  his  personal  history,  including  character,  conduct,
        associations and employment record and domestic  circumstances,  any
        previous criminal record and the nature of any offence of  which  he
        has   been   convicted;   compassionate   circumstances   and    any
        representations received on his behalf.


    33.   Further, he must not fall  foul  for  refusal  under  the  general
        grounds for refusal.


    34.   'Lawful residence' is defined as  residence  which  is  continuous
        residence pursuant to existing leave to enter or remain.


    35.   Section 85(2) of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum  2002  Act
        provides that if an appellant under s.82(1) makes a statement  under
        s.120 of that Act, the Tribunal shall consider any matter raised  in
        the statement which constitutes a ground of appeal of a kind  listed
        in s.84(1) against the decision appealed against.


    36.   In  MU  (statement  of  additional  grounds  -  long  residence  -
        discretion) Bangladesh [2010] UKUT 442 (IAC), the Upper Tribunal  in
        reliance on the decision in AS (Afghanistan) and NV v  SSHD)  [2009]
        EWCA Civ 1076, held that  there  is  no  time  limit  on  serving  a
        Statement of Additional  Grounds  in  response  to  a  "section  120
        notice."  Thus, an appellant may  accrue  ten  years'  lawful  leave
        (including leave extended by s.3C of the 1971 Act) while his  appeal
        is pending. The Tribunal may then be asked  to  decide  whether  the
        appellant qualifies for indefinite leave under  the  long  residence
        rule.


    37.   In AS (Afghanistan), supra, the Court  of  Appeal  held  that  the
        Tribunal itself has jurisdiction to determine any additional grounds
        for seeking stay in the UK which  have  been  raised  following  the
        service of such one stop warnings.


    38.   In Patel and Others v Secretary  of  State  [2013]  UKSC  72,  the
        Supreme Court held that there is no express provision  dealing  with
        the form of the response, nor imposing on the Secretary of State any
        express duty to consider it or determine the issues  raised  by  it.
        Under s.85(2) the Tribunal hearing an existing appeal under  s.82(1)
        is required to consider any matter raised in the s.120 statement  if
        it "constitutes a ground of appeal  of  a  kind  listed  in  s.84(1)
        against the decision appealed against."


    39.   The Supreme Court had  regard  to  the  majority  decision  in  AS
        (Afghanistan), supra, namely that s.85(2) was  to  be  construed  as
        imposing a duty on the Tribunal to consider any potential ground  of
        appeal raised in response to a s.120 notice,  even  if  it  was  not
        directly related to the issues considered by the Secretary of  State
        in the original decision.


    40.   As already noted, both s.3C and s.3D of the Immigration  Act  1971
        extend a person's leave in certain circumstances. Section 3C extends
        leave  when  a  person  with  leave  to  remain  makes  an  in  time
        application. If a person has 3C  leave,  and  their  application  is
        refused,  s.3C  leave  continues  until  their  appeal  rights   are
        exhausted. In particular, it is provided that  both  s.3C  and  s.3D
        leave count as existing leave to enter  or  remain  in  the  UK  and
        therefore constitutes lawful residence for the purpose  of  the  ten
        year long residence rule.


    41.   Paragraph 4 of the UKBA guidance to the application form, SET (LR)
        for indefinite leave to remain on  the  basis  of  ten  years'  long
        residence, states: "please do not apply more  than  28  days  before
        completing the qualifying period. If you  apply  earlier  than  that
        your application may be refused."


         The underlying facts


    42.   The first appellant is a national of Congo. He  was  born  on  7th
        April 1982. He came to the UK on a student visa on 7th May 2004.


    43.   There have been successive extensions of his leave to remain as  a
        student. He made an in time application for variation of  his  leave
        to remain on 10th October 2013. That is the decision  which,  having
        been refused by the respondent, triggered  the  current  appeal.  He
        appealed against that refusal.


    44.   It is common ground that he was served with  a  one  stop  warning
        under s.120 of the 2002 Act that accompanied the refusal decision of
        19th November 2013. In the one  stop  warning  he  was  directed  to
        inform the respondent of any reasons why he thought that  he  should
        be allowed to stay in the UK. That includes why he  wishes  to  stay
        here and any grounds why he should not be  removed  or  required  to
        leave. It is expressly provided that if he  later  applies  to  stay
        here for a reason which he could have given to the respondent "now,"
        he may not be able to appeal if the application were to be  refused.
        This ongoing requirement to state his reasons is made under s.120 of
        the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.


    45.   In accordance with the UKBA guidance on ten years long  residence,
        a person becomes eligible to apply for indefinite leave to remain on
        the basis of such ten years' residence, 28 days before completion of
        the ten years long residence.


    46.   On 14th  April  2014  the  first  appellant  produced  "additional
        grounds of appeal" which were sent both to the presenting  officers'
        unit in Cardiff and served on the  Tribunal.  These  were  expressly
        stated to be the service of additional grounds pursuant to  the  one
        stop warning.


    47.   In his additional grounds, he contended that he  was  entitled  to
        indefinite leave to remain in the UK pursuant to 276B  and  276C  of
        the rules. In particular, he asserted that he entered the UK on  7th
        May 2004 and became eligible for indefinite leave to remain  "as  of
        9th April 2014, having continuously and lawfully resided in the UK."




    48.   He relied on the UKBA guidance on  long  residence  for  leave  to
        remain on the basis of ten years'  long  residence  28  days  before
        completion of those ten years.


    49.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not engage with  his  additional
        grounds of appeal.


    50.   The second appellant came to the UK in September 2009 on a Tier  4
        General student visa valid until October 2012. She applied  in  time
        for a variation of that leave, which  was  refused  on  1st  October
        2013. She appealed against that refusal.


    51.   She too was served with a one stop warning under s.120, set out in
        the immigration decision dated 1st October 2013.


    52.   In due  course,  she  submitted  separate  additional  grounds  of
        appeal. She contended in those grounds that she  should  be  granted
        leave to remain as the partner of a person who is being admitted for
        settlement at the same time.


    53.   Having regard  to  the  foregoing,  I  find  that  the  First-tier
        Tribunal Judge erred in failing to apply s.3C of the Immigration Act
        1971 during the appeal process. I find, after  applying  s.3C,  that
        the first appellant had completed ten years' lawful  and  continuous
        residence as at the date of the appeal decision.


    54.   That in turn impacts on the second appellant's grounds  of  appeal
        as set out in her additional grounds.


    55.   Section 1(3) of the British Nationality Act 1981 provides  that  a
        person born in the UK  after  commencement  who  is  not  a  British
        citizen by virtue of sub section (1) or (2) shall be entitled to  be
        registered as a British citizen if, while he is a minor, his  father
        or mother becomes a British citizen or becomes settled in the UK and
        an application is made for his registration as a British citizen.


    56.   The second appellant contended that in the event that the Tribunal
        accepts the first appellant's grounds for indefinite leave to remain
        based on ten years' long residence,  their  child,  Samuel  Maharjan
        Samba, born in the UK on  the  7th  August  2011,  will  the  become
        eligible for registration as a British citizen; she will be entitled
        to rely on her additional grounds for leave to remain under  EX.1(b)
        of Appendix FM of the rules, as she is  in  a  genuine  relationship
        with a partner  who  will  be  settled  in  the  UK  and  there  are
        insurmountable obstacles to the family life continuing  outside  the
        UK and it would not be reasonable to expect the child to  leave  the
        UK.


    57.   It was therefore contended that the Judge should allow her  appeal
        and grant her discretionary leave to remain under EX.1  of  Appendix
        FM.


    58.   I find with regard to the second appellant,  that  the  First-tier
        Tribunal Judge did not engage with her additional grounds of appeal.
         He accordingly did not consider the consequences of a finding  that
        the first  appellant  was  entitled  to  indefinite  leave,  and  in
        particular how it might affect the child's  immigration  status  and
        the second appellant's eligibility to  apply  under  the  Rules  for
        indefinite leave to remain in the UK.


    59.   I accordingly find that there  were  material  errors  of  law  in
        respect of both appellants, and, as agreed by  the  parties,  I  set
        aside the determination.


    60.   The parties agreed that I should re-make the decision. Ms  Everett
        contended that even if it is found  that  the  first  appellant  has
        satisfied the residence requirements under the Rule, it is  for  the
        respondent herself to consider the public interest  component  under
        paragraph 276B.


    61.   Mr Mahmood  however  submitted  that  on  the  authorities  of  AS
        (Afghanistan) and Patel, supra, the Tribunal has the jurisdiction to
        decide all issues.


    62.   In re-making the decision, I consider the effect of the additional
        grounds resulting from the service of a one stop warning.


    63.   I am required in the circumstances to make  a  decision  on  those
        grounds even though  they  had  not  been  raised  in  the  original
        application of 10th October 2013.


    64.   I have set out the significance of s.3C  of  the  Immigration  Act
        1971 during the appeal process as well as confirmation from the Home
        Office guidance on indefinite leave to remain on the  basis  of  ten
        years' long residence.


    65.   I  find,  having  regard  to  the  facts  relating  to  the  first
        appellant's residence in the UK including residence in  reliance  on
        section 3C of the 1971 Act, that he has been  here  lawfully  for  a
        period of ten years.


    66.   Paragraph 276B(i)(a) sets out the requirements to  be  met  by  an
        applicant for indefinite leave to remain  on  the  grounds  of  long
        residence, which in this case is  at  least  ten  years'  continuous
        lawful residence here.


    67.   The additional requirement to be met  by  an  applicant  is  that,
        having regard to the public interest, there are no  reasons  why  it
        would be undesirable for him to be given indefinite leave to  remain
        on the grounds of long residence. I have already set out  the  seven
        matters that must be considered with regard to the public interest.


    68.   Paragraph 276B(ii) makes it clear that to succeed, applicants must
        show that their circumstances considered as a whole do not  make  it
        undesirable for them to be given indefinite leave to remain.


    69.   In that respect I have had regard to  the  decision  in  MO  (Long
        residence rule - public interest proviso) Ghana [2007]  UKAIT  00014
        where the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal itself considered the list
        of factors under 276B(ii).


    70.   In MO the First-tier Tribunal Judge in  fact  concluded  that  the
        appellant's whole personal history and conduct in the  UK  had  been
        based on a life of deliberate deceit.  His  appeal  was  accordingly
        dismissed.  The Tribunal upheld that finding. There was  nothing  to
        suggest that the Tribunal did not have the  jurisdiction  itself  to
        consider the public interest provisos.


    71.   The appellant in MO appealed under the 14 year  rule.  Regard  was
        had to  his  personal  history  and  conduct  based  on  a  life  of
        deliberate deceit. He had committed a "most serious  offence."  This
        was a case of a man who had taken active steps to use  deception  by
        employing a false identity when it suited him.  He  did  this  in  a
        short time of arriving.


    72.   In the current appeal  there  is  no  suggestion  of  any  adverse
        circumstances  contemplated  by  paragraph  276B(ii)  rendering   it
        undesirable on public interest grounds for the first appellant to be
        granted indefinite leave to remain on the grounds of long residence.


    73.   After considering the public interest under the Rule, I find  that
        there are no reasons why it  would  be  undesirable  for  the  first
        appellant to be given indefinite leave to remain.


    74.   Insofar as the second appellant is concerned, there is no  dispute
        regarding  the  genuineness  and  subsistence  of  the  relationship
        between her and the first appellant. In addition,  their  child  was
        born in the UK.


    75.   Their child will now become entitled to be registered as a British
        citizen as his father has become settled in the UK. This requires  a
        formal application to be made for  his  registration  as  a  British
        citizen.


    76.   There should in  the  circumstances  be  no  obstacle  impeding  a
        relatively swift and successful outcome to the  child's  application
        for registration.


    77.   The second appellant will, on  registration  of  her  child  as  a
        British citizen, become entitled to make an application for leave to
        remain as the mother of a British child under EX.1.


    78.   In the circumstances she should be granted discretionary leave  to
        remain pending the registration of her child as a  British  citizen.
        Once that has  been  achieved  she  should  be  given  a  reasonable
        opportunity to present an  application  under  EX.1,  for  leave  to
        remain.  Pending the outcome  of  such  application  she  should  be
        granted further discretionary leave to remain in the UK.


        Decisions


            Having found that there were material errors of law, I  re-make
  the decisions              allowing the appeal of each appellant.


       No anonymity order made.





                               Signed                 Date:  28/8/2014






                               Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer
