
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/40461/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28th August 2015                  |On 3rd September 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       mr Harishkumar Kanubhai Valand
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Saini, Counsel instructed by Shri Venkateshwara
                    Solicitors, Hounslow


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Mr Valand is a citizen of India whose date of birth is recorded as  7th
    June 1981.  He first arrived in the United Kingdom  in  2009  and  then
    remained with leave as a student until 7th April 2014.   On  4th  April
    2014 he made application for leave to remain  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student Migrant under the points-based system.  On 26th September 2014,
    however, a decision was made to refuse the application and to remove Mr
    Valand from the United Kingdom.  He appealed and eventually the  matter
    was placed before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Borsada.  The matter
    was dealt  with  "on  the  papers".   The  Decision  and  Reasons  were
    promulgated on 9th February 2015.

 2. In this case the Secretary of  State  refused  the  application  having
    regard to paragraph 245ZX(c) and (d) with reference to paragraph 116(c)
    of Appendix A because although Mr Valand had submitted a valid CAS with
    the application by the time the CAS  came  to  be  considered  on  25th
    September 2014 the relevant college, namely the Sponsor, had  withdrawn
    the  CAS  and  without  a  CAS  the  application  was  deemed   to   be
    unsatisfactory and that it did not meet the requirements of the Rules.

 3. Mr Valand submitted in his appeal that there was inherent unfairness in
    the case because the Secretary of State did not inform him that the CAS
    had been withdrawn by the college and neither did the college.  It  was
    submitted on behalf of Mr Valand  that  in  the  circumstances  he,  Mr
    Valand, should have been granted 60 days by the Secretary of  State  to
    find a new Sponsor and in  any  event  there  had  been  a  failure  to
    consider Article 8 of the ECHR.

 4. Judge Borsada in a very short Statement of Reasons noted that there was
    no factual dispute in the case; the CAS  was  not  valid  when  it  was
    considered by the Secretary of State. However  Judge  Borsada  accepted
    also having regard to Home Office guidance that Mr Valand  should  have
    been informed and been granted 60 days to find a new CAS. There was  no
    evidence, he found, that the Secretary of State  had  given  Mr  Valand
    that opportunity.  In those circumstances Judge Borsada found that  the
    Secretary of State had not acted in accordance with her own policy  and
    allowed the appeal to the extent that it was not in accordance with the
    law.

 5. Not content with that decision by Notice dated 13th February  2015  the
    Secretary of State made application for permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  The grounds were as follows:

         "Background

         1.   The Appellant sought leave to remain as  a  Tier  4  (General)
             Student under the points-based system (PBS).

         Ground One: failure to give adequate  reasons  for  findings  on  a
         material matter

         2.   The Tribunal concluded that the matter should be  remitted  to
             the Respondent and that the Appellant should be given 60  days
             to regularise his stay or leave the United Kingdom.

         3.   It is respectfully submitted that, in allowing the appeal, the
             Tribunal has erred in law.  It is not clear why  the  Tribunal
             finds at paragraph 7 that the Appellant should have been given
             the opportunity to have 60 days to find  a  new  Sponsor.   He
             should not have been.

         4.   The Appellant was not disadvantaged  by  matters  of  fairness
             falling within the remit of Patel (India) [2011] UKUT 211  and
             not, therefore, entitled to 60 days' leave.  That  is  because
             the Appellant's CAS was no longer valid after he submitted  it
             because it was withdrawn by his Sponsor, who had not  informed
             him.  It was not because the UK Border Agency had suspended or
             revoked the Sponsor's licence and had not informed  him.   The
             matter rests between the Appellant and his Sponsor.

         5.   Permission to appeal is respectfully sought, an  oral  hearing
             is requested."

 6. On  25th  March  2015  Designated  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Macdonald granted permission on the basis of  the  grounds.   Thus  the
    matter comes before me.

 7. For the Respondent, Mr Saini placed before me the guidance in the  case
    of Kaur (Patel fairness: respondent's policy) India [2013] UKUT  00344.
    The headnote reads:

         "(1) The Respondent has produced a policy,  which  is  intended  to
             give  effect  to  the  principles  of  common   law   fairness
             identified in  Patel  (relocation  [I  think  that  should  be
             revocation] of sponsor licence - fairness) [2011]  UKUT  00211
             (IAC).

         (2)  In essence, the policy provides that, in  cases  of  potential
             discretionary refusal under paragraph 322 of  the  Immigration
             Rules, caseworkers should follow the 'Patel'  process.   Where
             this is not done,  the  resulting  decision  will  not  be  in
             accordance with the law."

 8. Helpfully the case of Kaur has as an annex a copy of the relevant  part
    of the guidance upon which reliance is placed by Mr Saini.  The  policy
    in fact relates to refusals under paragraph 322 but the application was
    one that was made in time and it is the first paragraph of  three  upon
    which the reliance is placed.  I set out  the  relevant  parts  of  the
    policy below.

         "(1) As with all applications the caseworker will have followed the
             usual  procedures  for  risk  profile,  verification   checks,
             standard checks, eligibility checks and  identity  checks  and
             should  be  in  a  position  to  substantively  consider   the
             application.

             If, during the course of these checks, it transpires that  the
             application will fall  to  be  refused  under  322(1A)  (false
             representations, false documents or information  submitted  in
             relation to the application, etc)  then  the  case  should  be
             refused outright on this basis.  As  322(1A)  is  a  mandatory
             ground  for  refusing  an  application,  it   would   not   be
             appropriate to provide the opportunity for  the  applicant  to
             vary the grounds of their application.

             If the  application  falls  to  be  refused  under  322(2)  to
             322(12), then as full  consideration  of  the  application  is
             required then caseworkers should proceed in the  way  set  out
             below.

             The caseworker should first of all check whether  or  not  the
             application  was  submitted  prior  to  the  expiry   of   the
             applicant's leave to enter or remain.

             If the application was  submitted  after  the  expiry  of  the
             applicant's leave (out of time)  then  the  caseworker  should
             proceed to step 2.

             If the application was submitted  before  the  expiry  of  the
             applicant's leave (in time) then the caseworker should proceed
             to step 3."

    It was common ground that the application in this case was made  before
    the expiry of the applicant's leave and so it is paragraph  or  step  3
    that applies.

         "3.  Although the applicant does not possess a  valid  CAS  and  so
             falls to have their case refused,  as  their  application  was
             submitted 'in  time'  we  will  delay  the  refusal  of  their
             application for a period of 60 days to allow them to obtain  a
             new CAS and to submit a request to vary the grounds  of  their
             original application.

             In such cases, the caseworker  will  write  to  the  applicant
             using ICD4500 and information leaflet ICD4499 explaining  that
             their previous Sponsor has surrendered their  licence  or  had
             their licence revoked and that they have  60  days  to  either
             leave the UK or to find a new Sponsor, obtain a  new  CAS  and
             submit all of the required documents to show  that  they  meet
             the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

             ..."

 9. Mr Saini then took me to the  case  of  Patel  (revocation  of  sponsor
    licence - fairness) India [2011]  UKUT  00211.   The  headnote  at  (2)
    reads:

         "Where a Sponsor licence has been revoked by the Secretary of State
         during an application for variation of leave and the  applicant  is
         both unaware of the revocation and not party to any reason why  the
         licence has been revoked, the Secretary of State should  afford  an
         applicant a reasonable  opportunity  to  vary  the  application  by
         identifying a new Sponsor before the application is determined."

    Clearly that part of the subheading relates only  to  circumstances  in
    which it is the Secretary of  State  that  has  taken  the  step  being
    objected to but Mr Saini  suggested  that  I  ought  to  look  also  to
    paragraphs 21 and 22  of  the  substantive  judgment.   That  reads  as
    follows:

         "21. If this is correct it follows that not  only  will  any  fresh
             application made after a  refusal  not  be  one  that  can  be
             considered in accordance with the  Immigration  Rules,  it  is
             also not one that can be the subject  of  an  appeal  to  this
             Tribunal because it is made by someone who  has  no  leave  to
             remain.  Moreover, the evidence in this and other  cases  that
             have come before the Tribunal on the same point indicates that
             responsible  Sponsors  are  unwilling  to  give  unconditional
             sponsorship letters to students who  would  otherwise  qualify
             for admission for the course under offer if they have no leave
             to remain.  We accept that  in  some  cases  Sponsors  may  be
             unwilling to issue such documentation on a misapprehension  of
             whether a person has leave  pursuant  to  Section  3C  of  the
             Immigration Act 1971.  We take this opportunity  to  emphasise
             that a person with  Section  3C  leave  who  has  an  in  time
             application for an extension of leave under consideration  may
             vary that application by substituting a  new  college  Sponsor
             and sponsorship letters need therefore not  be  contingent  on
             the outcome of the application.

         22.  Where the applicant is both innocent of any practice that  led
             to loss of the sponsorship status and ignorant of the fact  of
             such loss of status, it seems to us that common  law  fairness
             and the principle of treating  applicants  equally  mean  that
             each  should  have  an  equal  opportunity   to   vary   their
             application by affording them a reasonable time with which  to
             find a substitute college on which to base  their  application
             for an extension of stay to obtain the relevant qualification.
              In the curtailment cases, express Home Office  policy  is  to
             afford 60 days for such application to be made.

         23.  Although we accept that there is no such  policy  for  refusal
             cases, fairness requires that such cases be treated in broadly
             the  same  way.   The  applicant  must  be  given   an   equal
             opportunity before refusal of application to amend it  in  the
             way we have described.  This was  clearly  not  done  in  this
             case.  The Home Office knew that it had suspended the  college
             in January 2010 but no one else did.  The applicant could  not
             have known  that  subsequently  the  college's  status  as  an
             approved Sponsor was revoked before  his  application  for  an
             extension of stay was decided."

10. Mr Saini relied only on paragraphs 21 and 22 but they must be  read  in
    the context of the decision as a whole and that is  why  I  have  added
    paragraph 23 because the case of Patel was concerned with  a  situation
    in which it was the Secretary of State that had revoked the licence.

11. I indicated very early on in the appeal to Mr Saini  having  heard  his
    submissions that the authorities to which I  was  being  referred  were
    cases in which it was the Secretary of State that had made the decision
    rather than as in this case, the Sponsor.   Having  heard  all  of  the
    submissions made by Mr Saini I informed Mr  Wilding  that  it  was  not
    necessary for me to hear from him.

12. It is clear that the policy upon which Mr Saini relies applies  not  to
    the circumstances which appertain in this appeal.  The first  paragraph
    under the policy at 3 cannot be read  in  isolation  of  the  remaining
    parts.  It is clear that if a caseworker is to write  to  an  applicant
    using form ICD4500 in conformity with the policy explaining that  their
    previous Sponsor has surrendered their licence  or  had  their  licence
    revoked that is a very different set of circumstances to one  in  which
    the Sponsor itself has revoked the CAS.  On  the  facts  of  this  case
    there was no unfairness by the Secretary of State.  If  there  was  any
    unfairness at all it was on the part of the college.   That  is  not  a
    matter for which the Secretary of State can be  held  responsible.   To
    allow an appeal to succeed on the basis upon which Mr Saini suggests is
    open to abuse.  A CAS may be revoked for good reason quite  independent
    of any decision taken by the Secretary of State.  It may be, I  do  not
    know, that the applicant, Mr Valand, did not attend that  college.   He
    said in his evidence before the First-tier Tribunal by way  of  written
    statement that he did not know the reason why the CAS had been  revoked
    but if he is to suggest that there  has  been  unfairness  then  in  my
    judgment he must show that the decision was material,  in  other  words
    were the reason why the CAS had been revoked been known it  would  have
    made a material difference.  I am far from saying, however,  that  that
    would have been a sufficient basis for allowing the appeal in the First-
    tier Tribunal.  I simply refer to the argument as advanced by Mr Saini,
    who put forward his submissions on the basis of fairness generally  and
    in relation to the guidance.

13. I am reinforced in my view that there  is  considerable  merit  in  the
    Secretary of State's grounds that by reference to the facts of the case
    of EK (Ivory Coast) -v- Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2014] EWCA Civ 1517.  At paragraph 24 there is a  discussion  on  that
    case.  It reads as follows:

         "24. The position in which the Appellant has been placed can, in  a
             general sense, be said to be unfair to her.   She  obtained  a
             valid CAS letter and made her application for leave to  remain
             to continue her studies on the basis of that letter.  She  had
             a limited period of time in  which  she  could  make  such  an
             application on an in country basis,  granted  to  her  by  the
             Secretary of State to give her an opportunity to  rectify  the
             position which had arisen as a  result  of  her  first  chosen
             college, Bliss College,  losing  its  authorisation  from  the
             Secretary of  State  to  issue  CAS  letters.   She  made  her
             application within time.  Unbeknown to her, as a result of  an
             administrative error for which she had no  responsibility,  St
             Stephen's withdrew her CAS letter.  As  a  result,  after  the
             period for making a fresh in country application had  elapsed,
             her application was dismissed by the Secretary of State.   The
             Appellant will have to leave the United  Kingdom  and  make  a
             fresh out of country application if she wishes to continue her
             studies here.

         25.  However, in my judgment, there was no breach by the  Secretary
             of State of her public law duty to act fairly  in  considering
             the  Appellant's  application  for  leave  to   remain.    The
             Secretary  of  State  is  not  responsible  for  the   general
             unfairness which the Appellant  has  suffered.   That  is  the
             result of actions and omissions by St Stephen's.  There is  no
             basis on which any of the decisions of the Secretary of State,
             the FTT and the Upper Tribunal can be impugned as unlawful.

         26.   The  Secretary  of  State  accepts,   correctly,   that   the
             Immigration Rules do not exclude the general public  law  duty
             to act fairly which rests  upon  the  Secretary  of  State  in
             exercising her functions: see, e.g.,  Alam  -v-  Secretary  of
             State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 960, [44].   The
             question,  therefore,  is  whether  that   duty   imposed   an
             obligation on the Secretary of State, when she  saw  that  the
             CAS letter on which the Appellant's application for  leave  to
             remain was based had been withdrawn, to adjourn  any  decision
             on the application to give the Appellant notice of the problem
             and an opportunity to rectify it.  In my view, it did not.

         27.  It is well-established that the precise content of the duty to
             act fairly varies according to the particular  decision-making
             context in which it falls to  be  applied.   I  refer  to  the
             classic statement by Lord Mustill in  a  case  concerning  the
             procedure to be followed by the Secretary of State in  setting
             tariff periods of mandatory imprisonment for prisoners serving
             life  sentences,  R  -v-  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
             Department, ex p. Doody [1994] 1 AC  531,  at  560D  -  G  (in
             particular, principles (2), (3) and (4)):

                  'What does fairness  require  in  the  present  case?   My
                  Lords, I think it unnecessary to refer by name or to quote
                  from, any of the often  cited  authorities  in  which  the
                  courts have explained what  is  essentially  an  intuitive
                  judgment.  They are far  too  well-known.   From  them,  I
                  derive that (1) where an  Act  of  Parliament  confers  an
                  administrative power there is a presumption that  it  will
                  be exercised  in  a  manner  which  is  fair  in  all  the
                  circumstances.  (2) The  standards  of  fairness  are  not
                  immutable.  They may change with the passage of time, both
                  in the general and in their application to decisions of  a
                  particular type.  (3) The principles of fairness  are  not
                  to be applied by  rote  identically  in  every  situation.
                  What fairness demands is dependent on the context  of  the
                  decision, and this is to be taken into account in all  its
                  aspects.  (4) An essential feature of the context  is  the
                  statute which creates the discretion, as regards both  its
                  language and the shape of  the  legal  and  administrative
                  system within which the decision is taken.   (5)  Fairness
                  will very often require that a person who may be adversely
                  affected by the decision will have an opportunity to  make
                  representations  on  his  own  behalf  either  before  the
                  decision is taken with a view to  producing  a  favourable
                  result; or after it is taken, with a view to procuring its
                  modification; or both.   (6)  Since  the  person  affected
                  usually cannot  make  worthwhile  representations  without
                  knowing what  factors  may  weigh  against  his  interests
                  fairness will very often require that he  is  informed  of
                  the gist of the case which he has to answer.'

             See also Lloyd -v- McMahon [1987] AC 625, 702 - 703  per  Lord
             Bridge:

                  '... The  so-called  rules  of  natural  justice  are  not
                  engraved on tablets of stone.  To  use  the  phrase  which
                  better  expresses  the  underlying   concept,   what   the
                  requirements of fairness demand when any  body,  domestic,
                  administrative or judicial, has to make a  decision  which
                  will affect the  rights  of  individuals  depends  on  the
                  character  of  the  decision-making  body,  the  kind   of
                  decision it  has  to  make  and  the  statutory  or  other
                  framework in which it operates.  In particular, it is well-
                  established that when a statute has conferred on any  body
                  the power to make  decisions  affecting  individuals,  the
                  courts will not only require the procedure  prescribed  by
                  the statute to be followed, but will readily imply so much
                  and  no  more  to  be  introduced  by  way  of  additional
                  procedural safeguards as will  ensure  the  attainment  of
                  fairness.'

         28.  The points-based system is intended to simplify the  procedure
             for applying for leave  to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United
             Kingdom in certain classes of case, such as economic  migrants
             and students.  This is to enable the  Secretary  of  State  to
             process high volumes of applications in a fair and  reasonably
             expeditious manner, according  to  clear  objective  criteria.
             This is in the interests of all applicants.  It  also  assists
             applicants to know  what  evidence  they  have  to  submit  in
             support of an application.

         29.  As Sullivan LJ observed in Alam, it is an inherent feature  of
             the  points-based  system  that  it   'puts   a   premium   on
             predictability and certainty at the expense of discretion'."

14. Then at paragraph 32:

         "In my judgment, acceptance of the Appellant's submission that  the
         general duty  of  fairness  required  the  Secretary  of  State  to
         postpone making a decision on her application  in  order  to  raise
         with her the cancellation of her CAS  letter  would  undermine  the
         benefits associated with the points-based system in  a  significant
         and inappropriate way.  It may often be the case that a CAS  letter
         is  withdrawn  between  the  filing  of  an  application  with  the
         Secretary of State and the making of a decision on that application
         for reasons to do with the student (such as failing to  attend  the
         course or failing to pay the tuition  fees),  and  in  relation  to
         which it would not be  appropriate  to  grant  leave  to  enter  or
         remain.  There is no way in which the Secretary of State  can  tell
         whether withdrawal of a CAS letter reflects that type of underlying
         situation or a situation in which  some  administrative  error  has
         occurred on the  part  of  the  sponsoring  college  in  which  the
         applicant is in no way implicated.  It would be a serious intrusion
         upon  the  intended  straightforward   and   relatively   automatic
         operation of decision-making by the Secretary of  State  under  the
         points-based system if in every case of withdrawal of a CAS  letter
         she had to make enquiries and delay making a decision."

15. In my judgment for the reasons I have stated the guidance to  which  Mr
    Saini made reference and upon which he relies  has  no  application  in
    this case.  When one reads point 3 as a whole it is clear that it  does
    not relate to a circumstance in which the CAS has been withdrawn by the
    college even if it is not known to the applicant.  As for the  question
    of fairness I can do no better than refer simply to the guidance in EK.

16. In the circumstances the Secretary of State has made  out  her  grounds
    and the judge in the First-tier Tribunal  clearly  erred.   The  appeal
    should not have been allowed.  In the circumstances  I  shall  set  the
    decision aside and remake it such that the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is to be dismissed.  The applicant did not produce a valid CAS
    at the time of the decision.  The  Secretary  of  State  was  right  to
    refuse the matter.  There was no cross-appeal and no suggestion that  I
    should deal with any Article 8 matters.

Notice of Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.  The  decision  of  the  First-
tier Tribunal is set aside and remade such that the appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker
