
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/40395/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 28 July 2014                               |On 12 August 2014            |
|Oral determination given following hearing    |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                        Mrs Abisoye Oyetayo Onyefuna

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No Representation
For the Respondent:    Mr G Jack, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. The appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Widdup promulgated on 11 March 2014 following a hearing at Hatton Cross
    on 4 March 2014 in which the judge had dismissed her appeal against the
    refusal by the respondent of  her  application  for  further  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant under the points-based system.  At
    that hearing there had been no attendance  by  the  appellant  who  had
    originally claimed to be too ill  to  attend.   The  judge  records  at
    paragraph 11 of his determination that:

         "On the day before the hearing the appellant's solicitors  faxed  a
         letter to the Tribunal requesting an  adjournment  on  the  grounds
         that the appellant was ill and unable to attend the hearing."

 2. The judge continues that "the letter  was  accompanied  by  a  doctor's
    certificate stating that the appellant was not  fit  for  work  due  to
    'back  pain  under  investigation'."   The  judge  records  that   this
    application was refused by the Duty Immigration Judge  on  the  grounds
    that "not fit for work does not mean cannot attend court".

 3. I should record that it is noted by the judge at paragraph  12  of  his
    determination as follows:

         "At the start of the hearing I asked [the appellant's solicitor] if
         he was applying for an adjournment and he said  he  was  not.   The
         appellant was not present and the appeal proceeded  on  submissions
         only."

 4. The appellant had provided evidence in support of her application which
    included evidence relating to income that she claimed to have made from
    self-employment running a business known as African Queen.  In  support
    of this aspect of her appeal she produced  a  series  of  invoices  for
    catering services which she said she had provided to named  individuals
    at least two of whom were  doctors.   Amongst  the  recipients  of  her
    services was said to be a Dr Abiola.

 5. The respondent wrote to Dr Abiola, who replied  in  very  strong  terms
    that she had no knowledge of the appellant and had had no dealings with
    her.  The letter from the doctor is dated 20 May  2013  and  states  as
    follows:

         "I received the  attached  letter  from  your  office  [this  is  a
         reference to a letter from the respondent] this  morning  regarding
         the above mentioned.  I DO NOT HAVE ANY  DEALINGS  WHATSOEVER  WITH
         THIS INDIVIDUAL OR  named  BUSINESS.   Any  document  is  submitted
         purported to have come from me should be  regarded  as  forged.   I
         have never dealt  with  the  individual  neither  have  I  had  any
         encounter   with   the   business   either   on   a   personal   or
         professionally."

 6. The letter was referred to  by  the  judge  in  his  determination  and
    unsurprisingly the judge made adverse  credibility  findings  based  in
    part on this letter.  As the judge remarks at paragraph 22:

         "There is no obvious reason why Dr Abiola would  want  to  make  an
         allegation of forgery against  the  appellant  whom  she  does  not
         appear even to know.  The allegation is made in very  clear  terms.
         I find that it is evidence of quality and weight.  It is no  answer
         for the appellant to argue that no-one else has  provided  evidence
         of forgery."

    The judge also remarks at paragraph 23 that "no attempt has  been  made
    to rebut this allegation".

 7. The judge also noted that other than denying dishonesty this allegation
    had not been answered by  the  appellant,  who  had  not  attended  the
    hearing and given her own explanation for the invoices.   He  commented
    that there was no evidence that her back condition was  such  that  she
    could not attend the hearing and of course, as already noted above, the
    judge  had  recorded  that  there  was  no  application  made  for   an
    adjournment at the hearing but that the representative of the appellant
    had stated in terms that she was not applying for an adjournment.

 8. In light of  the  judge's  adverse  credibility  findings  clearly  the
    appellant's claim with regard to her earnings could not succeed and  in
    any event the appeal would have had to be dismissed on the  basis  that
    she had submitted false documents in support of her application because
    this is what the judge found.

 9. There was though another limb to the appellant's appeal which was based
    upon her asserted EEA rights which were founded upon her case that  she
    had a son, Daniel, who was an Irish citizen having been born in Dublin.

10. Although the judge stated that he was not dealing with the  EEA  issues
    (at paragraph 27) nonetheless he considered the evidence on this  issue
    which was put before him and which he  found  (at  paragraph  27)  "was
    totally contradicted by her own application and by Daniel's passport".

11. The judge noted at paragraph 28  that  in  her  witness  statement  the
    appellant had first alleged that Daniel was born in Dublin, (which  is,
    as I set out below, inconsistent with  the  contents  of  his  Nigerian
    passport) and also had regard to  her  lack  of  credibility  generally
    because she had not  dealt  with  the  issues  concerning  Dr  Abiola's
    letter.

12. With regard to the assertion that her son  was  an  Irish  citizen  the
    appellant relied upon a document said to  be  a  birth  certificate  in
    respect of Daniel.  Daniel did not have an Irish  passport,  which  the
    appellant claimed had been lost, and as the judge records at  paragraph
    29:

         "No explanation was given as to why Daniel, when  aged  16  months,
         had an Irish passport, nor why it had taken until February 2014 for
         the appellant to report its loss in November 2003 when  the  family
         were attacked at home by armed robbers who murdered her husband and
         stole household property including the Irish passport."

13. It is recorded that although it was said that attempts had been made to
    obtain further information in support of her EEA claims these had  only
    been made in February 2014 and a letter which was  said  to  have  been
    sent to the passport office in Dublin had not produced a response.

14. With regard to the birth certificate the judge balanced  this  document
    with the other evidence in the case and he found at paragraph 31  "that
    I can attach no weight to it particularly as it is contradicted by  the
    appellant herself in her application".  The judge also found

         "as a fact that  the  postdecision  claim  that  the  appellant  is
         entitled to an EEA residence card is contradicted by the  reference
         in her application form to Daniel as having been born in Lagos  and
         by the contents of his passport."

15. At paragraph 32 he finds unsurprisingly that:

         "The appellant's credibility is therefore severely damaged both  by
         her deceptive use  of  forged  [documents]  and  by  her  elaborate
         attempt to construct a case that Daniel was an Irish citizen."

16. With regard to whether or  not  Daniel  was  an  Irish  citizen  it  is
    relevant that the  Nigerian  passports  exhibited  in  the  appellant's
    bundle referred to at paragraph 4 of the determination  shows  that  on
    their Nigerian passports both the appellant's children are said to have
    been born in Lagos.  This cannot be reconciled with the case put before
    the Tribunal that in fact Daniel had been born in Dublin.

17. The grounds of appeal contain a number of assertions.  Included amongst
    them is that the judge did not point to evidence that the  Irish  birth
    certificate is a forgery.  Having regard to the well-known decision  in
    Tanveer Ahmed the judge was not required to do this.  There was  not  a
    specific allegation of forgery.

18. Moreover, a judge when deciding what weight to give to  a  document  is
    entitled before relying on that document to  have  regard  to  all  the
    evidence.  In light of the evidence showing that the account  given  by
    the appellant was inconsistent with the passport  of  the  child  which
    stated that he had been born in Lagos and taking into account also that
    this appellant had produced documents which suggested she had  supplied
    services to a doctor who had denied in forceful terms even knowing  her
    the judge was perfectly entitled not to give any weight to the document
    said to be an Irish birth certificate.

19. It is also suggested in the grounds that the judge's refusal to  accept
    that the children had lost their  father  in  tragic  circumstances  is
    unsustainable, especially as the judge's conclusion with regard to  the
    Irish birth certificate "is not supported by law as  it  flies  in  the
    face of the incontrovertible evidence of  the  birth  certificate  that
    cannot be concluded without further evidence as a forgery".  Again,  it
    would seem that the drafter of these grounds did not have in  mind  the
    authority of Tanveer Ahmed which deals with cases such as the present.

20. It is also said that the  judge  did  not  consider  independently  and
    sufficiently the best interests of the children pursuant to Section  55
    of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act  2009  but  again,  in
    light of the judge's finding that Daniel  was  not  an  Irish  citizen,
    there was no basis upon which he could then have gone on to find  other
    than that the best interests of the children was to remain  with  their
    mother and that there was no  reason  why  they  could  not  return  to
    Nigeria with her.

21. On behalf of the respondent in this regard Mr Jack referred me  to  the
    Tribunal decision in  Azimi-Moayed  [2013]  UKUT  00197  in  which  the
    Tribunal decided that there was no need to give specific  consideration
    to a Section 55 point in cases where no welfare arguments had been  put
    before the Tribunal.

22. Before the hearing  the  appellant's  solicitors  had  written  to  the
    Tribunal objecting to the respondent's request that the case be  listed
    as an oral hearing and subsequently no-one attended on  behalf  of  the
    appellant.

23.  This  appeal  had  been  listed  as  an  oral  hearing  and  in  those
    circumstances it was perfectly appropriate for  the  Tribunal  to  take
    account of any submissions made on behalf of the respondent whether  or
    not the appellant chose to attend or be represented.

24. The appellant was granted permission to appeal by Upper Tribunal  Judge
    Reeds on the basis that subsequent to the decision  the  appellant  had
    put before the Tribunal a  letter  purporting  to  be  from  the  Irish
    authorities that an Irish passport had been previously  issued.   Judge
    Reeds considered that in those circumstances it was  arguable  that  in
    light of the decision of MM (unfairness; E & R) Sudan [2014] UKUT 00105

         "the judge proceeded on a mistake of fact although it is plain that
         it was not due to  any  failing  on  the  part  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge and that it may have affected the  overall  findings
         made by the judge on the evidence."

25. Having considered the decision in MM very  carefully,  in  my  judgment
    this does not support the appellant's case.   In  the  first  case  the
    decision in that case was extremely fact-specific.   The  applicant  in
    that case had asserted that she had given her  solicitors  instructions
    to send a letter to the Home Office which the Home Office claimed never
    to have received.

26. At the hearing in that case the judge regarded this assertion in  light
    of the fact that no letter  had  apparently  been  received  as  highly
    relevant to credibility but subsequently it was conceded that in fact a
    letter had been sent but mislaid by the Home Office.

27. The Tribunal in that case had regard to the  guidance  which  had  been
    given by the Court of Appeal in R & Ors (Iran) [2005] EWCA Civ  982  in
    which the Court of Appeal had in the words of the Tribunal at paragraph
    20  "conducted  a  detailed  review  of  categories  of  error  of  law
    frequently encountered" and in which Brooke LJ  having  considered  the
    effect of the decision in E & R v Home Secretary [2004] EWCA Civ 49; QB
    1044 had stated that before E & R could be relied  upon,  "it  must  be
    possible to categorise the relevant fact or evidence  as  'established'
    in the sense that it was uncontentious and objectively verifiable".  In
    MM it was.

28. It is also important to note what the Tribunal in MM said at  paragraph
    25 concerning the flexibility that this Tribunal might have in  certain
    circumstances, which was as follows:

         "The pivotal importance  of  the  error  of  fact  upon  which  the
         reasoning of the judge was demonstrably based helps to explain why,
         in  appeals  raising  issues  of   international   protection   [my
         emphasis],  there  is  room  for  departure  from   an   inflexible
         application of common  law  rules  and  principles  where  this  is
         necessary to redress unfairness."

29. This appeal does not raise issues of international protection, in which
    a lower standard of proof is required, and it is  in  my  judgment  not
    arguable either that this later evidence can somehow be accepted  under
    any general Rule that late evidence which could have  been  put  before
    the court at an earlier stage must be accepted.

30. If there was evidence available that the appellant  had  in  fact  been
    granted an Irish passport and was an Irish citizen this evidence  could
    and should have been obtained before the hearing.  It was  not  and  on
    the basis of the evidence  which  the  judge  had  before  him  he  was
    entirely entitled to make the findings he did.

31. I would make one other point.  I do not believe that this Tribunal  has
    even been provided with the original letter said to be from  the  Irish
    authorities.  All that the Tribunal has is a  copy  and  even  this  it
    appears was never served on the respondent, who until the  hearing  had
    not even seen it.

32. In these circumstances it cannot on any view be said that this evidence
    is incontrovertible.  The inconsistency between on  the  one  hand  the
    appellant claiming that her son was born in Dublin  and  on  the  other
    hand the existence of a Nigerian passport which says on its  face  that
    he was born in Lagos remains.

33. In these circumstances in my judgment there is no arguable error of law
    in Judge Widdup's determination.  His findings were  entirely  open  to
    him and are adequately reasoned.

34. This appeal must accordingly be dismissed and I so find.

Decision

There being no arguable error of law in the determination of the  First-tier
Tribunal this appeal is dismissed.

Signed:
     [pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Craig
                           Date: 11 August 2014
