
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/40815/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |    Decision & Reasons         |
|                                              |Promulgated                    |
|On 3 February 2016                            |    On 22 February 2016        |
|                                              |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW

                                   Between

                                    mr TK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mtisi, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction
 1. An anonymity order was made previously. Pursuant  to  Rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/269) I make  an
    anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a  Court   directs
    otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any  form  of  publication
    thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the  original  Appellant.
    This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure  to
    comply with this  direction  could  give  rise  to  contempt  of  court
    proceedings

 2. This is an appeal by the appellant against a decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal dismissing his appeal against a  decision  of  the  respondent
    taken on 9 September 2014 to  refuse  his  application  for  indefinite
    leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  respondent  also  gave
    directions under Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999  for
    the removal of the appellant from the UK.

Background Facts


 3. The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe whose date of birth is 13  April
    1957.  The appellant entered the United Kingdom on  10  September  2002
    and was granted leave to enter as a visitor until 1 September 2002.  On
    6 September the appellant submitted an application for an extension  of
    his leave to remain as a  visitor.   He  was  granted  leave  until  10
    February 2003.  On 29 January 2003 the appellant was a  dependant  upon
    his spouse's transfer of conditions application and was  granted  leave
    in line with that application until 6 August 2004.  On  5  August  2004
    the appellant was granted leave as  the  dependant  of  a  spouse  work
    permit holder until 7 September 2009.  In 2005 the Home Office received
    a letter from the appellant's estranged spouse notifying them that  she
    was no longer in a relationship  with  the  appellant.   The  appellant
    failed to update the authorities regarding his change in circumstances.
     On 21 August 2009 the appellant submitted an 'outside the  Immigration
    Rules' application which was refused on 24 June 2010.  On 9  July  2010
    the appellant submitted an appeal to the First-tier Tribunal which  was
    dismissed on 19 August 2010.   On  1  September  2010  the  appellant's
    appeal rights were exhausted.  On 6 February  2014  the  appellant  was
    served with an IS151A notice notifying him that he had  overstayed  his
    period of valid leave and was liable to be removed.  On 20 February the
    appellant applied for leave to remain under Article 8 of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights ('European Convention on Human  Rights')  on
    the basis of private and family life. He also claimed that he could not
    return to Zimbabwe because he feared persecution due  to  his  Movement
    for Democratic Change ('MDC') membership. The  appellant  also  claimed
    that he was unwell  with  debilitating  depression  for  which  he  was
    receiving treatment.

 4. That application was refused because the Secretary  of  State  did  not
    consider that there were insurmountable obstacles to family  life  with
    the appellant's partner continuing outside of the  UK  in  relation  to
    family life. In  relation  to  private  life  the  respondent  did  not
    consider  that  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
    integration into Zimbabwe.  The respondent did not consider that  there
    were any exceptional circumstances warranting a grant of leave  outside
    the Immigration Rules.  The respondent also considered the  appellant's
    medical  condition  and  although  the  respondent  accepted  that  the
    healthcare systems in the  UK  and  in  Zimbabwe  are  unlikely  to  be
    equivalent she  decided  that  this  does  not  constitute  exceptional
    circumstances.  The respondent also considered Article 3 in relation to
    the appellant's medical condition and considered that  the  appellant's
    case did not meet the threshold indicated in the case  of  N  v  United
    Kingdom - 26565/05 [2008] ECHR.

 5. Regarding fear on return to Zimbabwe  the  respondent  noted  that  the
    appellant had previously raised his fear on return issues at his appeal
    in 2010.  This appeal against the respondent's decision  was  dismissed
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Telford in August 2010.  The  judge  found
    that the appellant had no "subjective fear of return to Zimbabwe".  The
    respondent noted that the appellant has  never  made  a  formal  asylum
    claim.  On 26 March 2014 and on 25 July 2014 the respondent had written
    to  inform  the  appellant  that  any  application  for   international
    protection must be made in person.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The appellant appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  In  a  decision
    promulgated on 10 June 2015 First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  C  M  Phillips
    dismissed the appellant's appeal.  The judge found that  the  appellant
    and Ms J (his partner) were not in a durable,  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship akin to marriage and therefore that he did  not  meet  the
    requirements of Appendix FM.  The judge  noted  that  the  respondent's
    decision was issued  on  the  basis  that  the  appellant  and  Ms  J's
    relationship was considered  to  be  genuine  and  subsisting  but  the
    respondent considered that there were no  insurmountable  obstacles  to
    family life continuing in Zimbabwe.  The judge found that this decision
    was correct in that it would be reasonable for them to continue  family
    life in Zimbabwe.  In relation to Article  8  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules the judge considered the relationship with Ms J to  constitute  a
    private life given his finding that they were  not  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship.  In the alternative the judge  found  that  it
    was open to the appellant to return to Zimbabwe  and  apply  for  entry
    clearance.   The  judge  also  considered  that  the  public   interest
    considerations in Section 117B  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 (the '2002 Act') apply.   He  found  that  the  medical
    issues do not reach the Article 3 threshold but considered them as part
    of private life.  The judge found that little weight can  be  given  to
    the relationship with Ms J  because  this  was  established  after  the
    appellant's asylum appeal was dismissed.   The  judge  found  that  the
    interference with the appellant's private life would not constitute the
    level required to engage Article 8.  The judge found that  even  taking
    the evidence at its highest the appellant and Ms J do not have  serious
    medical conditions requiring long-term care.  In relation to the  claim
    that the appellant would fear persecution on  return  to  Zimbabwe  the
    judge found that the appellant was seriously  lacking  in  credibility,
    that the  appellant's  attempt  to  found  a  sur  place  claim  lacked
    credibility, finding that there was no risk on return  for  either  the
    appellant or Ms J.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  On  7
    September 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge P J M Hollingworth refused the
    application for permission  to  appeal.   The  appellant  renewed  that
    application to the Upper Tribunal and on 22 October 2015 Upper Tribunal
    Judge Eshun granted the appellant permission to appeal.  The  grant  of
    permission sets out that all the grounds disclose arguable errors.





Summary of Submissions

The appellant's submissions


 8. The grounds of appeal assert that the assessment of risk on  return  to
    Zimbabwe by the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  is  manifestly  flawed  for
    failure to adequately consider evidence. At the hearing  Mr  Mtisi  had
    made no submissions regarding this ground of appeal. I therefore  asked
    if the appellant wished to pursue this ground.  Mr Mtisi submitted that
    the appellant's sur place  activities  postdate  the  initial  decision
    refusing asylum.  He has submitted that the appellant's links with  the
    MDC were shown by his membership card.  He submitted that  in  relation
    to current case  law  that  evidence  postdating  the  CM  (EM  country
    guidance; disclosure) Zimbabwe CG [2013] UKUT 00059(IAC) case  appeared
    at pages 75 to 121 of the bundle.  He submitted that it was an error of
    law as there was clear evidence as presented  to  the  judge  that  the
    picture was not as rosy in Zimbabwe as at the time of CM.  He submitted
    that ZANU-PF is in control.  He referred to pages 122  to  123  of  the
    bundle of documents before the First-tier Tribunal where  there  was  a
    chilling warning that exiles would be subject to  intrusive  screening.
    He submitted that based on the objective evidence it is not just  those
    with significant profiles but those suspected of  links  with  the  MDC
    that would be at  risk.   He  submitted  that  those  with  a  military
    background were at enhanced risk, that  there  was  evidence  that  the
    appellant had served under the Rhodesian regime and that the  appellant
    was known to the authorities.  I  indicated  to  Mr  Mtisi  that  those
    arguments had already been rejected by the First-tier Tribunal  in  the
    appellant's case in 2010 and that there was no evidence on the  finding
    of the judge that the appellant had been in  the  Rhodesian  Army.   Mr
    Mtisi in response submitted that there is a deteriorating situation  in
    Zimbabwe and that  the  military  are  subject  to  being  stopped  and
    questioned.  His reading of the First-tier Tribunal decision  was  that
    it did not indicate that the judge considered that  the  appellant  had
    not been in the Rhodesian Army.  I indicated to Mr  Mtisi  that  having
    considered the papers it did not appear that the case was  put  on  the
    basis of military involvement before the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  Mr
    Mtisi referred me to paragraph 3 of the appellant's  witness  statement
    and submitted that it was clearly open to the judge to  reconsider  the
    appellant's military involvement.


 9. It is asserted in the grounds that the judge erred in going behind  the
    respondent's concession that the appellant had established family  life
    with his partner Ms J.  It was also asserted that the Tribunal erred in
    failing to consider material  evidence  regarding  subsistence  of  the
    relationship. The  grounds  assert  that  the  Tribunal's  decision  on
    subsistence of the appellant's relationship is  inconsistent  with  the
    guidance in the case of Fetle (Partners: two year  requirement)  [2014]
    UKUT 00267  (IAC).  Mr  Mtisi  submitted  that  the  appellant  started
    cohabiting with Ms J in August  2010.   There  was  evidence  that  the
    appellant was living with Ms J before the judge, namely the NHS letter.
    He submitted that there was a subsisting family life, a red herring had
    come up at the hearing because it became  apparent  that  for  a  brief
    period  the  appellant's  partner  was   in   emergency   accommodation
    necessitated by her illness.  The judge's interpretation  was  that  it
    was indicative that their relationship was no  longer  subsisting.   He
    submitted that this  was  a  perverse  finding,  there  was  compelling
    evidence including supporting documents written, and oral evidence from
    the sponsor, as to  why  she  was  in  emergency  accommodation.   From
    October 2014 the couple resumed cohabiting.  Mr Mtisi  referred  me  to
    page 10 of the supplementary  bundle  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    which contained a letter from the  NHS  to  the  appellant  at  Ms  J's
    address.  He also submitted that  a  fax  to  the  Tribunal  of  6  May
    confirmed the appellant was residing at that  address.   That  was  the
    request for an adjournment.  He submitted that  the  notice  of  appeal
    confirmed the appellant was residing at that address and all the  court
    notices were sent to the appellant at that  address.    Mr  Mtisi  also
    handed up the appellant's  driving  licence  which  was  issued  on  24
    October 2014 giving the address as  [                     ].  Mr  Mtisi
    accepted that that evidence was  not  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge but asked for it to be taken into  consideration  if  a  material
    error of law was found.


10. It is asserted that the fact that the appellant's partner has  recourse
    to public funds does not exclude the appellant from Appendix FM as  his
    partner is a recipient of personal independence payment.  He  submitted
    that the judge took issue with the fact that  the  appellant's  partner
    had stopped working and that it was implicit from that that  the  judge
    was considering adequacy of support and maintenance.  He asserted  that
    the Secretary of State's own guidance specifically exempts those in the
    sponsor's circumstances from having to  prove  ability  to  maintain  a
    partner.  He submitted that there was evidence that the  appellant  was
    in receipt of enhanced benefits.  I asked Mr Mtisi  if  the  claim  had
    been approved at the date of the hearing.  He  submitted  that  at  the
    time of the hearing there was evidence  in  that  it  came  up  in  the
    witness evidence.  He then rephrased his submission to say that what we
    have is confirmation that she was under assessment at the date  of  the
    hearing.  He submitted that the judge did not fully  engage  with  EX1.
    The appellant and the sponsor had been in a relationship for five years
    at the date of the hearing.  He submitted  that  it  was  an  important
    factor that the sponsor was  not  someone  who  historically  had  been
    reliant on benefits.   This  had  only  started  after  experiencing  a
    bereavement and she had been in receipt of benefits for  just  under  a
    year.

11. It is asserted that there was ample medical evidence pertaining to both
    the appellant and Ms J which was of significance to  assessing  whether
    there were insurmountable obstacles to continuation of family life.  It
    is asserted that the Tribunal erred in failing  to  consider  and  make
    reference to the medical evidence attached to the  application  for  an
    adjournment lodged on 6 May 2015. The grounds assert that the  decision
    is materially flawed as inconsistent with the guidance  in  SS  (Congo)
    [2015] EWCA Civ 387 and Agyarko [2015] EWCA Civ 440.

12.  The grounds assert that the Tribunal's decision to dismiss the  appeal
    under Article 8(2) right to family life  is  fundamentally  flawed  and
    inconsistent with the guidance in AB (Jamaica) [2007] EWCA Civ 1302  in
    assessing proportionality.  The grounds assert  that  the  respondent's
    decision portrays a cavalier treatment  of  the  appellant's  partner's
    rights within the meaning of AB (Jamaica) particularly given  that  the
    appellant's partner is settled in the UK, has been  residing  here  for
    many years, is studying in the  UK,  has  family  in  the  UK  and  now
    considers the UK to be her home.    Mr Mtisi  submitted  that  the  key
    issue was whether or not the sponsor could relocate  to  Zimbabwe.   He
    submitted  that  the  evidence,  including   the   medical   conditions
    afflicting both the appellant and sponsor  and  the  difficulties  that
    they would face, were not engaged with  by  the  judge.   Although  the
    judge sets out that there are medical facilities in  Zimbabwe  he  does
    not engage with the claims by both the appellant and the  sponsor  that
    they would be returning to starting life in  a  state  of  destitution.
    Both have infirmities, both are presently unable to work.  He  asserted
    that there was an inadequate consideration of the impact of  relocation
    on the sponsor who is a British citizen with the legitimate right to be
    in social housing.  He submitted that it would be  contrary  to  public
    policy for her to be compelled to leave the UK.

The Respondent's Submissions

13. The respondent filed a  Rule  24  (of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008) response.  The respondent asserts that the  judge
    was correct to observe that there had  been  a  fundamental  change  in
    circumstances since the Secretary of State accepted that  there  was  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship.  The respondent asserts  that  the
    judge  was  entitled  to  reach  the  conclusions  she   did   on   the
    relationship.   Further  it  is  asserted  that  the  judge   made   an
    alternative finding at paragraph 84 that it would not  be  unreasonable
    for them to live together in Zimbabwe.

14. In oral submissions Ms Fijiwala submitted that at paragraphs 81 and  82
    of the decision the judge analysed the evidence and  found  that  there
    was no documentary evidence that the appellant was living  with  Ms  J.
    She referred to the judge's finding  that  the  oral  evidence  of  the
    appellant was vague when asked if the authorities knew he was  residing
    there.   The  judge  records  that  in  March  2013  the  sponsor   was
    representing herself to the authorities as a  single  homeless  person.
    The judge was entitled to take into consideration  that  two  different
    accounts had been given to two different authorities and therefore  the
    credibility of the appellant was  undermined.   The  circumstances  had
    changed since the Reasons for Refusal Letter and the judge was  obliged
    to consider the circumstances at the date of the  hearing.   The  judge
    did not consider the lack of maintenance because the judge was not able
    to go through the route having found that the sponsor and the appellant
    were not in a genuine and subsisting relationship.  She submitted  that
    the judge could have  gone  further  and  found  that  the  eligibility
    requirements were not met.  She submitted  that  at  paragraph  83  the
    judge considers insurmountable obstacles.  She submitted that  even  if
    the judge was in error with regard to  appendix  FM  there  has  to  be
    insurmountable obstacles which the judge considers at paragraphs 83 and
    84.  When considering Article 8 outside of the Rules  the  judge  again
    makes reference to the medical issues and the availability  of  medical
    treatment in  Zimbabwe.   At  paragraph  93  the  judge  considers  the
    evidence at its highest.  She  submitted  in  response  to  Mr  Mtisi's
    submission that the appellant and the sponsor  would  be  destitute  on
    return, that at paragraph 79 the judge notes that  both  the  appellant
    and the sponsor said that they intended to work.  With  regard  to  the
    evidence of PIP she submitted there was only evidence that the  sponsor
    had applied but that  an  assessment  had  not  yet  taken  place.   At
    paragraph 84 she submitted the judge considers that the  appellant  has
    accommodation and family in Zimbabwe so that it is not clear  where  Mr
    Mtisi's submission that they would be destitute has come from.

15. Ms Fijiwala  submitted  that  I  should  not  go  behind  the  previous
    determination on the appellant's claim to be at  risk  of  persecution.
    The main findings were set  out  at  paragraph  55  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in this case where the  judge  set  out  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge in 2010 had found it incredible that the  appellant  was
    in the Rhodesian Army.  That decision was  not  appealed  any  further.
    She submitted that it is clear that  the  judge  found,  regarding  sur
    place activities, that the appellant was vague (see paragraph  66)  and
    at paragraph 70 the judge found  that  the  appellant  had  no  genuine
    political affiliation.

Legislative Provisions

16. As from 28 July 2014 statutory provisions in a new Part 5A of the  2002
    Act (inserted by  s.19  of  the  Immigration  Act  2014)  requires,  in
    legislative form for the first  time,  the  Tribunal  to  take  certain
    factors into account when determining whether a decision made under the
    Immigration Acts breaches respect for  private  and  family  life.  The
    decision in the instant case is a decision made under  the  Immigration
    Acts. The relevant provisions provide:

17. Section 117A sets out the scope of the new Part 5A headed "Article 8 of
    the ECHR; Public Interest Considerations" as follows:
          i) 117A Application of this Part


         (1) This Part applies where a court  or  tribunal  is  required  to
         determine
         whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-
         (a) breaches a person's right to respect  for  private  and  family
         life
         under Article 8, and
         (b) as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human
         Rights Act 1998.


         (2) In considering the  public  interest  question,  the  court  or
         tribunal must
         (in particular) have regard-
         (a) in all cases, to the considerations listed in section 117B, and
         (b) in cases concerning the deportation of  foreign  criminals,  to
         the
         considerations listed in section 117C.


         (3) In subsection (2), "the public  interest  question"  means  the
         question of
         whether an interference  with  a  person's  right  to  respect  for
         private and
         family life is justified under Article 8(2).


18. The considerations listed in s.117B are applicable  to  all  cases  and
    are:

         117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all
         cases


         (1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the
         public
         interest.


         (2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the
         economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who seek to
         enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able to speak English,
         because persons who can speak English-
         (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
         (b) are better able to integrate into society.


         (3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the
         economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who seek to
         enter or remain in the United Kingdom are financially independent,
         because such persons-
         (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and
         (b) are better able to integrate into society.


         (4) Little weight should be given to-
         (a) a private life, or
         (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,
         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.


         (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person
         at a time when the person's immigration status is precarious.


         (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
         public
         interest does not require the person's removal where-
         (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
         with
         a qualifying child, and
         (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
         United Kingdom.

   19. Relevant Immigration Rules
         EX.1. This paragraph applies if

               (a) (i) the applicant has a genuine and subsisting parental
               relationship with a child who-

               (aa) is under the age of 18 years;

               (bb) is in the UK;

               (cc) is a British Citizen or has lived in the UK
               continuously for at least the 7 years immediately preceding
               the date of application; and

               (ii) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
               the UK; or

               (b) the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship
               with a partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen,
               settled in the UK or in the UK with refugee leave or
               humanitarian protection, and there are insurmountable
               obstacles to family life with that partner continuing
               outside the UK."











Discussion

Risk on Return to Zimbabwe

20. There were two aspects to this ground of appeal, one  set  out  in  the
    written grounds, which was that the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  is
    unsafe,  because  at  the  date  of  the  decision  the  appellant  had
    associated with the MDC for more than four years in circumstances where
    his activities are likely to be known to the authorities.   The  second
    aspect was that  submitted  in  oral  submissions  that  based  on  the
    appellant's military involvement in the army in Rhodesia he would be at
    an enhanced risk on return.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  set,  out  from
    paragraph 55, the findings of Judge Telford  in  the  appellant's  2010
    appeal.  Judge Telford  had  found  the  appellant's  account  to  lack
    credibility  throughout.   Judge  Telford  had  also  found  that   the
    appellant realised that he could drip feed the respondent with multiple
    different applications to prolong his time in the United  Kingdom.   No
    appeal was made against that decision, and as the judge  correctly  set
    out at the end of paragraph 57, those findings  remain  intact  as  the
    statement of the facts as at 9 August 2010 the  date  of  the  hearing.
    Although Mr Mtisi submitted that his reading of the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Telford's decision was not that he had rejected the evidence that
    the appellant served in the Rhodesian Army,  I  have  considered  Judge
    Telford's decision at paragraph 9 where the judge found:

         "I find that the appellant can safely be returned  as  he  has  not
         established even on the low standard of proof that he was a  member
         of the Rhodesian Army."

21. In light of that finding Mr  Mtisi's  submissions  that  the  appellant
    would be at an enhanced risk of return to Zimbabwe on the basis of  his
    membership of the Rhodesian Army must be rejected.

22. With regards to the appellant's sur  place  activities  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge considered in detail, from  paragraphs  60  to  73,  the
    appellant's evidence.  This is a detailed account and analysis  by  the
    judge.  The judge clearly has adequately considered the evidence of the
    appellant's claimed MDC UK activity both in respect of the  documentary
    evidence and the appellant's witness evidence.  The  judge  found  that
    the appellant's evidence about his involvement with  MDC  Southend  was
    implausible and vague and that the documents that he relied  on  lacked
    supporting detail when his evidence  should  have  been  clear  if  his
    account were genuine and credible.  The judge  considered  the  country
    guidance cases and relevant case-law, in particular RT  (Zimbabwe)  and
    others (Respondents) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    (Appellant) [2012] UKSC 38 and found that the appellant's history prior
    to departure from Zimbabwe showed that he must have had a profile  that
    is either neutral or supporting of the Zimbabwe state.  He reached this
    finding on the basis that this was consistent with his work  record  of
    relatively high positions within the state or  state  linked  companies
    between 1981 and 2000 and the  fact  that  the  appellant  returned  to
    Zimbabwe without encountering any difficulties entering and exiting  in
    2004, 2007 and 2008.  He found that this was because the regime had  no
    information on him which  led  them  to  conclude  that  he  was  worth
    investigation.  The judge also considered the case of CM  finding  that
    the appellant, who has no genuine political  affiliation  to  the  MDC,
    would not engage in political activities likely to attract the  adverse
    attention of ZANU-PF.  The judge noted  that  the  appellant  refrained
    from political activities until after his asylum claim was refused  and
    appeal rights exhausted and that any involvement that he had  had  with
    the MDC in order to obtain the documents that  he  had  lodged  was  an
    opportunistic attempt to elaborate an asylum claim based on  sur  place
    activities and not a genuine  statement  of  political  beliefs.  These
    findings were fully supported by adequate reasoning and  were  entirely
    open to the judge.

Article 8 under the Immigration Rules

23. The judge was entitled to go  behind  the  respondent's  concession  or
    acceptance that the appellant and the sponsor were  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship based on evidence  that  was  put  before  him.
    However, I do consider that the judge did not  take  into  account  the
    letter from the NHS which sets out that the appellant's address  is  20
    Springfield Close.  It is not clear that this particular  document  was
    drawn to the judge's attention as confirmation that the  appellant  was
    residing at the address of Ms J.  Whilst the judge cannot be criticised
    for arriving at the conclusion that he did, based on the fact that  the
    sponsor had quite  clearly  presented  a  state  of  affairs  that  was
    entirely contrary to the position now asserted, i.e.  that  she  was  a
    single homeless person.  However, on the basis of the evidence  of  the
    NHS letter the judge's finding, that the appellant has not provided up-
    to-date documentary or independent evidence that he is in fact part  of
    the  same  household  as  Ms  J,  is  in  error.  However,  the   judge
    notwithstanding this finding, went on to consider that the respondent's
    decision was made on the basis of the relationship  being  genuine  and
    insisting and considered the test of insurmountable  obstacles  in  the
    'partner' provision in EX.1.  Therefore, that error was not material.

24. In oral submissions Mr  Mtisi  stressed  that  the  issue  of  adequate
    maintenance was a key element of the appeal.  He submitted  that  there
    was evidence before the First-tier Tribunal Judge that the sponsor  was
    in receipt of enhanced benefits.  He then rephrased his submission that
    what was before the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was  that  there  was
    confirmation that the appellant was under  assessment.   Clearly  there
    was no evidence before the First-tier Tribunal Judge that the appellant
    was in receipt of Personal Independence Payment as she was only advised
    of that on 24 May 2015 after the date of the hearing.  In any event the
    judge did not consider the maintenance requirements having  found  that
    the appellant and the sponsor were not  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship.  Had the judge considered the matter,  there  would  have
    been no error as the sponsor had not been  granted  an  entitlement  to
    PIP.

25.  Putting  aside  the  maintenance  issue,  the  issue  the   respondent
    considered and the judge considered was EX1 of the  Immigration  Rules.
    The  requirement  in  issue  is  that  the  appellant  must  be  in   a
    relationship with a qualifying  partner  and  there  must  not  be  any
    insurmountable obstacles to their continuing family life in Zimbabwe.

26. The issue that the judge had to consider is whether or not there  would
    be insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing outside  the  UK.
    In R (on the application of Agyarko and others) v  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ  440,  (2015)  ('Agyarko')  the
    Court of appeal held:

         '[21]  The  phrase  "insurmountable  obstacles"  as  used  in  this
         paragraph of the Rules clearly imposes a high hurdle to be overcome
         by an Applicant for leave to remain under the Rules.  The  test  is
         significantly more demanding than a mere test of whether  it  would
         be reasonable to expect a couple  to  continue  their  family  life
         outside the United Kingdom.

         [22] This interpretation is in line with  the  relevant  Strasbourg
         jurisprudence. The phrase "insurmountable obstacles" has its origin
         in the Strasbourg jurisprudence in relation to immigration cases in
         a family context, where it is mentioned as one factor among  others
         to be taken into account in determining whether any right under art
         8 exists for family members to be granted leave to remain or  leave
         to enter a  Contracting  State:  see  eg  Rodrigues  da  Silva  and
         Hoogkamer v Netherlands (2007) 44 EHRR 34, para 39 (". . .  whether
         there are insurmountable obstacles in the way of the family  living
         together in the country of origin of one or more of them .  .  .").
         The phrase as used in the  Rules  is  intended  to  have  the  same
         meaning as in the Strasbourg jurisprudence. It is  clear  that  the
         ECtHR regards it as a formulation  imposing  a  stringent  test  in
         respect of that factor, as is illustrated by Jeunesse v Netherlands
         (see para 117: there were no insurmountable obstacles to the family
         settling in Suriname, even though  the  Applicant  and  her  family
         would experience hardship if forced to do so).

         [23]  For  clarity,  two  points   should   be   made   about   the
         "insurmountable obstacles" criterion. First, although it involves a
         stringent test, it is obviously intended in both the  case-law  and
         the Rules to be interpreted in a sensible and practical rather than
         a purely literal way ...

         [25] ...The mere facts that Mr Benette is a  British  Citizen,  has
         lived all his life in the United Kingdom and has a job here  -  and
         hence might find it difficult and might be reluctant  to  re-locate
         to Ghana to continue their family life there- could not  constitute
         insurmountable obstacles to his doing so.'

27. In Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013]  UKUT  640
    (IAC)  it  was  held  that  the  term  'insurmountable  obstacles'   in
    provisions such as Section EX.1 are not obstacles which are  impossible
    to surmount: they concern the practical possibilities of relocation.

28. However, as held  in  Agyrako  the  test  of  insurmountable  obstacles
    imposes a high hurdle to be overcome  by  an  applicant  for  leave  to
    remain under the Rules.  The test is not whether it would be reasonable
    to expect a couple to continue their family  life  outside  the  United
    Kingdom. It is a much more stringent test.

29. The First-tier Tribunal Judge considers,  at  paragraph  88,  that  the
    appellant was born in Zimbabwe, he  has  accommodation  and  family  in
    Zimbabwe, he has a work record and that he would not  be  destitute  on
    his return.  The judge also found that Ms J was born  in  Zimbabwe  and
    remained there for a significant period of her life arriving in the  UK
    when she was almost 45 years of age.  He found that  she  looked  to  a
    family member there when she wished to marry the appellant.  The  judge
    also considered the medical evidence, finding that it did not justify a
    finding of insurmountable obstacles.  The judge notes at  paragraph  79
    that in her witness statement Ms J states that she hopes to  return  to
    work as does the appellant once his hip replacement operation has taken
    place.  The judge found that the evidence about the customary  marriage
    shows that the sponsor and the appellant are  socially  and  culturally
    tied to Zimbabwe where both have family.

30. In light of the authorities it is clear that the  judge  made  findings
    that were open to her on the evidence available that the appellant  and
    the sponsor would  not  face  insurmountable  obstacles  to  continuing
    family life in Zimbabwe.  There was no material error of  law  on  this
    issue.

Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules

Medical conditions

31. It was submitted  that  the  medical  conditions  afflicting  both  the
    appellant and his partner and the difficulties that  they  would  face,
    were not engaged with by the judge.  In the case of GS (India) & Ors  v
    The Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ  40  the
    court held:



         86.     If the Article 3 claim fails (as I would hold it does
         here), Article 8 cannot prosper without some separate or additional
         factual element which brings the case within the Article 8 paradigm
         - the capacity to form and enjoy relationships - or a state of
         affairs having some affinity with the paradigm. That approach was,
         as it seems to me, applied by Moses LJ (with whom McFarlane LJ and
         the Master of the Rolls agreed) in MM (Zimbabwe) [2012] EWCA Civ
         279 at paragraph 23:

             "The only cases I can foresee where the absence of adequate
             medical treatment in the country to which a person is to be
             deported will be relevant to Article 8, is where it is an
             additional factor to be weighed in the balance, with other
             factors which by themselves engage Article 8. Suppose, in this
             case, the appellant had established firm family ties in this
             country, then the availability of continuing medical treatment
             here, coupled with his dependence on the family here for
             support, together establish 'private life' under Article 8.
             That conclusion would not involve a comparison between medical
             facilities here and those in Zimbabwe. Such a finding would
             not offend the principle expressed above that the United
             Kingdom is under no Convention obligation to provide medical
             treatment here when it is not available in the country to
             which the appellant is to be deported."

         87.     With great respect this seems to me to be entirely right.
         It means that a specific case has to be made under Article 8. It is
         to be noted that MM (Zimbabwe) also shows that the rigour of
         the D exception for the purpose of Article 3 in such cases as these
         applies with no less force when the claim is put under Article 8:

             "17. The essential principle is that the ECHR does not impose
             any obligation on the contracting states to provide those
             liable to deportation with medical treatment lacking in their
             'home countries'. This principle applies even where the
             consequence will be that the deportee's life will be
             significantly shortened (see Lord Nicholls in N v Home
             Secretary [2005] 2 AC 296, 304 [15] and N v UK [2008] 47 EHRR
             885 (paragraph 44)).

             18. Although that principle was expressed in those cases in
             relation to Article 3, it is a principle which must apply to
             Article 8. It makes no sense to refuse to recognise a 'medical
             care' obligation in relation to Article 3, but to acknowledge
             it in relation to Article 8."


32. The judge at paragraph 93 found that even taking the  evidence  at  its
    highest the appellant and the  sponsor  do  not  have  serious  medical
    conditions requiring long-term care.  The evidence of the appellant and
    Ms J was that they both hoped to recover and return to work. The  judge
    had found that the appellant has family in Zimbabwe  and  accommodation
    to return to - there was  no  evidence  that  the  appellant  would  be
    destitute on return. As set out in GS (India) in medical claims Article
    8 cannot prosper without some separate or  additional  factual  element
    which brings the case within the Article 8 paradigm - the  capacity  to
    form and enjoy relationships. No such factors have been  identified  in
    this case. The findings  of  the  judge  in  relation  to  the  medical
    conditions were ones that were open to her and no other  finding  could
    have been arrived at on the facts of this case  in  light  of  relevant
    case-law.

Proportionality Exercise

33. The appellant submits that the First-tier Tribunal Judge's findings  on
    Article 8 outside  the  Immigration  Rules  are  flawed  and  that  the
    respondent's decision portrays a cavalier treatment of the  appellant's
    partner's rights.

34. In terms of reasonableness of Ms J's  return  to  Zimbabwe,  the  judge
    found that Ms  J  was  born  in  Zimbabwe  and  remained  there  for  a
    significant period of her life arriving in the UK when she  was  almost
    45 years of age. The judge concluded, at paragraph 8, that the evidence
    did not demonstrate Article 8 family  life.   In  the  alternative  the
    judge found that if she was incorrect then the second leg of the Razgar
    test is not met by credible evidence of interference in the family life
    actually enjoyed by the appellant.  Given my  finding  that  the  judge
    erred in considering that the appellant and the sponsor were not  in  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship, the judge ought to have considered
    Article  8  in  relation  to   family   life   when   considering   the
    proportionality exercise[1].  However I do not consider that there  was
    a material error of law because at paragraph 90 the judge  went  on  to
    undertake the proportionality balancing exercise required  as  per  the
    fifth stage of the Razgar test.

35. In any event in the assessment of proportionality  the  factors  to  be
    examined are likely to be the same in a case such as this regardless of
    whether family or private life is engaged. In the case of Singh &  Anor
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA  Civ  630  the
    court considered:

          25.     However, the debate as to the whether an applicant has  or
         has not a family life for the purposes of Article 8 is liable to be
         arid and academic. In the present case, in agreement with  Sullivan
         LJ's comment when refusing permission to appeal the issue is indeed
         academic and clearly so. As the  European  Court  of  Human  Rights
         pointed out in AA, in a judgment which I have found  most  helpful,
         the factors to be examined in order to assess  proportionality  are
         the same regardless of whether family or private life  is  engaged.
         The question for the Secretary of State, the Tribunal and the Court
         is whether those factors lead to the conclusion that  it  would  be
         disproportionate to remove the applicant from the United Kingdom. I
         reject Mr  Malik's  submission  that  the  Upper  Tribunal  Judge's
         assessment of proportionality was flawed because she, on  his  case
         wrongly, based it on the Appellants' private life rather than their
         family and private life. In my  judgment,  she  took  all  relevant
         factors into account, and her conclusion on proportionality is  not
         open to challenge. Indeed, I would go further. In my  judgment,  no
         reasonable Tribunal, on the facts found, could properly  have  come
         to a different conclusion.

36. As set out above the judge took into consideration a number of  factors
    in addressing the proportionality exercise.

37. The First-tier Tribunal judge set out that he was required to take into
    consideration the public interest considerations in Section 117B of the
    2002 Act.  The judge noted that the appellant can speak English and has
    worked. Weighing against the appellant the judge noted that he had  not
    provided evidence that he is currently  financially  independent.   The
    judge found that little weight can be given to the relationship with Ms
    J because this was established after the appellant's asylum appeal  was
    dismissed and after he was appeal rights exhausted.

38. Had the judge considered the appellant had established family life with
    Ms J Paragraph 117B(4) requires that little weight is to be placed on a
    relationship with a qualifying partner that was established at  a  time
    when the appellant was in the UK unlawfully.   It  is  clear  from  the
    appellant's immigration history that as from 2005  he  was  in  the  UK
    unlawfully.  Therefore, the judge was correct to place little weight on
    his relationship with Ms J.

39. The judge also weighed in the balance against the  appellant  that  the
    public interest considerations, including the maintenance of  effective
    immigration control, weighed against him.  Given this appellant's  poor
    immigration history, that factor weighs heavily against him.

40. The judge undertook  the  proportionality  exercise  weighing  all  the
    positive factors in favour of the appellant  and  those  against.   The
    conclusion reached by the judge, that the interference with private and
    family life was justified, is a finding that was open  to  her  on  the
    facts of this case.

41. In light of the public interest considerations  set  out  in  paragraph
    117B and the  fact  that  little  weight  should  be  afforded  to  the
    appellant's relationship with Ms J or to any private life  in  the  UK,
    the appeal under Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules was  bound  to
    fail.



Notice of Decision

The appellant has not discharged the burden upon him of showing  that  there
is any material error of law in the First-tier  Tribunal  decision,  without
which that decision is not susceptible to being set aside.   The  appeal  is
therefore dismissed.  The decision of the respondent stands.



Signed   P M Ramshaw                         Date 15 February 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw



                           -----------------------
[1] I do not need to determine whether in principle the judge ought to have
in fact considered Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules

