
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/40537/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11 August 2014                             |On 20 August 2014            |
|Decision given orally                         |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

                          omobolaji gabriel ashaye

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Vassiliou, instructed by McGill & Co Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Ms M O'Brien, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant who is a national of Nigeria born on 6  August  1982  has
    been granted permission to appeal the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Reid.  For reasons given in her determination dated 9 April 2014,
    she dismissed on grounds under the Immigration Rules and Article 8,  Mr
    Ashaye's appeal against the decision to remove him pursuant to s.10  of
    the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

 2. The facts are these.  The appellant arrived in the  United  Kingdom  in
    November 2006 on a six month visitor visa.  It appears that he had done
    so on a different name and with details altered in a passport in  order
    to give the impression of being someone older than he is in  fact.   He
    remained here unlawfully.

 3. On 6 July 2012 he made application  to  regularise  his  stay  on  form
    FLR(O) which was refused on 15 July 2013 with no right of appeal.  On 3
    September 2013 he was encountered and arrested at the Marriage Registry
    in Leith, Edinburgh when he was seeking to marry a British national, Ms
    Esther Coutinho.  The marriage did not go ahead on  that  occasion  but
    the parties subsequently married on 20 May 2014.  There are no children
    of the marriage.  The appellant has a number of family members  in  the
    United  Kingdom.   He  has  four  brothers  who  either  have   British
    citizenship or settled status and two  sisters  living  in  the  United
    States of America.  His parents have died. He explained  to  the  judge
    that he had only distant relatives remaining in Nigeria and had a  very
    large number of cousins living in  the  United  Kingdom,  with  two  in
    Edinburgh and perhaps twenty in London.

 4. At the hearing which proceeded on two dates, 5 and 17 December 2013, Mr
    Vassiliou accepted that the appellant did  not  meet  the  criteria  of
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules  and  he  argued  the  case  under
    Article 8 based on the appellant's family private life.

 5. Mr Vassiliou  relies  on  two  grounds  of  challenge  to  the  judge's
    decision.

 6. The  first  is  that  the  judge  placed  undue  weight  on  immaterial
    considerations stemming from her disapproval of the appellant's  family
    members as recorded in [99]  of  the  determination.   That  ground  as
    drafted also argues  that  the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration
    control is not among the legitimate aims under Article 8(2) although Mr
    Vassiliou understandably no longer wished to pursue that before me.

 7. The second ground argues  that  the  judge  had  erred  by  failing  to
    consider the role that the relatives played in the appellant's life  in
    the United Kingdom and  failed  to  consider  whether  removal  of  the
    appellant from the UK would be a disproportionate interference.  It  is
    further argued that the judge had erred by failing to make findings  on
    the existence of a private life for the purposes of Article 8.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Andrew.  The Secretary of State has responded with a notice pursuant to
    Rule 24.  This response  acknowledges  that  the  judge  may  not  have
    specifically addressed private life, however it was  clear  that  there
    were family members  still  in  Nigeria  and  very  unlikely  that  the
    appellant had lost all social and cultural ties with that country.  The
    appellant was neither working nor studying in the  United  Kingdom  and
    the judge was entitled to consider the strength of any Article 8  claim
    lay with the relationship he had with Ms Coutinho.  The judge  did  not
    consider that the existence of that relationship meant the decision was
    a disproportionate  one  and  it  seemed  to  the  Secretary  of  State
    "inherently  unlikely  that  [the  judge]   would   have   found   [the
    appellant's] claim to succeed on private life".

 9. I am grateful to Mr Vassiliou and Ms O'Brien for their  submissions  to
    which I have had careful regard.  Candidly Mr Vassiliou  accepted  that
    the findings by the judge on credibility were properly open to her  but
    he maintained that her approach had been  unduly  influenced  by  those
    findings.  The witnesses had been called to demonstrate the  extent  of
    the appellant's connections with the United Kingdom.  Ms O'Brien argued
    that the judge had taken into account all  the  factors  and  that  the
    determination was required to be read as a whole.

10.  My conclusion is that there is no merit in either ground of challenge.
     As to the first which argues the judge gave undue weight to immaterial
    matters, the appellant chose  to  call  a  number  of  witnesses  whose
    evidence was  relied  on  to  demonstrate  their  relationship  to  the
    appellant and thus the strength of his  ties  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    Their  evidence  is  set  out  over  a  number  of  paragraphs  of  the
    determination.

11. At [12] to  [13]  the  judge  set  out  the  appellant's  own  evidence
    regarding the ties that he has with the UK and his long-term plans  are
    referred to in [14].  The  evidence  of  the  witnesses  including  the
    testimony of Ms Coutinho are set out over nine pages demonstrating  the
    care with which the judge approached the task before her.  Her findings
    on the evidence are set out over six pages  of  the  determination.  At
    [99] the conclusions on the evidence of the  appellant's  brothers  are
    set out.  It is this paragraph in particular which Mr Vassiliou  argues
    has given rise to error.

12. It has to be said the judge was clearly unimpressed  by  the  brothers'
    testimony observing that they were unhelpful about  how  or  when  they
    knew the appellant had not returned to Nigeria after the expiry of  his
    visa.  There is no doubt  that  the  judge  clearly  had  in  mind  the
    strength of the appellant's connections in this country, in  particular
    to his brothers and was justified  in  her  critical  analysis.   Their
    testimony was one factor among several that were taken into account  by
    the judge in reaching her conclusions.  She was required to assess  the
    quality and extent of the appellant's private life built up when he was
    aware that he had no right to be in the United Kingdom.  The  brothers'
    evidence was part of the overall picture and I do not consider  it  can
    be said that the judge's focus was unduly  distracted  by  this  aspect
    from an  assessment  of  the  evidence  as  a  whole  when  reaching  a
    conclusion on the proportionality of the interference with the  private
    life.

13. This leads me on to the second ground which in essence complains  about
    the adequacy  of  the  private  life  assessment  and  the  absence  of
    findings.  This is not a sustainable ground.  As well as  recording  in
    detail the evidence that she had heard, the judge noted the submissions
    from the Presenting Officer and Mr Vassiliou.  It was clear from  those
    submissions that Mr Vassiliou was relying on  the  appellant's  private
    life as part and parcel of his Article 8 claim  which  was  principally
    focused on his relationship with Ms Coutinho.  The judge made  findings
    on what the appellant would encounter on return to  Nigeria.   At  [98]
    she observed that there was evidence of  the  appellant's  degree  from
    Nigeria and no objective evidence that with such a degree he would find
    it impossible to obtain employment as he  claimed.   She  concluded  at
    [101]:

         "There is no evidence whatsoever that any relationships  which  the
         appellant enjoys with his brothers and second cousin extend at  all
         beyond the usual bonds of  affection  and  shared  history  between
         adult family members.  Those relationships could  be  continued  by
         modern electronic means and by visits."

14. It is clear that the judge addressed the  circumstances  the  appellant
    would face if returned to Nigeria and what he would leave  behind.   In
    substance the judge addressed private life and the fact  that  she  did
    not specifically state that the appellant's  removal  would  not  be  a
    disproportionate interference, I  have  no  doubt  that  based  on  the
    findings which she had reached, had she done so, the result could  have
    been any different.  For these reasons I  am  not  persuaded  that  the
    judge erred on  the  basis  claimed  and  accordingly  this  appeal  is
    dismissed.



Signed                              Date 19 August 2014


[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson


