
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/40912/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 December 2014                   |On 22 December 2014                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PETER LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Mark Akwasi Sarpong
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M. Shilliday, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Heller, Counsel, instructed by J R Immigration
Ltd


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The respondent (henceforth "claimant") is a citizen of  Ghana  born  on
    16 July 1995, who entered the United Kingdom as a visitor, following  a
    successful appeal.  His date of entry was 21 January 2012.  On 27 April
    2012 the claimant was adopted by his  sponsor,  his  brother  (fourteen
    years older than the claimant) and the brother's wife (a person present
    and settled in the United Kingdom).  The adoption took place in  Ghana,
    according to the law of that country, having, it seems, been  initiated
    in March 2012.

2.   On 15 May 2012, an application was made for indefinite leave to  remain
    to be granted to the claimant, as the adopted child of parents  settled
    in the United Kingdom.  That application was refused by  the  Secretary
    of State on 19 July 2013.

3.   The claimant appealed against that decision and his  appeal  was  heard
    in Birmingham on 24 April 2014 by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lagunju.
    In a determination promulgated on 23 June 2014, the judge  allowed  the
    claimant's appeal, both under the Immigration Rules and by reference to
    Article 8 of the ECHR.

4.   Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal on 6 November 2014.  In the decision granting permission,
    the First-tier Tribunal noted that it was "debatable as to whether  the
    [claimant] was a child at all relevant  times".   Permission  was  also
    granted by reference to Article 8 of the ECHR.

5.   At the hearing on 8 December, Mr Shilliday applied  for  permission  to
    amend the Secretary of State's grounds in order  to  pursue  the  point
    noted by the First-tier Tribunal; namely, that by the date of decision,
    the claimant was not under the age of 18 and,  accordingly,  could  not
    succeed under paragraph 298 of the Immigration Rules.  In  support,  Mr
    Shilliday relied upon the  judgment  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  SO
    (Nigeria) [2007] EWCA Civ 76.  This  made  it  plain  that,  except  in
    applications made from abroad, the fact that a person had  reached  the
    age of 18 by the date of the Secretary of State's decision was fatal to
    that person's ability to succeed  under  the  Rules,  which  require  a
    person to be under that age.

6.   For the claimant, Ms Heller quite properly  conceded  that  that  point
    was plain; and that, accordingly, she did not oppose  the  application.
    In deciding whether to grant permission, I also had regard to the  fact
    that the matter could not  be  said  to  come  as  a  surprise  to  the
    claimant, having been articulated in the grant of permission, and  that
    Mr Shilliday's skeleton  argument  -  in  which  the  issue  was  fully
    developed - had been sent to Ms Heller on 5 December 2014.

7.   In all the circumstances, having regard to the overriding objective  in
    rule 2 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, I granted
    permission to  Mr  Shilliday  to  amend  the  grounds.   I  also  heard
    submissions regarding the judge's findings concerning Article 8.

8.   The judge allowed the claimant's appeal under  the  Immigration  Rules.
    She did so on the basis that she found no difficulty with the  Ghanaian
    adoption.  She also accepted the evidence that  the  claimant's  mother
    had suffered a stroke, so as to be confined to a wheelchair,  and  that
    the claimant  has  sustained  an  injury  whilst  playing  recreational
    football in the United Kingdom.  The claimant had been in hospital  for
    two weeks as a result of that injury.  Since September 2012 he had been
    studying at Abingdon & Witney College for a course  leading  to  GCSEs.
    He had not played football at the college since his accident.   He  had
    made friends at the school and also got on well with his  sister-in-law
    and her two children.

9.   The judge found that the adoption was  not  one  of  convenience.   She
    therefore found that the claimant met the requirements  of  the  Rules.
    So far as Article 8 was concerned, the judge, at paragraph  19  of  the
    determination, purported to follow "guidance" contained in the Court of
    Appeal judgment of Edgehill & Anor [2014] EWCA Civ 402, considering the
    application "in line with  the  Rules  that  were  in  place  when  the
    application was made", which was May 2012.  The judge then purported to
    undertake an analysis of the kind required by Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27.
    She found that the claimant had established a private and  family  life
    in the United Kingdom.  At paragraph 25, she took account of the length
    of time the claimant had been in this country, the circumstances  which
    led to his presence, and that he was "in the process of embarking on  a
    new life with his new adoptive parents.  If he were to leave the UK his
    education, family and personal relationships would be disrupted."


    The judge concluded as follows:-


         "26. Having weighed these factors against the  public  interest  in
             maintaining effective immigration control,  I  find  there  is
             nothing undesirable about the [claimant's] presence in the UK.
              Accordingly I find that the respondent has failed to show  to
             the requisite standard, that the decision is proportionate".

10.  The judge's Article 8 analysis is plainly legally deficient.  The  test
    is not whether there  is  anything  "undesirable"  about  the  claimant
    remaining in the United Kingdom.  Rather, the question is  whether  the
    claimant has established a private and/or family life of such a quality
    as to defeat the powerful state interest in removing those persons  who
    fail to meet the requirements of the Rules.

11.  It is, of course, possible that the judge's approach to Article  8  was
    influenced by the fact that she had found that  the  claimant  met  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.  Since,  however,  that  finding
    was wrong, the need for  a  proper  Article  8  analysis  was  all  the
    stronger.

12.  I therefore set aside the determination of the First-tier Tribunal.   I
    heard submissions from the  parties  regarding  the  re-making  of  the
    decision by reference to Article 8.

13.  It was common ground that the matter comes down  to  an  assessment  of
    proportionality.  In this regard, I note that  it  took  some  fourteen
    months for the Secretary of State to decide the claimant's application,
    by which time, as I have stated, the claimant was over the  age  of  18
    and could not meet the requirements of the Rules.  I apply the  law  as
    set out by the House of Lords in EB (Kosovo) [2008] UKHL 41.  I do  not
    consider that the delay is, in this case, indicative of a dysfunctional
    system, such as to result in less importance being given to maintaining
    a system of immigration controls, than would  otherwise  be  the  case.
    The delay has, however, resulted in the claimant strengthening both his
    private and family life ties with  the  United  Kingdom,  such  that  I
    accept he feels part of the family of his brother and sister-in-law, as
    well as having friends and an academic career in the United Kingdom.

14.  Nevertheless, adopting the approach of the  House  of  Lords  in  Huang
    [2007] UKHL 11, it will only be in a small minority  of  cases  that  a
    person who fails to meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules will
    be able successfully to deploy Article 8 as a means of remaining in the
    United Kingdom.  This is so, whether one looks at  the  Rules  as  they
    were at the date of  application  or  as  they  were  at  the  date  of
    decision.  There is no suggestion in the present case that the claimant
    could meet any of the relevant requirements of the "old" Rules  and  it
    is common ground that he can meet  none  of  the  requirements  of  the
    present Rules.  Accordingly, the question is whether the claimant would
    face such a degree of hardship, if returned to Ghana, as  to  make  his
    removal disproportionate.  I accept the evidence regarding the  medical
    position of  the  claimant's  grandmother.   So  far  as  the  football
    accident is concerned, I have not been presented with any  evidence  to
    show that this is a  significant  ongoing  problem  for  the  claimant.
    Instead, I was shown a letter dated 1 August 2013 from  the  claimant's
    GP to the claimant, concerning a "vascular disease annual  review",  in
    which it is stated that "experience has shown that  patients  suffering
    from a history of heart disease, peripheral vascular disease or  stroke
    benefit from a regular review with their doctor".  This shows that  the
    claimant appears to be a person who benefits from  annual  reviews  for
    some cardiovascular reason.

15.  Whilst I accept that the claimant may look to his brother as a  father-
    figure, since the claimant's own father disappeared when  the  claimant
    was very young, the fact is that the  brother  left  the  claimant,  in
    order to make a  life  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  fact  that  the
    claimant's mother requires a carer, following her stroke, may  to  some
    extent  have  increased  the  claimant's  reliance  upon  his  brother.
    However, it is also clear from the evidence that the claimant has other
    relatives living in Ghana, including a sister.   The  claimant  plainly
    has not lost relevant ties to  Ghana.   Whilst  I  accept  Ms  Heller's
    submission that there is no necessarily "bright line" between the needs
    of a person under the age of 18 and someone slightly over that age, the
    claimant is an adult, who has benefited from education  in  the  United
    Kingdom, which no doubt will stand him in good stead in  Ghana.   There
    is no suggestion that, following return there, he would  be  destitute,
    or even close to it.  The accident occasioned during the football  game
    does not appear to have had any lasting consequences.  The GP's  letter
    is indicative of a need  for  annual  checks.   However,  there  is  no
    evidence before me to show that the  claimant  is  suffering  from  any
    actual specific cardiovascular disease.  In  any  event,  there  is  no
    suggestion that checks would  be  unavailable  in  Ghana  or  that  any
    treatment the claimant might eventually require  would  be  unavailable
    there.

16.  Overall, balancing everything known to me, I do not consider  that  the
    claimant has shown that he would suffer any unduly harsh  consequences,
    were he required to leave the United  Kingdom.   In  other  words,  his
    removal would not be a disproportionate interference with his Article 8
    private and family life rights.

Decision

17.  The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of  law.
     I set it aside and re-make the decision in this case by dismissing the
    claimant's appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR.



                               Signed   Date 18 December 2014


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Peter Lane



