
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/40510/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 19th January 2015                          |On 28th January 2015          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                          MR Adegoke Stephen Ayoola
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms H Sheizon (LR)
For the Respondent:    Ms L Kenny (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Thanki, promulgated on 23rd October 2014 following a hearing at  Hatton
    Cross  on  22nd  September  2014.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal of  Mr  Adegoke  Stephen  Ayoola.   The  Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Nigeria, who  was  born  on  22nd
    July 1975.  He appealed against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent  to
    revoke his residence card under Regulation  20(2)  of  the  Immigration
    (EEA) Regulations 2006, made in a decision letter dated 23rd  September
    2013.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he had been issued with a residence  card
    on 19th February 2010 as an unmarried partner of a Ms  AK,  who  was  a
    Polish national, exercising treaty rights in the UK.  On 13th May 2013,
    however, Ms AK wrote to the Respondent Secretary of State informing her
    that her relationship with the Appellant had permanently  broken  down.
    The Respondent took the view that the Appellant was no longer  entitled
    to a residence card.  A refusal letter was issued.  The  Appellant  now
    appealed under Section 82 of the NIAA 2002  and  under  Regulation  26.
    The Appellant argued that the Respondent's decision was unlawful  under
    Section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998, and it  was  specifically  with
    the Appellant's rights to family and private life, under Article  8  of
    the ECHR.  The Appellant and Ms AK had a son.  That son  is  a  British
    citizen.  The Appellant's relationship with the British  citizen  child
    would be interrupted if the Appellant were forced to leave the UK.

The Judge's Findings

 4. At the hearing  before  Judge  Thanki,  there  was  evidence  that  the
    Appellant had failed to inform the Respondent Secretary of  State  that
    his relationship had broken down with Mr AK in May 2013 and that he had
    moved out of joint  residence.   However,  there  were  court  approved
    contact arrangements with their child, whom the Appellant last  saw  on
    20th September 2009, and another supervised  visit  on  23rd  September
    2009.  There was also a court hearing on 10th October 2009 to determine
    whether he could have increased contact with the child  (see  paragraph
    12).

 5. The representative for the Respondent Secretary of State argued that if
    Article 8 family life  rights  were  being  asserted  then  a  separate
    application was required because the Respondent had not issued  removal
    directions yet.  However, the Appellant  asserted  that  the  right  to
    family life was not a "additional" right but a primary  right  and  the
    Appellant was entitled to raise it under Section 84(1)(b) of  the  NIAA
    2002.  Moreover, the Respondent had not considered the  child's  rights
    under Section 55.  The decision was not  in  accordance  with  EU  law.
    Given that under Regulation 20 the Respondent  was  required  to  apply
    discretion before revoking the  residence  card,  these  considerations
    were relevant.

 6. In what is a very brief determination, the judge  simply  proceeded  to
    say that because the power existed under  Regulation  20  to  revoke  a
    residence card from a holder when  he  no  longer  satisfies  the  2006
    Regulations, this revocation was  made,  and  it  was  made  after  the
    Respondent received letters from Ms AK, that she was  no  longer  in  a
    relationship with the Appellant (see paragraph  30).   The  judge  also
    held that the Appellant was not entitled  to  appeal  the  Respondent's
    decision under Section 84(1)(3) because he was no longer  a  member  of
    the family of an EEA national.  Also, given that the Respondent had not
    made  removal  directions,  Article  8  issues  could  not  be   raised
    (paragraph 32).  The Respondent's decision was made lawfully because it
    was based on information available to her and the presence of the child
    it was not known to the Respondent  because  the  Appellant  failed  to
    inform the Respondent that he was no longer a family member of  an  EEA
    national (paragraph 33).  The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 7. The grounds of application state that the judge erred in  finding  that
    the Appellant had no right to rely on Section  84(1)(ii)  of  the  2002
    Act; that the  judge  erred  in  failing  to  address  the  Appellant's
    argument that the principle of proportionality applied in all decisions
    giving effect to community rights; (3) that the judge erred in  law  in
    refusing to consider the interests of the child;  (4)  that  the  judge
    erred in law in failing to address the Appellant's  argument  that  the
    decision amounted to discrimination  contrary  to  Article  21  of  the
    Charter of Fundamental Rights; (5) the judge erred in law in failing to
    address the Appellant's  argument  that  the  revocation  decision  was
    incompatible with the right of the child  to  have  contact  with  both
    parents; (6) that the judge erred in law in failing to give reasons  as
    to why the Appellant's application for his request  for  disclosure  of
    proceedings in the Family Court was refused.

 8. On 9th December 2014, permission to appeal was granted.

 9. A Rule 24 response was entered on 12th December 2014 by the  Respondent
    Secretary of State.

Submissions

10. At the hearing before me on 9th  January  2015,  Ms  Sheizon  made  the
    following  submissions.   First,   that   even   if   the   Appellant's
    relationship had broken down with his unmarried partner who was an  EEA
    national, the Appellant still had a right of access to a child of  this
    relationship, this was confirmed by a contact order  from  the  Romford
    County Court (at pages 32  to  34  of  the  Appellant's  bundle).   The
    Appellant was  having  weekly  direct  contact  with  the  child  every
    Saturday.   This  was  in  addition  to  scheduled  contact  over   the
    telephone.

11. Second, the Appellant did not lose protection  of  the  EEA  rights  by
    reason of the deterioration of his  relationship  with  his  ex-partner
    because he had a continuing parental relationship with the child.   Any
    decision to revoke the residence card was in breach of the  Appellant's
    retained right of residence under EU  law  derived  from  the  combined
    operation of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of  the  European  Union
    and the provisions of Directive 2004/38.  The  exercise  of  discretion
    under Regulation 20(2) of the EEA  Regulations  was  therefore  not  in
    accordance with the law.

12.  Third,  the  judge  made  a  material  error  in  recording  that  the
    Appellant's evidence was that he last saw his  son  on  20th  September
    2009 and had another supervised visit on 23rd September  2009,  because
    the Appellant's evidence was that he saw his child weekly, and the last
    time he saw his child was two days before the hearing on 20th September
    2014.

13. For her part, Ms Sheizon submitted that Article 8 was rightly  rejected
    by the judge because it was not relied upon at the hearing.  There  was
    no application for a consideration of Article 8.   The  appeal  process
    cannot be used to circumvent an application process.  If the  Appellant
    wanted to rely upon Article 8 a separate application had to be made.

14. Second, the judge produced a copy of the case of Mohammad (Family Court
    proceedings - outcome) [2014] UKUT 00419.  This confirms that the  mere
    possibility of an application for contact being made in the case of  an
    immigration appeal is not a relevant  consideration  in  adjourning  an
    appeal or directing the grant of discretionary leave in order for  such
    proceedings to be  pursued.   In  this  case  the  Appellant  had  only
    instigated Family Court proceedings after the refusal and there was  no
    evidence before the court except a letter from SJ Solicitors dated 16th
    September 2014 that a contact order is in place.

15. Furthermore, as the judge makes clear, "there was  no  evidence  before
    the Respondent as  to  the  existence  of  the  child  of  the  family"
    (paragraph 30).  The proper course for the Appellant now was to make  a
    fresh application where his Article 8 rights could be considered.

16. In reply, Ms Sheizon submitted that Section 84(2) gives  protection  to
    the right of appeal under Regulation 26.  Section  84D  is  with  human
    rights applications and this includes Article 8.  It was wrong for  the
    judge to say that this was not relevant.  The Family Court  proceedings
    are there to show that there is a family life between the Appellant and
    this child.  The child is entitled to contact with both  parents.   The
    decision was not in accordance with the community law.

Error of Law

17. It is an error for the judge to say that there is  no  right  to  raise
    Article 8 issues given Section 84(1)(ii) of the 2002 Act.   However,  I
    am not satisfied that this is a case where the decision should  be  set
    aside.  This is for the following reasons.

18. First, as the judge made clear,  "there  was  no  evidence  before  the
    Respondent as to the existence of the child of the  family"  (paragraph
    30).

19. Second, and in point of fact,  the  Appellant  only  instigated  Family
    Court proceedings after the refusal.  Accordingly, it is not correct to
    say that the judge failed to have regard to the best interests  of  the
    child, or to have made a  decision  which  was  incompatible  with  the
    rights of the child to have contact with both parents.

20. It may very well be, as the Appellant now claims that  he  had  contact
    with his child two days before the hearing on 20th September  2014,  or
    that he has contact on a weekly basis.

21. These matters, however, were not before the Respondent decision  maker.
    The appropriate course of action is indeed for  the  Appellant  to  now
    make a separate application and to raise these matters specifically  in
    relation to his Article 8 rights.

22. Accordingly, such error as  there  is  in  this  determination  is  not
    capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal, and I  consequently  do
    not set aside the decision.  I am guided by Section 12(2)(a)  which  is
    to the effect that the Upper Tribunal may (but need not) set aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

No anonymity order is made.






Signed                              Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 28th January 2015





