
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/40955/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 1 September 2014                           |On 17 September 2014         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           HARRISON OGBONNAYA ODI

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr K Ayileka, Adonai Beulah Solicitors


                            WITHDRAWAL OF APPEAL


 1. The Secretary of State  has  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge A Simpson who for  reasons  given
    in her determination dated 20 March 2014  allowed  the  appeal  by  the
    respondent,  whom  I  shall  refer  to  as  the  claimant,  under   the
    Immigration Rules.  The claimant had made  application  for  indefinite
    leave to remain under the long residence provisions of  paragraph  276B
    of the Rules but his application had been refused.  This was because he
    had been without valid leave for a six week period between 7  June  and
    22 July 2010.  The judge found exceptional circumstances  in  the  case
    which included the Secretary of State's conduct in 2010. He found  that
    an application for further leave to remain  made  by  the  claimant  in
    February  in  2010  should  have  been  granted  when   it   fell   for
    consideration and so consequently would not have resulted in  a  hiatus
    in leave.

 2. At the hearing before me I explored with the parties  the  events  that
    occurred in 2010. Unfortunately the position remained as obscure and as
    muddled as it was before the first-tier tribunal judge.  In summary, it
    appears that the Secretary of State refused the claimant's  application
    on 7 June 2010 on the basis that he had  not  paid  the  increased  fee
    which came into force on 6 April 2010 without regard to the  timing  of
    the application.  It appears also  that  the  claimant's  fee  for  the
    application had been taken by the Secretary of State  and  it  was  the
    correct amount so far as he was concerned when paid.

 3. Sensibly Mr McVeety took instructions and considered that the  historic
    injustice which appears to have occurred in 2010 could not sustain  the
    Secretary of State's appeal which he withdrew.

 4. I gave my consent in the absence of any opposition from Mr Ayileka.  As
    a consequence the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  the
    appeal under the Immigration Rules stands.






Signed
                                             Date 16 September 2014
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson


