
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/40549/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29th July 2016                             |On 8th August 2016            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                             Appellant in the Upper Tribunal
                                     and

                             MAJIDA NISHA MARAJH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the Secretary of State:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Claimant: Miss A Kouma, Migrant Legal Action


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Chowdhury promulgated  on  13th  January  2016,  in
    which she dismissed the Appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules,
    but allowed the Appellant's appeal under Article  8  of  the  ECHR   in
    respect of her family and private life in the UK.  For the purposes  of
    clarity in this appeal, as it is the Secretary  of  State's  appeal,  I
    shall refer to  the  Appellant  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  Mrs
    Marajh, as being "the claimant" and the Respondent  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal as being "the Secretary of State".

 2. The Secretary of State has appealed against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Chowdhury on two grounds.

 3.  The first ground alleged that there was a perverse  or  an  irrational
    finding on a material matter, in respect of the findings that the judge
    made regarding the acceptance by the judge that the housing association
    was aware the presence of the Claimant at her sponsor's address and  it
    was argued that the housing association would not have actually  agreed
    for the tenant to be residing in breach of its  own  tenancy  agreement
    and that the judge's finding in this regard was irrational.

 4. Permission to appeal was  not  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Robertson in respect of that first ground  and  I  am  grateful  to  Mr
    Tarlow on behalf of the Secretary  of  State  for  agreeing  that  that
    ground of appeal is not being pursued today.  .

 5. However in respect of the second ground of appeal, it  is  argued  that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law in respect of the
    Claimant's Article 8 case, outside of the Immigration Rules.   Firstly,
    it is argued that in effect that there  would  have  to  be  compelling
    reasons before a judge will go on to consider  an  appeal  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.  However of course as far as any question  about  an
    intermediate test is concerned, again I am grateful to  Mr  Tarlow  for
    agreeing that that part of the Grounds of Appeal were not being pursued
    as clearly an argument that there needs to be an intermediate  test  is
    contrary to the findings of the Court of Appeal in the case of MF  (New
    Rules) Nigeria [2013] EWCA Civ 393 where the Court of  Appeal  made  it
    clear that there was no intermediate test and that the Tribunal has had
    to consider whether or not an Claimant was entitled  to  succeed  under
    the Immigration Rules and thereafter if everything was dealt with under
    the Rules to simply say so, but if, not to go on to consider the  claim
    outside of the Immigration Rules in respect of Article 8.

 6. However as has been made clear by the Court of Appeal in the case of SS
    (Congo) v Secretary of State [2015] EWCA Civ 387 when considering  that
    claim outside of the Rules  in  circumstances  where  someone  was  not
    liable to deportation, there would have to  be  what  was  said  to  be
    compelling circumstances to justify a  grant  for  leave  to  enter  or
    remain outside of the Immigration Rules.

 7. Next, it is argued within the second ground of appeal, the judge failed
    to consider the Article 8 case through the  prism  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  In  this  regard,  Miss  Kouma,  solicitor  for  the  Claimant,
    conceded that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  has  not  looked  at  the
    Claimant's Article 8 case in this case through the 'prism' or  'through
    the lens; of the Immigration Rules.  Although it was agreed before  the
    First-tier  Judge  that  the  Claimant  did  not  meet  the   requisite
    requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  there   was   actually   no
    consideration given by the First-tier Tribunal Judge Chowdhury  herself
    as to what those requirements actually were or  as  to  the  extent  to
    which the requirements either were or were not met.

 8. When considering the question of the Claimant's Article 8 claim outside
    of the Rules this still has to be considered  through  the  'prism'  or
    through the 'lens' of the Immigration Rules  and  in  that  regard  the
    court has to have consideration as to the extent  to  which  the  Rules
    either are or are not met and the reasons therefore, in considering the
    question of proportionality.  What appears to  have  happened  in  this
    case is that First-tier Tribunal Judge Chowdhury noting that the  Rules
    were not met  simply  has  then  gone  on  to  conduct  a  freewheeling
    consideration of Article 8  without  reference  at  all  to  the  Rules
    themselves.

 9. Permission to appeal has been  granted  on  this  basis  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Robertson who raised concerns regarding  the  fact  that
    the judge, in not considering the Article 8  claim  outside  the  rules
    through the lens  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  had  not  set  out  the
    requirements for example of paragraph E-ELTRP1.10 of Appendix  FM,   as
    to whether or not there were good reasons as to why  the  Claimant  and
    his spouse had not been residing together for a certain period of  time
    and that there was no consideration  given  under  the  Rules,  as  the
    extent of compliance with paragraph EX1(b)   of  Appendix  FM,   as  to
    whether or not there would be very significant obstacles to family life
    continuing outside of the UK.

10. It has been conceded quite properly on behalf of the claimant  by  Miss
    Kouma that the First-tier Tribunal Judge has not considered the Article
    8 outside of the Immigration Rules through the prism of the Immigration
    Rules themselves and that this does amount to a material error of  law.
    I therefore do find that there was a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Chowdhury, in not considering the
    extent to which and the reasons why the Immigration Rules were not met,
    in particular she has failed to take account of, inter-alia,  paragraph
    E-LTRP1.10 of Appendix FM and paragraph EX1 (b)  of  Appendix  FM,  and
    then has not considered the Article 8 claim outside of the  Immigration
    Rules through the lens of the Immigration Rules.

11. Further, in consideration  of  the  Article  8  claim  outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules, it is also clear when looking at the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge that although she makes reference to  Section
    117 of the Immigration Act 2014 at paragraph 47 of  her  decision,  the
    judge at paragraph 48 then goes on to find  that  the  Claimant  has  a
    strong

         "... family life here and developed  important  social  connections
         within the UK and has a significant private life  here.   Certainly
         the bond she has not only with friends who attended court  to  give
         evidence in support of her appeal have only got stronger."

12. However the judge has not actually considered Section 117B(5) and  that
    pursuant to that subsection, little weight should be given to a private
    life developed at a time when the Claimant was in the UK at a time when
    her status was precarious in that her  ability  to  remain  in  the  UK
    required a further grant of leave.

13. That has not been considered by the First-tier Tribunal Judge and again
    it has properly been conceded by Miss Kouma on behalf of  the  claimant
    that again also amounts to an error of law.

14.  Ms Kouma also  properly  concedes  that  in  those  circumstances  the
    judge's consideration of the Article 8 case outside of the  Immigration
    Rules does contain material errors of law that may  have  affected  the
    outcome of the Article  8  consideration  had  those  errors  not  been
    committed.

15. I therefore  find  that  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Chowdhury does contain material errors of  law  and  I  find  that  the
    decision should be set aside.

16. Although it has been initially argued before me  that  there  would  be
    some preserved findings of fact, given  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge has not actually looked at the Article  8  consideration  through
    the  prism  of  the  Immigration  Rules  as  was   then   conceded   by
    representative for the claimant, it would be  appropriate  rather  than
    making preserved findings of fact for the entire case to be  looked  at
    again including as to whether or not there was a genuine and subsisting
     relationship and also the intent to live permanently together, so that
    the Article 8 claim can be properly considered through the lens of  the
    Immigration Rules.

17. As far as the second argument raised within  Rule  24  reply  that  the
    judge failed to consider the application on the basis of the  Secretary
    of State's own policy in respect of discretionary leave, given that  it
    is said that the Claimant had  previously  been  granted  discretionary
    leave for a period of three years and therefore failed to  consider  it
    under the discretionary policy applicable before 9th July 2012. That in
    itself rather than being a Rule 24 response effectively  amounts  to  a
    ground of appeal and the Claimant did not seek  leave  to  cross-appeal
    and therefore I have not considered the appeal on that basis.

18. However of course that does not prevent that argument being run  before
    the First-tier Tribunal given the case is going to be remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

    The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Chowdhury I find does contain
    material errors of law and is set aside.

    The case is remitted back to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  rehearing
    before any First-tier Tribunal Judge other than Judge Chowdhury.

    It has not been argued before me that the claimant should  be  entitled
    to anonymity and therefore I do not make any anonymity direction.


Signed                                  Date 29th July 2016
[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty
