
[pic]
IAC-AH-sar-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/40690/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 October 2014                           |On 30 October 2014            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVID TAYLOR


                                   Between

                            MRS THANDIWE SIBANDA
                       (ANONYMITY direction NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Y Darboe, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Secretary of State is the appellant to  this  appeal  but  for  the
    sake of consistency I refer  to  her  as  the  respondent  and  to  the
    original appellant as such.

2.   The appellant is a 36 year old citizen of  Zimbabwe  born  on  11  July
    1978.  In a determination promulgated on 18 June 2014 in the First-tier
    Tribunal, Judge Herbert allowed her  appeal  against  the  respondent's
    refusal to grant her a derivative residence card under  Regulation  15A
    of  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006.   The  basis   of   the
    application was that she is the primary carer of her 2 year old son who
    is a British citizen residing in the  UK.   The  child's  father  is  a
    British citizen residing in the UK but, on the evidence, Judge  Herbert
    found [38] that "there is no credible evidence ... that the  father  of
    the child is playing any role whatsoever in his life".  He  found  that
    there was ample evidence that the  child's  father  committed  domestic
    violence, that he has had no contact with the child and  has  abdicated
    his responsibility for him.  [41]

3.   In his submissions, Mr Wilding relied on paragraphs  8  and  9  of  the
    grounds.  His submissions were based entirely on those two grounds  and
    I therefore set those grounds out in full:

         "8.  The judge finds that the father has had no  contact  with  the
             child since the appellant left the  family  home  in  November
             2013 [32].  However, nowhere in the determination, does it say
             that the father was informed of the  whereabouts  of  his  ex-
             partner or son.


         "9.  The determination fails to identify any efforts on the part of
             the appellant to satisfy the restraining  order  showing  that
             the father can be facilitated to meet or contact his son,  or,
             that he has been informed of his child's whereabouts".


4.   Mr Wilding went on to say that there had been  a  court  order  against
    the father in light of the domestic abuse.  That order, referred to  at
    [8]  prohibited  contact  with  the  appellant  save   as   to   making
    arrangements for contact with the child.  There was no evidence  as  to
    whether the mother had attempted to involve the father in  the  child's
    life.

5.   I did not call upon Mr Darboe to reply.  I indicated that  having  read
    the determination and the grounds and having now heard the  submissions
    I was satisfied that there had been no error of law in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision and that that decision must stand.

6.   My reasons  for  reaching  that  conclusion  are  straightforward.  The
    grounds which suggest that the father should have been notified of  the
    whereabouts of the appellant and her child and/or  that  the  appellant
    should have encouraged the father to contact the son are irrelevant  to
    the requirements of Regulation 15A of the 2006 Regulations.  The  judge
    in his determination gave full and clear reasons why each part  of  the
    relevant requirements of Regulation 15A were met.  There was  no  error
    of law in his approach or in his findings.



Notice of Decision

7.   There was no error of  law  in  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  That determination shall stand.

8.   No application has been made for an anonymity direction,  and  none  is
    made.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge David Taylor
29 October 2014
