

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
IA/40677/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reason Promulgated       |
|On Tuesday 29 October 2019               |On Wednesday 6 November 2019        |


                                   Before
                               MR JUSTICE DOVE
                    (SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE)
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MR MAROOF CHOWDHURY
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:     Mr S Karim, Counsel instructed by Kalam solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      BACKGROUND

    1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State.  For ease of reference,
       we refer to the parties as they were before the First-tier  Tribunal
       notwithstanding that,  strictly,  the  Secretary  of  State  is  the
       Appellant in this Tribunal.


    2. The Respondent appeals against a  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
       Judge Mayall promulgated on 26 June 2015 ("the  Decision")  allowing
       the Appellant's appeal on human rights grounds (Article  8)  against
       the Respondent's decision  dated  22  October  2014  cancelling  the
       Appellant's leave to enter.  The basis of the Respondent's  decision
       was that the Appellant had used a proxy test taker when obtaining  a
       TOEIC English language test certificate in 2012 and  had  used  that
       test certificate to obtain leave to remain as a student in the  same
       year.  Although  the  Judge  allowed  the  appeal  on  human  rights
       grounds, he dismissed  the  appeal  "under  the  Immigration  Rules"
       finding at [62] of the Decision that the Appellant had used a  proxy
       test taker and concluding at [65] of the Decision that he had  acted
       dishonestly.


    3. The Respondent appealed the Decision on three grounds.  First,  that
       the Judge had erred by failing to engage with the Immigration  Rules
       ("the Rules") when concluding that Article 8 would  be  breached  by
       removal.  Second, that the Judge failed to give sufficient weight to
       the public interest in light of the  Appellant's  deception.  Third,
       that the Judge had failed to give reasons  for  concluding  that  it
       would not be reasonable to expect the Appellant's British  child  to
       leave the UK and therefore allowing the appeal  on  the  basis  that
       Section 117B  (6)  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
       ("Section 117B (6)") was met.  There  was  no  cross-appeal  by  the
       Appellant against the dismissal of the appeal under the Rules.


    4. Permission to appeal was granted to the Respondent on  29  September
       2015 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Mark Davies in the following terms
       so far as relevant:


             "...2.      The  Judge's  conclusions   that   it   would   be
           unreasonable for the  Appellant's  child  to  leave  the  United
           Kingdom is based on little or no evidence.  There appears to  be
           no evidence before him for him to conclude that the  Appellant's
           child and the child's mother could not relocate.
            3.   The Judge puts forward little  or  no  reasoning  why  the
           Appellant was entitled to make a freestanding Article 8 claim.
            4.   It is arguable that the Judge  has  not  given  sufficient
           weight to the fact that the Appellant had used deception to  try
           to remain in the United  Kingdom  and  the  public  interest  in
           maintaining effective immigration control.
            5.   The grounds and  determination  do  disclose  an  arguable
       error of law."


    5. The Respondent's appeal came before Deputy Upper Tribunal G A  Black
       who, in a decision promulgated  on  28  January  2016  ("the  Second
       Decision") found an error of law in the Decision, set it  aside  and
       re-made it, dismissing the appeal on all grounds.  It is  worthy  of
       note that no issue was taken by the Appellant with  the  finding  of
       deception made in the Decision.


    6. The Appellant sought permission to appeal the Second Decision to the
       Court of Appeal.  He raised  four  grounds.   First,  whether  Judge
       Black had erred by setting aside  the  Decision  when  the  Decision
       disclosed no material error of law. At  [33]  of  his  grounds,  the
       Appellant for the first time challenged Judge Mayall's finding  that
       the  Appellant  had  exercised  deception.   We  observe  that  this
       assertion was included at the end of a ground which  contended  that
       the First-tier Tribunal Judge had not erred in law.

    7. The other three grounds focussed on the Deputy  Judge's  conclusions
       when re-making the  Decision.   Ground  two  challenged  the  Deputy
       Judge's re-making of the decision  without  first  hearing  evidence
       herself.  Ground three challenged the Deputy Judge's conclusions  as
       to the reasonableness of expecting a British child to leave the  UK,
       applying Section 117B (6).  By ground four, the Appellant challenged
       the Deputy Judge's proportionality assessment.


    8. By a decision dated 1 November  2017,  Lord  Justice  Singh  granted
       permission to appeal giving the following reasons:


            "1.  Although the second appeals test applies, I bear  in  mind
           that the UT allowed the SSHD's appeal against the FTT  decision,
           which had allowed the A's appeal on Article 8 grounds.
            2.   The A raises four grounds  of  appeal.   I  consider  that
           Grounds 2  and  3  do  raise  points  of  general  principle  or
           practice.  I also consider that there are compelling reasons  to
           grant permission on Grounds 1 and 4, in particular  because  the
           UT may have erred in law in a way that has an impact on the best
           interests of a very  young  child  and  one  who  is  a  British
           citizen."


    9. By a consent order dated 8 July 2019, the parties  agreed  that  the
       Second Decision should be set aside and that the  appeal  should  be
       remitted to this Tribunal for redetermination.  The matter therefore
       comes before us to re-make the Decision.

      DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS


   10. We can deal very shortly with the Respondent's ground  asserting  an
       error of law in Judge Mayall's application of Section 117B (6).   Ms
       Jones indicated at the outset of her submissions that the Respondent
       accepts that a British child cannot generally be expected  to  leave
       the UK and that this position applies in this  case  as  any  other,
       notwithstanding the finding of deception.  She pointed out that  the
       Respondent's grounds were drafted as long ago as June 2015 and case-
       law had moved on significantly since then.  She  accepted  therefore
       that the Respondent's third ground could not be pursued.   She  also
       accepted that it would be difficult to pursue a positive case  given
       that concession.  As we indicated  at  the  hearing,  therefore,  we
       allow the Appellant's appeal on human rights grounds  on  the  basis
       that Section 117B (6) is met  and  therefore  that  removal  of  the
       Appellant (who is in a genuine and subsisting relationship with  his
       British citizen child) would be disproportionate.


   11. We turn to deal with a further point raised by Mr  Karim.   He  drew
       our attention to the Appellant's ground one of his grounds of appeal
       before the Court of Appeal which challenges, inter alia, the  First-
       tier Tribunal Judge's  finding  that  the  Appellant  has  exercised
       deception. Mr Karim accepted that this finding was not challenged by
       the Appellant prior to the grounds before the Court of  Appeal.   He
       also accepted that there was no cross appeal  by  the  Appellant  in
       relation to the  dismissal  of  the  appeal  under  the  Rules.   He
       submitted however that case-law in relation to so-called  ETS  cases
       (as this is) has moved on and that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had
       erred by applying too high a standard of proof for the Appellant  to
       meet.  Following the case of SM and Qadir (ETS - Evidence  -  Burden
       of Proof) [2016] UKUT 229 (IAC) ("SM & Qadir"), Mr  Karim  submitted
       that a Judge would have to consider only  the  plausibility  of  the
       innocent explanation provided by an appellant in order to  discharge
       his evidential burden which would then shift  the  legal  burden  of
       proof back to the Respondent.


   12. Mr Karim suggested three possible ways forward.  First, he  accepted
       that we could conclude that the Appellant was precluded from arguing
       this issue on this occasion, having failed to advance it as a ground
       of appeal earlier.  Second, he also accepted that, in light  of  the
       Respondent's concession in relation to the Article 8 case, we  could
       also conclude that any error was immaterial.  He pointed out in that
       regard though that the error might not be immaterial for the  future
       as  the  finding  of  deception  might  influence  the  Respondent's
       decisions as to indefinite leave to remain and  citizenship  in  due
       course.  Third, we could indicate that we were minded to re-open the
       appeal on this issue and hear submissions on it.


   13. Having retired for a short period to deliberate, we  indicated  that
       we would follow the first option.  We therefore  concluded  that  it
       was too late  for  the  Appellant  to  raise  this  issue  now.   We
       indicated that we would provide our reasons in writing for  reaching
       that conclusion which we now turn to do.


   14. The Appellant raised this issue at [33] of his  grounds  before  the
       Court of Appeal in the following way:


           "The appellant also now challenges the FTT's conclusion relating
           to  deception.   It  is  submitted  that  whilst  this  was  not
           challenge below,  in  light  of  the  recent  Presidential  test
           ETS/TOEIC case determined by the UT Qadir and Ors, IA/31380/2014
           and others, where it was held that the respondent  does  not  in
           these types of cases have sufficient evidence to  discharge  the
           burden, the appellant submits that the deception finding of  the
           FTT must also be set aside in the interests of justice."


   15. We make three observations about the way in which this challenge  is
       raised.  First, as we have already noted, there was no challenge  by
       way of cross-appeal or before Judge Black in the Upper Tribunal.  No
       explanation is offered for  this  ground  not  having  been  pleaded
       earlier (save perhaps by reference to the "recent" decision of SM  &
       Qadir which had only just been promulgated). Second, this  paragraph
       appears in a section challenging Judge Black's finding of  an  error
       of law in the  Decision.  Third,  and  as  such,  the  challenge  is
       completely at odds with the remainder of ground one which asserts no
       error of law in the Decision. The challenge at [33] on the  contrary
       asserts that there is an error of law, albeit a different  error  of
       law to that found by Judge Black (unsurprisingly since this  alleged
       error was not argued before her).
   16. That then impacts on the submission made by Mr Karim that  Singh  LJ
       had considered this point arguable.  There  is  no  way  of  knowing
       whether he did because, as we note, the focus of ground one is  that
       there was no error of law in the Decision and  that  it  should  not
       have been set aside.  It is therefore not at all clear  to  us  that
       Singh LJ found there to be any arguable error on this point or  that
       he even considered it.  He makes no mention of the ground not having
       been raised before and the reference when dealing with ground one to
       the best interests of the Appellant's child tends to suggest that he
       was focussing only on whether the First-tier Tribunal Judge had made
       any error of law in relation to Section 117B (6).


   17. Finally, and in any  event,  the  basis  on  which  the  appeal  was
       remitted to this Tribunal does not indicate that this was one of the
       reasons why the appeal was conceded. We refer to  the  statement  of
       reasons agreed between the parties which sets out  the  reasons  why
       the appeal was conceded in the following terms:


            "7.  The parties agree that the Upper  Tribunal  made  material
           errors of law when re-determining the  Appellant's  appeal.   In
           particular, the  parties  agree  that  the  Upper  Tribunal  was
           required to consider  the  proportionality  of  the  Appellant's
           removal under Article 8 by reference to s.117B(6)  of  the  2002
           Act, and that it failed to  properly  apply  this  provision  in
           that:
              i.  The  Upper  Tribunal  had  regard  to   the   Appellant's
              fraudulent conduct in assessing the public interest, which is
              not  a  matter  falling  for  consideration   when   applying
              s.117B(6): see KO (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home
              Department [2018] 1 WLR 5273, at [17];
              ii. Notwithstanding  having  concluded  that  there  were  no
              insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life   continuing   in
              Bangladesh, the Upper Tribunal failed to set out any  reasons
              for why it would be reasonable for the Appellant's  child  to
              leave  the  UK,  including  in  light  of  the   child's   UK
              nationality;
              iii.  The Upper  Tribunal  wrongly  concluded  (parasitic  on
              these matters) that  there  was  no  basis  to  consider  the
              Appellant's circumstances under Article 8 outside the Rules.
            8.   The parties accordingly agree that this  matter  should  be
           remitted to the Upper Tribunal to re-determine  the  Appellant's
           appeal in accordance with this Statement of Reasons.  it will be
           for the Upper Tribunal to make such directions as  it  considers
           appropriate as to the need for any new evidence to allow  it  to
           re-determine the Appellant's appeal."


   18. Also, of importance is what is said  at  [5]  of  the  Statement  of
       Reasons by way of background to that concession as follows:


            "The Appellant appealed the Respondent's decision to cancel his
           leave to the First-tier Tribunal ("FTT").  His appeal was  heard
           by FTT Judge Mayall, who determined as follows:
           i.  Having  taken  into  account  the  evidence,  including  the
              Appellant's oral evidence,  the  Appellant  had  fraudulently
              obtained the TOEIC test certification.  FTTJ Mayall concluded
              in this regard that the  Appellant  was  not  a  credible  or
              honest witness when dealing with the test (see at [57]);
           ii.         By reason of this finding, the Appellant's leave was
              properly cancelled having regard to  paragraph  321A  of  the
              Immigration  Rules  (see  at  [66]),  and  further  that  the
              Appellant did not otherwise qualify for leave to remain under
              the Immigration Rules as a partner or as a parent  under  the
              relevant provisions in Appendix FM (see at [81]);
           iii.  However, having regard to the provisions of s.117B of  the
              Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  ("the  2002
              Act"), the Appellant's removal would result  in  an  unlawful
              interference with the Appellant's rights under Article  8  of
              the European Convention on  Human  Rights  ("ECHR")  (see  at
              [92]).
           iv.   The Appellant's appeal was therefore dismissed pursuant to
              the Immigration Rules but allowed on Article 8 grounds."


   19. As we observed at the hearing, therefore, the issues before  us  had
       been limited by agreement between the parties in  the  Statement  of
       Reasons. We do not accept that there is any good reason  to  re-open
       other issues, particularly in circumstances where  the  issue  which
       the Appellant seeks to raise was not properly raised previously.

   20. For those reasons, the Second Decision having been set aside by  the
       consent order, we re-make that decision,  allowing  the  Appellant's
       appeal  on  human  rights  grounds   (Article   8)   following   the
       Respondent's concession, on the basis that the  Appellant  is  in  a
       genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  a  qualifying  (British)
       child and it would not be reasonable to expect that child  to  leave
       the UK.   The Appellant is therefore entitled to  succeed  based  on
       Section 117B (6) and we so conclude.

      DECISION

    For the avoidance of doubt, the decision of Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
    G A Black promulgated on 28 January 2016 is set aside.  We re-make  the
    decision and allow the Appellant's appeal  on  the  basis  that  he  is
    entitled to succeed based on Section 117B (6) Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002.  His removal would therefore be  disproportionate.




    We allow the appeal of the Appellant (Mr  Chowdhury)  on  human  rights
    grounds.


      Signed
            [pic]
                 Upper            Tribunal            Judge            Smith
          Dated:  4 November 2019
