
[pic]
IAC-TH-WYL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/40080/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 October and 24 November 2015   |On 17 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                            mohammed jalal ahmed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Sreeraman (15.10.15) and Mr I. Jarvis
                    (24.11.15), Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    Mr J. Plowright (15.10.15) and Mr G. Davison
                    (24.11.15), Counsel instructed by Charles Simmons
                    Immigration Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge NMK Lawrence sitting at Hatton  Cross
    on 13 April 2015) allowing the claimant's appeal against removal on the
    ground that the decision was not in accordance with the law, and that a
    lawful decision on an Article 8  claim  outside  the  Rules  was  still
    outstanding.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity
    direction, and I do not consider  that  the  claimant  requires  to  be
    accorded anonymity for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

The Reasons for Granting Permission to Appeal

 2. On 27 July 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Frankish  granted  permission
    to appeal for the following reasons:

         1.   In a decision promulgated on 6 May  2015  F-tTJ  NMK  Lawrence
             remitted the appeal, against refusal of leave to remain  under
             article 8, to the respondent for  a  lawful  decision  on  the
             grounds of failure so as to consider the  application  outside
             of the Rules.

         2.   The application for permission to appeal asserts that  the  F-
             tTJ was wrong to have found that  the  respondent  omitted  to
             consider article 8; the refusal letter expressly considers the
             case outside the Rules,  contrary  to  the  F-tTJ's  findings;
             Aliyu misapplied in respect of  discretionary  application  of
             article 8; in the alternative the F-tTJ could and should  have
             made his own article 8 decision.

         3.   It is arguable that �20-29 of the  refusal  letter,  including
             citation of a previous failed article 8 appeal to  which  both
             the respondent and the F-tTJ refer do, indeed, amount  to  the
             respondent having done what the F-tTJ says she  has  not  done
             namely, to consider the  case  outside  of  the  Rules  which,
             accordingly comprises an arguable error.

The Relevant Background Facts

 3. The claimant is a national of Bangladesh, whose  date  of  birth  is  1
    February 1980.  He first entered the United Kingdom in  November  1994,
    and on 20 October 2004 he applied  for  ILR  on  the  grounds  of  long
    residence.  His application was refused on 27 March 2007 with  a  right
    of appeal.  It was not accepted that he had arrived in the UK in  1994.
    The documentary evidence lodged in support failed to substantiate  this
    claim.  Bank statements, wage slips  and  other  financial  information
    which he had provided dated back no further than 2001.

 4. The claimant's appeal against the refusal  decision  was  dismissed  by
    Immigration Judge Culver in a determination promulgated on 5  September
    2007.  He found that the claimant did not qualify for leave  to  remain
    under the Rules, which required either ten years  lawful  residence  or
    fourteen years' residence uninterrupted by  any  steps  to  effect  the
    removal of an applicant.  It was clear on the  claimant's  own  account
    that he had not been in the  UK  unlawfully  for  fourteen  years.   He
    claimed to have established family life with an aunt and  her  children
    in Brighton, but no evidence had been received from the aunt or another
    relative.  The claim of family life was undermined by the fact that  he
    clearly had no connection with the address which he gave as his  aunt's
    address.  It was also indicated that at the time of application he  was
    working in a restaurant in Devon which made his living with his aunt in
    Brighton unlikely.

 5. The claimant did not leave  the  country  following  his  appeal  being
    dismissed.  On 28 November 2012  he  applied  for  ILR  on  Article  8
    grounds.  That application was refused on 17 June 2013 with no right of
    appeal.  On 26 June 2013 his legal representatives requested  that  the
    decision be reconsidered, and on 26 September 2014,  the  Secretary  of
    State  gave  her  reasons  for  refusing   his   application   on   re-
    consideration, and for deciding to removing him as an  illegal  entrant
    or person subject to administrative removal under  Section  10  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 (asylum/human rights claim having  been
    refused).

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 6. At the hearing before Judge Lawrence, there  was  no  appearance  by  a
    Presenting Officer for  the  Secretary  of  State.   The  claimant  was
    represented by Mr Davidson of Charles  Simmons  Immigration  Solicitors
    and he called the claimant and three supporting witnesses to give  oral
    evidence.  As the judge noted in her subsequent decision, the witnesses
    were  not  cross-examined  because  the  Secretary  of  State  was  not
    represented.   The  three  witnesses  supported  the  claimant  in  his
    evidence that he had first arrived in the United Kingdom in 1994.

 7. The judge's findings were set out at paragraph [5] onwards.   In  order
    for the claimant to succeed under Rule 276ADE, he  had  to  demonstrate
    that he had resided in the UK for at least twenty years at the date  of
    his application on 28 November 2012.  There was an inconsistency in his
    witness statement.  On the one hand he claimed to have arrived  in  the
    UK in 1994 (see paragraph 9) but he also claimed to have arrived in the
    UK in November 2004 (see paragraph 5).  Even if it was accepted that he
    had arrived in the UK in 1994, and had been continuously resident  ever
    since, he could only demonstrate that he had been continuously resident
    in the UK for eighteen years for the purposes of the Rules.

 8. The judge observed that the Secretary of  State  had  not  removed  the
    claimant when his appeal was dismissed by Judge Culver.  In a  covering
    letter dated 26 June 2013 his solicitors had asserted that the claimant
    had established a private life in the UK.   The  judge  held  that  the
    Secretary of State  had  a  duty  to  consider  the  submissions.   The
    Secretary  of  State  asserted  that  there  was  no  evidence  of  any
    significant obstacles to the claimant returning to Bangladesh, but  she
    had failed to consider the  private  life  which  he  claimed  to  have
    established in the UK.  The judge continued:

         "8.  In R (on the application of Halimatu SA Adiya  Damilola  Aliyu
             and Fatima Oluwakemi Aliyu v Secretary of State for  the  Home
             Department [2014] EWHC 3919 (Admin)  the  respondent  had  not
             considered the  appellants'  cases  under  article  8  of  the
             Convention.  The High Court held, "(1) In  my  judgement,  the
             claimants were entitled to a consideration of their individual
             circumstances  outside  the  Immigration  Rules".   The  ratio
             appears to me, to be, where applicants do  not  meet  the  New
             Article  8  Rules  the  respondent  has  a  duty  to  exercise
             discretion  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  (including,  New
             Article 8 Rules) under article 8 of the  Convention.   Failure
             to consider article 8  of  the  Convention,  that  is  to  say
             exercise discretion outside the Immigration Rules, will render
             the decision wrong in law.

         9.   In the instant appeal I note the respondent has considered the
             application under para 276ADE only.  Even if the appellant  is
             accepted to have entered the UK in late 2004 and the appellant
             has remained in the UK ever since, it is  incumbent  upon  the
             respondent to consider his application under article 8 of  the
             Convention.  The consideration under article 8 may not lead to
             a decision that the respondent must demonstrate that  she  has
             discharged  her  duty  to  exercise  discretion  by   actively
             consideration issues under article 8, whether the decision  is
             in favour of the appellant or  not.   In  the  instant  appeal
             there is no evidence she has done that.  Accordingly,  I  find
             her decision is wrong in law (see para 60 Aliyu).   It  is  my
             finding that a lawful decision is still outstanding."

The Error of Law Hearing

 9. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mr Plowright accepted that the Secretary of State had  considered
    an Article 8 claim outside the Rules in the decision  letter.  However,
    he submitted that the  Secretary  of  State's  consideration  had  been
    inadequate, and so the judge had not materially erred in law.

10. I found that an error of law was made out, and gave my reasons  for  so
    finding in short form, with  my  extended  reasons  to  follow  in  due
    course.

11.  In  accordance  with  the  standard  Practice  Direction,  a   Bengali
    interpreter had been booked and the claimant was present in court  with
    his supporting witnesses to give oral  evidence  for  the  purposes  of
    remaking the decision.  However Mr Plowright submitted that the  appeal
    should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing, as
    the effect of the error had been to deprive  the  claimant  of  a  fair
    hearing before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Ms  Sreeraman  expressed  a
    preference  not  to  proceed  with  the  remaking   of   the   decision
    immediately, because the witnesses would need to be  cross-examined  on
    the disputed issue of when the claimant had first arrived in the UK and
    this could more conveniently be done at a resumed hearing.  So I agreed
    to adjourn, and to reserve my ruling on the forum in which the decision
    would be remade.

Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

12. In the decision letter, the Secretary of State addressed Rule 276ADE at
    paragraphs 16 to 19.  She concluded that the claimant did not meet  the
    requirements to be granted limited leave to remain on  the  grounds  of
    private life in the United Kingdom under Rule 276ADE.  At paragraph 20,
    she said that it  had  also  been  considered  whether  the  particular
    circumstances  set  out  in  the  claimant's  application   constituted
    exceptional circumstances which, consistent with the right  to  respect
    for private and family life contained in Article 8 ECHR, might  warrant
    consideration by the Secretary of State of a grant of leave  to  remain
    in the United Kingdom outside the requirements of the Rules.

13. The Secretary of State  noted  that  the  claimant  relied  on  several
    letters of support  from  friends  as  showing  that  the  relationship
    between him and his friends demonstrated dependency involving more than
    normal emotional ties.  The Secretary of State went on to quote various
    passages from the determination of Judge Culver which  underpinned  the
    conclusion that the claimant did not enjoy family life in the UK.

14. On the topic of private life in the UK, the Secretary  of  State  noted
    that the claimant first came into contact with the Home Office in  2004
    and it was therefore considered that he had been in the UK for no  more
    than ten years.  Due to a lack of evidence, it was not accepted that he
    had lost all social, cultural and family ties to his home country.   It
    was also not considered that his private life in the United Kingdom was
    so strong that his removal would breach his human rights.

15.  The  Secretary  of  State  went  on  to  address  "other   exceptional
    circumstances".  With regards to his compliance with the conditions, it
    was noted that he had complied with all reporting conditions  requested
    of him.  But it was not accepted that there had been any  circumstances
    beyond his control that had prevented him from returning to Bangladesh,
    and therefore his length of residence was not a factor in itself  which
    would justify allowing him to remain here.  So  having  considered  all
    the circumstances of his case, it was concluded that he had provided no
    evidence which might justify allowing  him  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom exceptionally.

16. Judge Lawrence thus plainly erred in asserting that  the  Secretary  of
    State had failed to consider the claimant's application under Article 8
    ECHR.  The Secretary of State had clearly  done  so  in  paragraphs  20
    onwards of the decision letter.

17. In paragraph [60] of Aliyu, the court held as follows:

         "In any event, as is  made  plain  in  Ganseabalan,  a  failure  to
         consider whether to exercise discretion outside the Rules will,  in
         itself, be unlawful."

18. The Secretary of State did not fail to  consider  whether  to  exercise
    discretion outside the Rules.

19. Mr Plowright seeks to defend the judge's decision on  the  ground  that
    the consideration by the Secretary of State  was  inadequate.   A  bald
    assertion to this effect is simply not good enough.   It  needs  to  be
    shown that there was at least one compelling circumstance that had been
    raised in correspondence  which  the  Secretary  of  State  had  wholly
    overlooked or ignored.  The only alleged compelling circumstance  which
    Mr Plowright raised before  me  was  the  claimant's  sheer  length  of
    residence (assuming that he arrived in 1994).  But it cannot reasonably
    be maintained that the Secretary of State failed  to  engage  with  the
    claimant's case on this issue in the decision letter.

20. Accordingly, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal was vitiated by  a
    error of law such that it should be set aside and remade.

21. I do not consider that the claimant has been deprived of a fair hearing
    in the First-tier Tribunal.  As is apparent from  a  letter  which  the
    claimant's solicitors sent to the First-tier Tribunal  on  18  November
    2014, the judge made the finding in favour of the  claimant  which  the
    claimant, through his solicitors, invited her to make  (which  was  the
    Secretary of State ought to reconsider her rejection of his  Article  8
    claim outside the rules).

22. The premise which underlay the judge's conclusion was  (a)  that  there
    were not very significant obstacles to the claimant's reintegration  to
    life in Bangladesh (and hence he could not succeed under  Rule  276ADE)
    and (b) that it did not matter if he had only  resided  in  the  United
    Kingdom since 2004.

23. There is no cross-appeal against the judge's finding that the  claimant
    could not bring himself within Rule 276ADE, so the only  factual  issue
    which potentially remains in controversy is the  claimant's  length  of
    residence.

24. The First-tier Tribunal judge considered the claimant's case on  length
    of residence and rejected it,  because  of  the  inconsistency  in  his
    witness  statement.   Arguably  her  reasoning  on   this   issue   was
    inadequate, as she did not engage with the "corroborative" evidence  of
    the supporting witnesses, and she did not engage with the Secretary  of
    State's case in rebuttal, which included the lack of documentary and/or
    independent third party evidence of his presence in the United  Kingdom
    prior to 2001.

25. The witness statements from the three  supporting  witnesses  are  very
    short, and the number of documents evidencing the  claimant's  presence
    in the United Kingdom between 1994 and 2004  is  relatively  few.   The
    nature and extent of the judicial fact finding  that  is  necessary  in
    order for the decision in this appeal to be remade is  not  such  that,
    having regard to the overriding objective, it is appropriate  to  remit
    the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

26. Accordingly, I find that there is no justification for  departing  from
    the normal approach to determining appeals in the Upper Tribunal  where
    an error of law is found, which is that the appeal should be remade  by
    the Upper Tribunal, even though some further fact finding is necessary.

The Resumed Hearing

27. The claimant spoke  through  a  Bengali  interpreter  whom  he  clearly
    understood, and he adopted as his  evidence-in-chief  his  most  recent
    witness statement and the two earlier statements that had  been  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.   The  earliest  of  these  statements  is  at
    section B of the core bundle. It  was  relied  on  in  support  of  the
    application made in October 2004 for discretionary leave to  remain  on
    human rights grounds.

28. His family were poor, and their poverty was exacerbated by the birth of
    his younger brother, Abdul Basit, six years after his own  birth,  thus
    stretching the family's resources even further.  Shortly after  Abdul's
    birth, his father was involved in a terrible accident  which  made  him
    unable to work.  The claimant was taken out of school, and  a  decision
    was made by his parents to send him out to work.  He went to work for a
    family out of town.  He believed  the  name  of  his  employer  was  Mr
    Hussain.  He used to do general household duties such  as  cooking  and
    cleaning.   This  arrangement  continued  for  about  four  years   and
    thereafter his mother told him that it had been  arranged  for  him  to
    stay and work with his employer on a permanent  basis.   This  was  the
    last time that he saw her or any  other  members  of  his  family.   Mr
    Hussain and his family moved to another part of Sylhet, which was  more
    developed.  In November 1994 Mr Hussain made a  decision  to  take  the
    family to the UK for a trip.  Mr Hussain's family members in the UK had
    holidays approaching, and the plan was to spend time with them.  He was
    shocked to learn that Mr Hussain wished to take him  with  them.   When
    they arrived in the UK, they stayed with family members of  Mr  Hussain
    in Birmingham.  Mr Hussain and his family remained  in  the  UK  for  a
    period of two months and then decided to go  back  to  Bangladesh.   He
    thought he would be leaving with them, but was shocked and saddened  to
    learn that he was not going to go with  them.   Mr  Hussain  stated  it
    would be better for him in the long run if he remained in the UK.

29.  The  claimant  said  he  remained  with  Mr  Hussain's  relatives   in
    Birmingham.  He did not go to school and stayed at  home  most  of  the
    time.  This went on for two years. He used to go with the head  of  the
    family, Mr Abdul, to his workplace which was an Indian restaurant.   As
    time progressed, he became familiar with the work  at  the  restaurant,
    and he pursued it on a full-time basis.  Eventually he moved out of  Mr
    Abdul's home and stayed at his restaurant, as  accommodation  and  food
    were provided for him there.

30. His first real job was at a restaurant called Akash in Chippenham.   He
    was happy as there were many fellow Bangladeshis  also  working  there.
    He began work as a kitchen assistant and worked there for approximately
    eighteen months before moving on.  Since being in the UK, he had worked
    at the following restaurants, which he went on to list.  He listed  six
    restaurants.   First  on  the  list  was  the  Cardamom  restaurant  in
    Upminster where he worked as a kitchen porter.  Second on the list  was
    the Megana Grill in South Woodford where he said he  had  worked  as  a
    cook.  He also worked as a cook at the Maharani restaurant in  Clapham.
    Restaurants four and five were outside London.   He  had  worked  as  a
    tandoori chef at the Kohinoor in Kent and at the Viceroy Restaurant  in
    Newhaven.  The last restaurant where he had worked, and  where  he  was
    still currently working, was the  Raj  Restaurant  in  Devon.   He  was
    employed as a tandoori chef earning a wage of �150 per  week.   He  was
    highly regarded by his employer as he had been able to pick up  on  the
    skills of the trade very quickly.

31. He was currently residing at an address in Brighton with his  aunt  and
    her family.  Her name was Shaheda Begum.  She lived there with her  two
    daughters, Shahema and Shimara.  His aunt had supported  him  since  he
    had managed to track her down.  His aunt had four  other  children  who
    were all married with their own families.  He also had a cousin,  Hafiz
    Mazir Uddin, who lived in East London. He enjoyed  spending  time  with
    him and his family.

32. In his second  witness  statement  signed  on  19  November  2014,  the
    claimant said that Mr Hussain had  taken  care  of  all  the  necessary
    paperwork with regard to bringing him to the United  Kingdom.   He  was
    not asked any questions at the airport and Mr Hussain  dealt  with  the
    immigration officials.  Mr Abdul and his family  members  welcomed  him
    into their home and treated him with humility and kindness.  They  were
    very helpful and supportive towards him and helped him to  settle  into
    his surroundings and he slowly became accustomed to  British  lifestyle
    and culture.  After an apprenticeship  at  Mr  Abdul's  restaurant,  he
    became familiar with the work  and  managed  to  secure  a  job  at  an
    alternative restaurant where he was paid a moderate  salary  which  was
    inclusive of meals and accommodation.

33. On 26 October 2012 he was  encountered  whilst  working  in  an  Indian
    restaurant in Brighton and subsequently  detained.   He  was  currently
    enjoying a full and active family life with his friends  and  relatives
    in the UK.  He felt he had developed an emotional dependence  on  them,
    in particular with Ridwan Ahmed, which  was  above  and  beyond  normal
    emotional ties.

34. In his third witness statement signed by him  on  1  August  2015,  the
    claimant said that the discrepancy in arrival dates noted by the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge was the result of a simple typing error which  both
    he and his legal representative failed to notice.

35. The claimant was asked supplementary questions by Mr Davison,  and  was
    extensively cross-examined by Mr Jarvis. He also answered questions for
    clarification purpose from me.

36. He was asked about a set of original photographs taken of  him  in  the
    street wearing a white baseball cap and  a  white  fleece.   Copies  of
    these photographs appear at pages 221 and 222 of the claimant's bundle.
     The claimant said that the photographs had been taken by his cousin Mr
    Faysal in South Woodford when he was aged 15 years old.

37. On the back of one of the photographs  someone  had  written,  "Age  15
    taken in South Woodford 1995".  The claimant said that  Mr  Faysal  had
    written these words.  I asked the claimant  when  the  photographs  had
    been developed.  He said he was not sure.

38. According to the refusal letter dated 14 November 2012 (page 64 of  the
    claimant's bundle) when the  claimant  was  interviewed  following  his
    detention on 26 October 2012 he said he had entered  in  1994  using  a
    passport belonging  to  someone  else.   Mr  Jarvis  put  this  to  the
    claimant, who denied that he had said this.  Mr Hussain had arranged  a
    passport for him.

39. Mr Jarvis asked the claimant to provide an  account  of  his  movements
    between 1994 and 2001, including at which restaurants  he  had  worked,
    and in what order.  The claimant  answered  that,  after  spending  two
    years in Birmingham, he had moved to Honiton  in  Devon  where  he  had
    worked at the Raj Restaurant for six months.  He then moved on to  live
    with his aunt in Brighton for some six to  seven  years.   He  was  not
    there permanently, as he used to go and work at  restaurants  where  he
    was given overnight accommodation.  He had gone to live with  his  aunt
    in 1997, and it might be in 1997 or 1998 that he had started working at
    the Megana Grill Restaurant in South Woodford.  He  initially  said  he
    worked there for a few days each week, but he later said  that  he  was
    living and working there for six days each week.  He had forgotten when
    he  had  stopped  working  there.   He  started  work  at  the  Viceroy
    Restaurant in Newhaven towards the end of the year 2000.  He  confirmed
    that before the end of the year 2000 he had not  worked  in  any  other
    restaurants apart from the Raj, the Megana Grill, and the Viceroy.

40. It was put to him that in his second  witness  statement  he  indicated
    that he had eventually obtained proper employment at a restaurant,  and
    he was asked which restaurant he was referring to.  He said  that  this
    was the Kohinoor Restaurant in Sheerness, Kent, where he had started in
    2001.

41. He was asked whether he had worked in Chippenham.  He said yes, he  had
    forgotten that.  But he could not recall when he had worked there,  and
    he had forgotten the name of the restaurant.  He could not say  whether
    he had worked in Chippenham before or after 2001.

42. His aunt had passed away on 14 November 2015.  He had not asked her  to
    give evidence on his behalf.  That was  why  there  was  no  letter  or
    witness statement from her.  Her daughter Jasnara had  accompanied  him
    to the hearing today, but she had not been  asked  to  make  a  witness
    statement either. He had not provided any documentary evidence  of  his
    employment between 1994 and 2001 as he had lost contact with his former
    employers.  There was a  high  turnover  of  staff,  and  ownership  of
    restaurants was always changing.

43. He had met Faysal Ahmed (who lives in South  Woodford)  at  the  Megana
    Grill Restaurant in 1995.  There was a birthday party taking  place  at
    the restaurant.  He thought it might have been Faysal's  own  birthday,
    but he was not sure.  He was still living in Birmingham at the time, so
    he did not have much contact with Faysal in 1996.  The level of contact
    had been much  greater  after  2012,  as  following  his  release  from
    detention he had gone to live with  Faysal  Ahmed,  and  he  was  still
    living with him.

44. He had met Gurdeep Virdee at the same birthday party.  He was a  friend
    of Faysal Ahmed, and he had a shop nearby.  He  had  had  good  contact
    with Mr Virdee since he had been living with Faysal Ahmed.

45. He had met Mr Joynal Uddin (who lives at an address in  Ilford,  Essex)
    at his home in Ilford in December 1994.  When he was working at  Megana
    Grill, he would regularly go round to Mr Uddin's house in Ilford.

46. Mr Virdee was called as a witness, and confirmed that his letter  dated
    22 April 2014 at page 200 of the claimant's bundle was  accurate.   The
    address given at the top of the letter (100 Snakes Lane East,  Woodford
    Green) was his work address.  In the body of the letter, he said he had
    known the claimant from 1995, having met him through a friend.  In  his
    oral evidence, he said he had met the  claimant  at  the  Megana  Grill
    Restaurant in Woodford.  His friend Faysal Ahmed owned the  restaurant,
    and he had invited him to a party which was taking place there.  It was
    not Faysal's own party, it was a  friend's  party.   The  claimant  was
    there as a guest, not as an employee.  Faysal Ahmed had introduced  the
    claimant to him as one of his friends.   He  did  not  know  where  the
    claimant was living at the time, or anything about his situation.   The
    next time he had seen him was in about 1998 at  Faysal  Ahmed's  house.
    He had seen him more  frequently  after  2012  when  he  had  become  a
    permanent resident at Faysal Ahmed's house.  He would  often  cook  for
    them.  Mr Virdee was confident that the first meeting was in  1995,  as
    he used to travel internationally with his work.

47. Faysal Ahmed was called as a witness.  On 19 July 2010 he had written a
    letter in his capacity as the proprietor of the Megana Grill Restaurant
    at 219 High Road, London E18.  He wrote to confirm  that  he  was  very
    impressed by the claimant's qualifications  and  experience  and  would
    like to offer him full-time  employment  as  a  chef.   The  offer  was
    subject to sight  of  the  claimant's  national  insurance  number  and
    documentation confirming his entitlement to work in the UK  (claimant's
    bundle page 190).

48. On 3 November 2010 Faysal Ahmed had written  a  letter  from  his  home
    address in Chelmsford Road, South Woodford, London E18 confirming  that
    he had known the claimant for over fifteen years and had  always  known
    him to be trustworthy and honest.

49. In his signed witness statement of 17 November 2014, which  he  adopted
    as his evidence-in-chief, Mr Ahmed said that he had been born in the UK
    to parents who were from Bangladesh.   He  had  been  residing  at  the
    Chelmsford Road address in South Woodford since 1990 with  his  family,
    who included his parents, wife and sibling.  He had known the  claimant
    since 1995, when they met at a family gathering in London.  He  got  on
    extremely well at their first meeting when he discovered  that  he  was
    from the same village as his father and a distant cousin.   After  that
    they maintained contact about four to five times a year and  often  met
    at other social engagements like weddings and  parties,  as  they  were
    from the same area in Bangladesh.  The claimant had been residing  with
    him and his family since November 2012.  He had  become  aware  of  the
    claimant's immigration status after they met.   The  claimant  informed
    him that he would like to settle in the UK as he had lost  all  contact
    with Bangladesh.  The claimant was particularly  close  to  his  wife's
    younger brother Ridwan who suffered from a learning disability.

50. Mr Davison asked Mr Ahmed about the photographs.  He said he had  taken
    the photographs of the claimant in the street outside his home in South
    Woodford in 1995 when the  claimant  was  aged  15.   This  was  on  an
    occasion when the claimant had come to see him at his home.   He  asked
    Mr Ahmed when the photographs had been developed.  He said he could not
    recall.  He developed them more or less at the  same  time  as  he  had
    taken them.

51. In cross-examination, Mr Jarvis put to Mr Ahmed that on the back of the
    photographs there was typed the date of 23.10.01.  Mr Ahmed  said  they
    could be reprints.  He had not supplied the photographs to the claimant
    for the purposes of the appeal proceedings.  It was only today that  he
    had written on the back of one of the  photographs  that  it  had  been
    taken in 1995.  He did not notice that the photographs were printed  in
    2001 when writing that message.

52. He had met the  claimant  for  the  first  time  at  the  Megana  Grill
    Restaurant at a birthday party.  His friend Gurdeep was there.  He  had
    not met the claimant before.  The claimant was  not  a  friend  of  his
    before the party at which they met.  He was a guest at the  party.   He
    did not know who had invited him.  He was on his own.  He had not asked
    him how he had got there.  The claimant told him  he  was  living  with
    someone in Birmingham.

53. The claimant had not come to work in the restaurant.  They had  offered
    him a job on production of his papers.  He had never actually worked at
    the restaurant, and he had never  stayed  in  accommodation  above  the
    restaurant premises.  He could not explain why the claimant had claimed
    the contrary.  He did not know  where  the  claimant  had  been  living
    between 1995 and 2012.

54. He knew his parents were alive, but  they  are  not  on  talking  terms
    otherwise he would have known about this.  He was not exaggerating  the
    difficulties that the claimant would face on return to Bangladesh.  The
    majority of people in Bangladesh  relied  on  remittances  from  people
    abroad.  It was put to him that he  could  provide  the  claimant  with
    financial support in Bangladesh.  He answered no, as  he  had  his  own
    family to look after.  He had not realised that the claimant  would  be
    with him for as long as three years.

55. Mr Joynal Uddin was called as a witness.  On 1  November  2010  he  had
    written a letter of support in the capacity of a representative of  the
    Golapgonj Upazela Education Trust UK, which operated from an address in
    Goodmayes,  Ilford,  Essex.   (Mr  Uddin's  home  address  is  also  in
    Goodmayes, Ilford, Essex). He said he  had  known  the  claimant  as  a
    member of "their organisations" for  over  eleven  years.   During  his
    tenure, he had had the opportunity to meet the  claimant  in  different
    activities as a colleague of the Golapgonj Upazela Education Trust  UK.
    He found the claimant  to  be  a  determined,  honest  and  hardworking
    person.  He understood that he was making an application for indefinite
    leave based on the long-residence concession, and he fully  recommended
    and supported his application.

56. In his witness statement, which he signed  on  17  November  2014,  and
    which he adopted as his evidence-in-chief, he said the claimant was his
    paternal cousin, although he now regarded him as his  younger  brother.
    He had known him all his life, especially after he first arrived in the
    UK in 1994.  He felt they had a duty to  support  him  and  ensure  his
    general wellbeing as he had no-one else to turn to for support.  He had
    supported him financially  and  emotionally  over  the  years  and  had
    provided him with a temporary home when needed.

57. In his oral evidence, he said that the claimant was his cousin brother.
     He had turned up at his house in December 1994  unannounced.   He  was
    aged about 13 or 14.  He had come on his own from Birmingham.  He  told
    him he had come from a family who  were  living  in  Birmingham.    The
    claimant had somehow obtained his address.  He had just  come  up  from
    Birmingham for the day.  Mr  Jarvis  asked  Mr  Uddin  whether  he  was
    worried about the claimant's situation, given how  young  he  was.   He
    said he was surprised.  The claimant lived in Birmingham for two  years
    and after that he got jobs at restaurants.  Mr Uddin initially said  he
    did not think the claimant had his own family in the UK.  But  he  then
    agreed that he had a cousin and auntie in Brighton.   Altogether,  they
    had about fifteen or sixteen cousins in the UK.  Mr Jarvis  put  to  Mr
    Uddin that the claimant had lived with his auntie until 2012.  Mr Uddin
    indicated that he did not know one way or the other.  He  said  he  had
    seen the claimant regularly after 1996 when the claimant was working in
    London.  He used to see the claimant every three months or so.

58. In his closing submissions on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State,  Mr
    Jarvis submitted that the evidence relating to the claimant's  presence
    and movements between 1994 and 2001 was conflicting  and  inconsistent.
    There was no corroborative documentary evidence that the  claimant  was
    in the United Kingdom at all before 2001.  Friends  and  relatives  who
    had given  evidence  in  support  of  the  claimant  had  a  motive  to
    exaggerate their evidence in order to assist him in his appeal.

59. In reply, Mr Davison submitted there was nothing inherently  incredible
    about the claimant's account.  He was not  a  reliable  historian,  but
    this was only to be expected given that he was a child  for  the  first
    four years that he was in the United Kingdom; and given  that  some  of
    the matters he was being asked to recall had taken  place  over  twenty
    years ago.

60. Faysal Ahmed was not the owner of the Megana Grill at the time that the
    claimant claimed to have been employed there.   It  was  being  run  by
    Faysal Ahmed's father.  Perhaps his father was employing  the  claimant
    illegally.  Faysal Ahmed was away at university.  Furthermore,  if  the
    whole thing was made up, they could have colluded in order to get their
    story straight on this point.  Another indication that  the  claimant's
    account had not been concocted with the assistance  of  his  supporting
    witnesses was that  the  claimant  had  always  been  consistent  about
    entering the United Kingdom in 1994,  including  when  he  applied  for
    discretionary leave to remain in 2004.   At  that  time  he  needed  to
    establish fourteen years' unlawful residence in order to take advantage
    of the long residence Rule.  So it did not make  sense  that  he  would
    fabricate a date of entry of 1994, as opposed to fabricating a date  of
    entry in 1990.

61. Mr Uddin did not really know the claimant, and it was difficult to  see
    what incentive Mr Uddin would have to lie on the claimant's behalf. But
    Faysal Ahmed had a vested interest in helping the claimant  as  he  was
    useful around the house.

62. Given his age between 1994 and 2001, and the fact that he  was  working
    illegally, it was  credible  that  he  was  not  able  to  produce  any
    documents relating to that period.  The  only  real  evidence  was  the
    original photographs.  He  was  plainly  considerably  younger  in  the
    original photographs than he was now.

63. He submitted that the claimant qualified for leave to remain under Rule
    276ADE, applying Rule 276AO.  Alternatively, the fact that he  had  now
    accrued over twenty years' residence meant  he  should  succeed  in  an
    Article 8 claim outside the Rules.



Discussion and Findings on Remaking

64. The claimant has been consistent about his claimed  date  of  entry  in
    1994,  but  in  most  other  respects  his  account  has  been   wildly
    inconsistent.  In 2004, when his recollection about his movements  over
    the preceding ten years would have been much fresher, the claimant gave
    a materially different account than that which he is giving now.

65. In his 2004 account, he said that after leaving Birmingham he had  gone
    to work at Akash Restaurant in Chippenham for eighteen months.  But  in
    his oral evidence, an eighteen month period of employment in Chippenham
    did not feature at all in his claimed employment history  between  1994
    and 2001.  The implication of the evidence he gave in 2004 was that his
    employment at the restaurant in Chippenham was a significant period  in
    his life, and so it is  not  credible  that  the  claimant  could  have
    completely forgotten this period of his life when asked to give details
    of his alleged employment history between 1994 and 2001.

66. Another notable discrepancy is in that in the 2004 statement he claimed
    to be working at the Raj Restaurant in Devon, presumably staying  there
    during the week, and returning  to  his  aunt's  home  in  Brighton  at
    weekends.  But in his oral evidence, he claimed that he had  worked  at
    the  Raj  Restaurant  in  Honiton,  Devon,  immediately  after  leaving
    Birmingham in 1996.

67. It is highly significant that the people who are, on his  own  account,
    best placed to testify to his presence in the United  Kingdom  in  this
    period have not come  forward,  or  been  asked  to  come  forward,  as
    supporting witnesses.  On his own account, the claimant was  very  well
    treated by Mr Hussain's family members in Birmingham with whom he lived
    after Mr Hussain allegedly abandoned him here.  In  the  circumstances,
    it is not credible that the claimant would not have remained in contact
    with Mr Hussain's family members, including  Mr  Abdul,  who  allegedly
    gave him  an  apprenticeship  in  his  restaurant  in  Birmingham,  and
    effectively acted as his mentor.  His claim to have lost  contact  with
    Mr Abdul is thus inherently lacking in  credibility,  and  it  is  also
    undermined by the fact that some of the letters in support  purportedly
    emanate from people who live in the West  Midlands,  including  one  at
    page 210 of the bundle from a person who claims to have met  him  at  a
    wedding in Wednesbury, West Midlands, in 1998; and  a  letter  from  Mr
    Mohammed Ali Ahad who says that he first met the claimant in Birmingham
    at his mother-in-law's house in 1996.

68. Mr Davison characterised the original photographs of the  appellant  as
    being the only real documentary evidence of the claimant's presence  in
    the United Kingdom as early as 1995.  I find that the claimant does not
    look considerably younger in these photographs  than  he  does  in  the
    other copied photographs in the bundle, and I find  that  he  does  not
    look as young as 15.  He looks as if he is in his early twenties, which
    would  be  consistent  with  the  date  printed  on  the  back  of  the
    photographs.   The  date  on  the  back  of  the  photographs  is  also
    consistent with the bank statements  at  pages  135  following.   These
    statements show that the claimant opened  an  account  at  the  NatWest
    branch in South Woodford on 16 August 2001, giving as his home  address
    the Chelmsford Road address of Mr Faysal Ahmed. So I am satisfied to  a
    high degree of probability that the original photographs were taken  of
    the claimant outside Mr Faysal Ahmed's home in October 2001.

69. Around the same time, the claimant registered with  a  GP  practice  in
    Ilford, giving as  his  address  the  same  Castleton  Road,  Goodmayes
    address which is given by Mr Joynal Uddin in his subsequent letter of 1
    November 2010.  The fact that in the 2010 letter Mr Uddin says  he  has
    known the claimant "for over  eleven  years"  rather  than  since  1994
    (which would be for over fifteen years)  reinforces  Mr  Jarvis's  case
    that Mr Uddin, and indeed Mr Ahmed, are simply not  telling  the  truth
    about when the claimant first came to the UK, and hence when they first
    met him in the UK.

70. The claimant has produced pay  slips  issued  to  him  by  the  Viceroy
    Limited Restaurant in  2002  and  2003,  and  extensive  documentation,
    including P60s, to show that he was employed at the Raj  Restaurant  in
    Honiton, Devon, between 2004 and 2007.  The fact the claimant has  been
    able   to   produce   documents   evidencing   employment   at    these
    establishments, although he was present in the country illegally, shows
    that he should have been able to produce documentary  evidence  of  his
    claimed employment in the United Kingdom prior to 2001.

71. The claimant's credibility, and Mr Ahmed's credibility as a  supporting
    witness, is further undermined by a letter dated 29 October  2010  from
    Mr  Nurul  Islam,  General  Secretary   of   the   Bangladesh   Welfare
    Association,. Mr Islam wrote to confirm that he  had  personally  known
    the claimant of the Chelmsford Road address (Mr Ahmed's  home  address)
    for the last ten years.  Mr Islam's evidence is significant  as  he  is
    ostensibly an independent witness.  Not only does Mr Islam only confirm
    the claimant's presence in the UK for the last ten  years  -  from  the
    year 2000 - as opposed to the last sixteen years, but he also  confirms
    that to his  knowledge  the  claimant  lives  at  Faysal  Ahmed's  home
    address.  But according to both the claimant and Mr Ahmed, the claimant
    did not start living with Mr Ahmed until 2012. There is no  documentary
    evidence of the claimant residing with his aunt  in  Brighton,  whereas
    there is documentary evidence indicative of the claimant residing  with
    Mr Faysal Ahmed as early as 2001.

72. Mr Davison submitted that if the claimant's claimed date of  entry  was
    fabricated, he would have claimed that he  had  entered  in  1990,  not
    1994, in  order  to  take  advantage  of  the  fourteen  year  unlawful
    residence Rule.  I do not find this to be a compelling argument, as the
    claimant might have calculated that a claimed date of entry of 1994 was
    likely to be found more credible.

73. Although  Mr  Faysal  Ahmed  may  not  have  been  running  the  family
    restaurant in 1996/1997, it is not credible that  he  would  have  been
    unaware that the claimant was living  and  working  at  the  restaurant
    during this period, if this was in fact the case.

74. Mr  Uddin's  account  of  the  claimant  turning  up  on  his  doorstep
    unannounced in December 1994 is wholly lacking in  credibility,  as  is
    the account of the claimant meeting Faysal Ahmed and his friend at  the
    Megana Grill Restaurant in 1995.   Mr  Virdee  said  the  claimant  was
    introduced to him by Mr Ahmed as a friend of  his,  but  Mr  Ahmed  had
    never met the claimant before. So it is not credible he was  introduced
    as a friend. No credible explanation has  been  given  as  to  how  the
    claimant came to be at the restaurant in the first place, given that he
    was allegedly living in Birmingham at the time; he was not  working  at
    the restaurant; and no identifiable adult had brought him along to  the
    restaurant as a party guest.

75. In conclusion, none of the supporting  witnesses  is  reliable  on  the
    question of when they first met the claimant in the United Kingdom, and
    none is reliable on the  claimant's  presence  in  the  United  Kingdom
    before 2001.  Alternatively, even if credence is given to  their  first
    alleged encounters with the claimant in the UK, each first encounter is
    entirely consistent with the claimant  being  present  in  the  country
    temporarily as a visitor, and then  returning  to  Bangladesh  at  some
    point in 1995 with the person or persons who  brought  him  here  as  a
    visitor.

76. On any view, I find that the claimant has not discharged the burden  of
    proving that he has been continuously resident in  the  United  Kingdom
    since 1994, as opposed to having being  continuously  resident  in  the
    United Kingdom since 2001.

77. Accordingly, the claimant does not qualify for leave to remain  on  the
    ground that he has accrued at least twenty years' unlawful residence in
    the UK.  Turning to an Article 8 claim outside the Rules, questions one
    and two of the Razgar test must be answered in his  favour  as  he  has
    been continuously resident here since 2001.  Questions three  and  four
    of the Razgar test must be answered  in  favour  of  the  Secretary  of
    State, and so the crucial question is whether the proposed interference
    with the appellant's  private  life  rights  is  proportionate,  having
    regard to the public interest considerations identified in Section 117B
    of the 2002 Act as amended by the Immigration Act 2014.

78. In light of my primary  findings  of  fact,  there  are  no  compelling
    circumstances which militate against the claimant's removal.  There are
    not very significant obstacles to  the  claimant's  reintegration  into
    life in Bangladesh.  The skills which he has acquired here  as  a  chef
    can be used by him to obtain employment on  return.   If  he  has  been
    financially supported by friends and relatives here such as  Mr  Faysal
    Ahmed, it is likely that he will be able to continue to  look  to  such
    friends and relatives for continued  financial  support  in  Bangladesh
    while he is re-establishing himself  there.   The  cost  of  living  in
    Bangladesh is much lower than it is here, and so the  financial  outlay
    required to support  the  claimant  in  Bangladesh  is  correspondingly
    modest. Although the claimant can apparently  speak  some  English,  he
    does not display a  high  level  of  integration  as  he  required  the
    services of a Bengali interpreter in order to give his evidence.  He is
    not financially independent. He has worked illegally and he  is  likely
    to have entered the  country  illegally  in  2001.   I  find  that  the
    proposed interference strikes a fair balance between, on the one  hand,
    his rights and interests, and, on the other hand, the  wider  interests
    of society. It is proportionate to the legitimate public end sought  to
    be achieved, namely the maintenance of firm and  effective  immigration
    controls.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law,  and
accordingly the  decision  is  set  aside  and  the  following  decision  is
substituted: the claimant's appeal is dismissed on all grounds raised.

I make no anonymity direction.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

