
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/40474/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:  Field House               |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On: 3rd May 2016                     |On: 26th May 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     DMP
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr D. Ayodele, Goodfellow Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of India born on the 8th February 1974.


 2. In a decision promulgated on the 1st June 2015 the First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Nicholls) dismissed his appeal, on human rights grounds, against
    a decision to remove him from the United Kingdom.   On the 20th  August
    2015 permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge PJM Hollingworth.    The  matter  came  before  the
    Upper Tribunal on the 7th December 2015 and in  a  decision  dated  the
    same day I set the determination of the First-tier Tribunal aside.  The
    'error of law' decision is attached. In summary the errors of law  were
    identified as follows:


          i) The Appellant's case rested on the presence in the UK  of  his
             two children, in particular that of his son who  was,  by  the
             date of the applications for leave to  remain,  a  "qualifying
             child", that is to say a child who has spent  seven  years  or
             more in the United Kingdom. That child had  earlier  succeeded
             in an appeal before the First-tier Tribunal and his  case  was
             being reconsidered by the Respondent.  It  was  common  ground
             that  the  outcome  of  that  review  was  capable  of   being
             significant (if not determinative) for the  Appellant's  case.
             The First-tier Tribunal refused to adjourn the appeal. I found
             that to be, in the circumstances, procedurally unfair;


         ii) The First-tier Tribunal had misdirected itself to  the  proper
             test.  In  assessing  whether  it  was  'reasonable'  for  the
             Appellant's child to now leave the UK the Tribunal had treated
             that question  as  if  it  were  a  proportionality  balancing
             exercise conducted 'outside of the  rules'.  The  question  of
             'reasonableness' in paragraphs 276ADE(1)(i), EX.1 and  section
             117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 is
             not the same as whether removal is 'proportionate'.


 3. The re-making of the decision was delayed pending promulgation  of  the
    decision in PD and Others (a Article 8 - conjoined family  claims)  Sri
    Lanka [2016] UKUT 108 (IAC). This reported decision of  a  Presidential
    panel establishes the following principles to apply:


           . In cases of conjoined family human rights  claims  the  proper
             approach is to first consider the position of each  individual
             under the Immigration Rules, and  then  move  on  to  look  at
             Article 8 'outside of the Rules'
           . That does not mean that factors relevant to the  family  as  a
             whole must be excluded from individual assessments
           . The fact that a child's parents are without leave  will  be  a
             relevant consideration to whether or not it is reasonable that
             he leave the UK; it cannot however be  determinative  of  that
             question
           . 'Reasonable' does not mean 'proportionate', or  'exceptional':
             it is self-evidently a less exacting and demanding threshold
           . The first point of call in addressing reasonableness  will  be
             that made in accordance with s55 of the  Borders,  Citizenship
             and Immigration Act 2009 - the 'best interests' question
           . The next material consideration is the  Secretary  of  State's
             own policy, as  expressed  in  the  Immigration  Directorates'
             Instructions[1] and in  particular  the  statement  that  "the
             longer the child has resided in the UK, the more  the  balance
             will begin to swing in  terms  of  it  being  unreasonable  to
             expect the child to leave the UK and strong  reasons  will  be
             required  in  order  to  refuse  a  case  with  continuous  UK
             residence of more than seven years."
           . If it is 'unreasonable' for the  child  to  leave  the  United
             Kingdom the position of his parents must be considered outside
             of the rules, assessing proportionality in light of  s117B  of
             the 2002 Act, and in particular s117B(6)
           . Applying Treebhawon and others (section 117B(6))  [2015]  UKUT
             674 (IAC), a finding that it would not be reasonable  for  the
             child to leave would mean that it would not be in  the  public
             interest for his parents to be removed


 4. By the time that the matter came back before  me  there  had  been  two
    significant developments in the factual circumstances  of  the  family.
    The eldest child had now become a British  citizen:  his  passport  was
    produced at the hearing. Due to the passage of time the second child of
    the family had, having been born in the UK in June  2009,  accrued  six
    years and eleven months' residence.

    My Findings

 5. The Appellant's children are not parties to this appeal. At  the  error
    of law hearing in December 2015 the Respondent had accepted  (that  day
    represented by SPO Ms Savage) that the existence of  the  children  was
    nevertheless a material factor in the Appellant's case.  This  must  be
    so, by operation of s117B, and indeed the guidance in PD.


 6. I begin by considering the best interests  of  the  Appellant's  eldest
    child. That child is now a British  national,  and  a  citizen  of  the
    European Union. He was born in the UK  and  has  never  lived  anywhere
    else.  In common with the child in PD, this is a young man who  attends
    school in the UK, who has established  friendships  here  and  who  has
    developed an entrenched private  life  of  great  significance  to  his
    personal development. Mr Wilding was quite entitled  to  point  to  the
    paucity of evidence of this: there were for instance  no  letters  from
    school friends, or sports awards, nor indeed certificates demonstrating
    academic excellence of the type produced by the  child  in  PD.  It  is
    however uncontested fact that this child has spent his entire  life  in
    the UK, and for the reasons clearly expressed in the  IDI  (and  indeed
    the numerous ministerial statements that preceded it) that in itself is
    a factor of great weight. Absent evidence  that  this  child  has  been
    secluded from his peers it can be assumed that his private  life  could
    not be qualitatively distinguished from that of any other  10  year-old
    living in Surrey.   It follows that his ties with his country of ethnic
    origin, India, are minimal: his parents are nationals;  his  sister  is
    entitled to citizenship; that is his cultural heritage;  he  has  never
    been there and is now a  British,  not  Indian,  national.   I  do  not
    discount the possibility that he would be able to gain entry to  India,
    and I find that supported by his parents he would be able to adjust  to
    life in that country. He would be able to attend a different school and
    no doubt in time make friends.   Having weighed all of those factors  I
    am satisfied that his best interests lie in maintaining the status  quo
    in the United Kingdom: the stability of his education, friendships  and
    home-life point towards it being in his best interests to remain here.


 7. I now turn to consider the Respondent's guidance. At 11.2.3 the  IDI[2]
    asks the question "would it be unreasonable to expect a British Citizen
    child to leave the UK?", to which the answer is given:
         "Save in cases involving criminality, the decision maker  must  not
         take a decision in relation to the parent or  primary  carer  of  a
         British Citizen child where the effect of that decision would be to
         force that British child to leave the EU, regardless of the age  of
         that child. This reflects the European Court of Justice judgment in
         Zambrano".
 8. There is no suggestion that this family have the ability or entitlement
    to move anywhere else within the EU.  I find that a decision to  remove
    his parents to India would mean that this British child would  have  to
    move with them.


 9. Taking into account my finding that it would be in  this  child's  best
    interests to remain in the UK, and the Respondent's  guidance,  I  find
    that it would not be 'reasonable' for the Appellant's  child  to  leave
    the UK.

10. Now I must apply those findings to the  Appellant's  circumstances.  Mr
    Ayodele did nothing more to prepare for the hearing than  turn  up  and
    mention Treebhowan. He relied  on  the  President's  interpretation  of
    section 117B(6) to the effect that it provides a  'trump'  card.  If  a
    parent of a qualifying child can show that it would not  be  reasonable
    for the child to leave the UK, there  is  no  public  interest  in  the
    parent's removal, no matter how the scales were otherwise  weighted  in
    favour of that outcome.  Ambiguity there is none.  If Mr  Ayodele,  and
    the President, are correct, the Appellant must win his appeal.

11. Mr Wilding strongly objected  to  the  application  of  Treebhowan.  He
    pointed out that the Secretary  of  State  has  an  entirely  different
    interpretation of s117B of the 2002 Act but her case cannot at  present
    be considered by the higher courts because Treebhowan  remains  an  un-
    appealable decision, reported as it was as 'error of law'  stage.   The
    Secretary of State is therefore stuck with a decision that she does not
    like.  With  that  in  mind  I  have  considered  the  matter  in   the
    alternative, in light of Mr Wildings submissions. He pointed  out  that
    the adults in this family took a calculated decision to overstay  their
    visas ten years ago. The First-tier  Tribunal  heard  and  rejected  as
    untrue the reasons put  forward  for  that.    It  found  there  to  be
    "obviously deliberate breaches" of the Immigration Rules.  The  parents
    have not demonstrated that they are able to speak English, or that they
    are financially independent. Their statements are silent  on  how  they
    might have been surviving since their arrival in the United Kingdom and
    it can be assumed that one or both parents is working  illegally.   The
    relationship between the Appellant and his wife  was  established  when
    both had precarious immigration status.    I  have  considered  all  of
    those matters, and the First-tier  Tribunal's  finding,  with  which  I
    agree, that it would be possible for the family to readjust to live  in
    India, albeit with some difficulties.  I  have  weighed  all  of  those
    factors in the balance, attaching great weight to the  public  interest
    in maintaining immigration control. However in this case  I  find  that
    the best interests of the child, taken with the clear statement in  the
    Respondent's guidance in respect of  British  children,  dictates  that
    removal of this family would be a  disproportionate  interference  with
    their Article 8 private lives, established as they are in the UK.


12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

13. I remake the decision in the appeal by  allowing  it  on  human  rights
    (Article 8) grounds.

14. The Appellant is an overstayer and on the facts pertaining to his case,
    has no right to anonymity. His identification would however lead to the
    identification of his minor children so for that reason I  am  prepared
    to make a direction for anonymity in the following terms:

         "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
         Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
         family.  This direction applies both to the Appellant  and  to  the
         Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to
         contempt of court proceedings".



                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                               22nd May 2016
















                      APPENDIX A: ERROR OF LAW DECISION
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/40474/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:  Field House               |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On: 7th December 2015                |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     DMP
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Ayodele. Goodfellow Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Savage ,  Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                         DECISION ON 'ERROR OF LAW'

     1. The Appellant is a national of India born  on  the  [  ]  1974.  He
        appeals with permission[3] the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
        (Judge Nicholls)[4] to dismiss his appeal  against  a  decision  to
        remove  him  from  the  United  Kingdom  pursuant  to  s10  of  the
        Immigration and Asylum Act 1999[5].   That  decision  followed  the
        rejection of the Appellant's application for  leave  to  remain  on
        Article 8 grounds.


     2. The Appellant came to the United Kingdom in 2001 as a visitor.   He
        stayed with an elderly aunt in London. He overstayed.  In  2005  he
        was introduced by relatives  to  [SP].   She  was  also  an  Indian
        national who had overstayed her visit visa. They  were  married  in
        Ganesh Temple in Thornton Heath on the [ ] 2005.  They have had two
        children, a boy born on the [ ] 2005 and a girl born  on  the  [  ]
        2009. The Appellant avers that his father in India did not  approve
        of the marriage to [SP] and disowned  him.    This  rift  with  the
        family caused the Appellant, his wife and children to be thrown out
        of his aunt's house. The Appellant further stated that he  had  not
        wanted to return to India because he had  substantial  debts  there
        and no means of paying them. He has been supporting his  family  in
        the UK by working illegally.

     3. On the 3rd December 2012 the whole family, mother, father  and  two
        children made  applications  for  leave  to  remain  on  Article  8
        grounds: these were based on the adults' long residence in the  UK,
        and the fact that his children had been born  and  grown  up  here.
        They did not know anything of life in India and he wanted  them  to
        stay in the United Kingdom and pursue their educations. On the 12th
        December 2012 a separate application was made,  in  similar  terms,
        for the Appellant's son.


     4.  In  response  to  the  Appellant's  application   the   Respondent
        considered the application under "Appendix FM". Since Ms Patel  was
        not lawfully settled in the UK  the  Appellant  could  not  succeed
        under the 'partner' route.  His children were not British  and  nor
        had they, at the date of application, lived in  the  UK  for  seven
        years.  Furthermore it would be reasonable to expect them to return
        to India.  The Appellant had not lived in the UK long  enough,  and
        was too  old,  to  qualify  under  any  of  the  alternative  'long
        residence' provisions in 276ADE.  He had lived in  India  until  he
        was 27  years  old  and  could  not  demonstrate  that  there  were
        significant obstacles to his reintegration there.   The  Respondent
        could find no exceptional circumstances to warrant a grant of leave
        outside of the Rules.

     5. In a separate decision, the Respondent also refused the application
        made on behalf of  the  Appellant's  son.   An  appeal  was  lodged
        against  that  decision  with  the   First-tier   Tribunal,   which
        inexplicably refused a request for the appeals of the whole  family
        to be linked together. So it was that the son's appeal was heard in
        isolation on the 9th March 2015. The  First-tier  Tribunal  allowed
        his appeal to the limited extent that the  matter  was  purportedly
        'remitted' to the Secretary of State so that consideration could be
        given to s55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.

     6. Prior to the Appellant's appeal hearing his representative  applied
        in writing for the matter to be adjourned pending the  Respondent's
        decision in the review of his son's  case.   That  application  was
        refused. The matter was listed, the appeal heard and  the  negative
        decision promulgated on the 1st June 2015.


    Error of Law

     7. I am satisfied that this determination must be set  aside  for  the
        following reasons.


     8. First, both determination and grounds  of  appeal  appear  to  have
        proceeded on the basis that  paragraph  EX.1  of  Appendix  FM  was
        somehow applicable to the Appellant. The  determination  devotes  a
        full two pages to considering whether it was 'reasonable' that  the
        Appellant's child leaves the United Kingdom in  this  context,  and
        the grounds of appeal challenge the factual underpinnings  of  that
        analysis. This entire exercise  was  a  waste  of  time  since  the
        Respondent had already conclusively demonstrated,  in  her  refusal
        letter of 22nd January 2014, that EX.1 had no  application  to  the
        Appellant. He  had  neither  managed  to  satisfy  the  eligibility
        criteria as a 'partner' nor 'parent'.  EX.1 is not  a  freestanding
        provision. It can only be considered if  the  applicant  has  shown
        himself 'eligible' under Appendix FM: see Sabir (Appendix FM - EX.1
        not free standing) [2014] UKUT 63 (IAC). This had not been done and
        the only possible ground of  appeal  open  to  this  Appellant  was
        Article 8 outside of the Rules.

     9. The assessment of Article 8 outside  of  the  Rules  called  for  a
        holistic assessment of the Appellant's circumstances, and following
        Beoku-Betts [2008] UKHL 39, that included an analysis of the impact
        of removal on his family members. Relevant  to  that  consideration
        then, was the position of the Appellant's son. If  the  Appellant's
        son could show that it was not reasonable to expect  him  to  leave
        the United Kingdom now,  that would be a decisive consideration  in
        the Appellant's own case: see section 117B(6) of  the  Nationality,
        Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

    10. A central matter to be decided was whether the Appellant's son  met
        the requirements of the Rules.  That was the very matter  that  the
        Respondent was actively considering at the date of the hearing.  Mr
        Ayodele argues that in  these  circumstances  the  proper  approach
        should have been to wait until  the  outcome  of  the  Respondent's
        review was known. I agree that it was arguably procedurally  unfair
        for the First-tier Tribunal to supplant its  own  assessment  of  a
        matter  which  another  Tribunal  had  specifically  directed   the
        Respondent to decide, a matter which  went  to  the  heart  of  the
        Appellant's appeal.  I am further satisfied that in  so  doing  the
        First-tier Tribunal made a discrete error of law in that it appears
        to   have   conflated   the   test   of    'reasonableness'    with
        'proportionality' in the sense that it would be analysed outside of
        the Rules; see for instance paragraph 23 where the factors in  Part
        5 of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 are weighed in
        the balance.

      Decisions

    11. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an  error  of
        law and it is set aside.


    12. The matter will be re-made before me at a later date. The re-making
        is adjourned pending forthcoming Presidential guidance on paragraph
        117B(6) and 'reasonable' within the context of 276ADE(1)(iv).

    13. I was not asked to make any direction for  anonymity,  and  on  the
        facts I see no reason to do so.  If either party would like such  a
        direction, an application should be made at the remaking.



                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                             7th December
                                    2015
                           -----------------------
[1] "Family Life (as a partner or parent) and Private Life: 10 Year Routes"
[2] supra
[3] Permission granted on the 20th August 2015 by First-tier Tribunal Judge
PJM Hollingworth
[4] Determination promulgated 1st June 2015
[5] Decision dated 22nd January 2014

