
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/40278/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 21 August 2014                             |On 2 September 2014          |
|Prepared 21 August 2014                       |                             |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Mr Seedy Saidy
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms L Tinubu, Cambridge Immigration Legal Centre

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   In this determination the Appellant is referred to as the Secretary  of
    State and the Respondent is referred to as the claimant.

2.   The claimant, a national of Gambia, date of birth 4 May 1974,  appealed
    against the Secretary of State's decision dated 18  September  2013  to
    make removal directions under Section 10 of the Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 1999, a human rights/asylum claim having  been  refused  ,  a  form
    IS.151A having been served on 28 May 2013.

3.   The claimant's appeal against  that  decision  came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Thew who, on 12 June  2014,  allowed  the  appeal  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR.  The Secretary of State was  granted  permission
    to appeal by First-tier Tribunal Judge Chambers on 2 July 2014.

4.   The core of the Secretary of States's  challenge  is  one  relating  to
    reasons being given and in particular it is also said  that  the  judge
    considered the Article 8 issues  and  its  outcome  before  considering
    whether there were compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised
    under the Rules as the first step in the process.

5.   It is clear that at paragraph 70 of the  determination  the  judge  set
    out an element of the case of Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules -  correct
    approach) [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC). Mr  Justice  Cranston  set  out,  with
    reference to the well-recognised cases of  MF  [2012]  UKUT  00393  and
    Nagre v SSHD [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin), the consideration of whether  the
    claimant can succeed under the Rules  and  if  not  whether  there  are
    compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised under the Rules to
    consider Article 8 and the merits of an Article 8 claim outside of  the
    Rules.

6.   Having set out that format the judge at paragraphs  71  to  72  of  the
    determination proceeded to highlight a number of material factors which
    persuaded her that Article 8 factors were sufficiently engaged to allow
    the appeal on that basis.  It is unfortunate that the judge did not set
    out, as might be expected the correct approach identified in Razgar and
    put in order in a coherent fashion  the  appropriate  analysis  of  the
    questions that needed to  be  addressed.   However,  the  Secretary  of
    State's grounds of appeal are not founded upon that as a material error
    of law, rather the issue of whether or not  there  has  been  a  proper
    approach to the consideration of those compelling  circumstances  prior
    to the assessment of Article 8 outside of the immigration rules.

7.   In the circumstances, although for my part I would have  regarded  that
    as an error of law, in the light of the point not being taken  and  the
    arguments that I have heard I am satisfied that it is not necessary  to
    consider that matter any further.

8.   The judge had a range of information before her, not least  some  which
    the Secretary of State had addressed in the Reasons for Refusal Letter,
    particularly in relation to the effects on the  younger  child  of  the
    Claimant's partner, particularly Niamh, and what impact it  might  have
    upon her of  the Claimant's removal bearing in mind the  evidence  that
    the judge had received on the extent to which the  Appellant  played  a
    part in her life and indeed in the life of his  family  generally  with
    the stepchildren and his partner.

9.   On a plain  reading  of  the  judge's  determination  it  is  certainly
    arguable that the judge first decided that the appeal should be allowed
    under Article 8. Then in paragraph 83 of the  determination  the  judge
    set it out that the issues  under  Article  8  amounted  to  compelling
    reasons not sufficiently recognised and  then  said  "on  the  evidence
    before me I conclude that they do."

10.  Ms Tinubu submits that the Secretary of  States  objection  is  one  of
    form or a procedural objection to layout rather than to the substantive
    merits She sought to persuade me that elements recited in paragraphs 71
    to 82 were sufficient to show there were compelling  circumstances  not
    sufficiently recognised under the Rules.

11.  I have reached the conclusion that the determination is poorly  drafted
    and unstructured in parts.  However, it seemed to me that the judge did
    conclude  that  there  were   circumstances   that   were   compelling,
    particularly  affecting  a  child  and  the  impact  upon  her  of  the
    disruption and so forth associated with the complications  relating  to
    the appeal.  In the circumstances the other factors, whilst I might not
    have found them so compelling, the  judge  plainly  thought  they  were
    important matters and particularly in relation to the  implications  of
    removal to the Gambia for  the  child  an  issue,  which  was  properly
    recognised by Ms Pal, not dealt with under the Rules but  rather  under
    statute being Section 55 of the BCIA 2009.

12.   It seemed to me understandably that the person  settling  the  grounds
    of the application felt that there was  an  issue  that  needed  to  be
    addressed. I do not criticise either the  person  who  drafted  of  the
    grounds or indeed the judge who granted permission.

13.  Whilst there was in effect an argument being run by the  Claimant  with
    reference to a near-miss approach it did not seem to me that  added  to
    the point and nor were the submissions by Ms Pal particularly  directed
    at those.

14.  In the  circumstances,  whilst  I  might  not  have  reached  the  same
    decision, let alone for the reasons given, that does  not  disclose  an
    error of law in making the findings of fact and  the  decision  derived
    from them.  I have in mind the decisions of R (Iran)  [2005]  EWCA  982
    and E & R [2004] QB 1044 (CA) which identify the scope which  has  been
    much repeated by the Court of Appeal  seeking  to  restrict  the  Upper
    Tribunal from substituting its own and different views to that  reached
    by a First-tier Tribunal Judge.  In these circumstances,  although  the
    grounds are not without merit,  I  do  not  find  that  the  errors  of
    presentation and of analysis demonstrate that there is  an  absence  of
    adequate reasons or that the judge has failed  to  consider  compelling
    circumstances.  The presentation as the judge  made  it  prior  to  the
    conclusion on compelling circumstances was poor but did not disclose  a
    material error of law in the overall assessment of the important issues
    raised in the appeal.

15.  The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed. The  original  Tribunal's
    decision stands.



Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
