
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/40723/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 14 January 2015                    |On 22 January 2015                    |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             AURANGZEB AURANGZEB
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss M Niama, Legal Representative, Berkshire Law
Chamber


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant respondent is as citizen of  Pakistan  and  his  date  of
    birth is 26 August 1977.  I shall refer to him as the appellant  as  he
    was before the First-tier Tribunal.

2.   The appellant made an application to vary his leave  under  Tier  1  of
    the points-based system on  12  December  2012.   His  application  was
    refused by the Secretary of State in a decision of 27  September  2013.
    It was noted in the decision that the appellant had been  here  legally
    as a student since 2009.  His application was refused on the basis of a
    letter that that was  submitted  by  the  appellant  from  Faysal  Bank
    Limited of 11 April 2013.  It was asserted by the  Secretary  of  State
    that the letter was false on the basis and this had been  confirmed  by
    the issuing authority. The application was refused under  Rule  322(1A)
    of the Immigration Rules.  This is a mandatory ground of refusal  which
    reads as follows:

         "(1A) Where false representations have been made or false documents
         or information have been submitted whether or not material  to  the
         application, and whether or not to the  applicant's  knowledge,  or
         material  facts  have  not  been  disclosed,  in  relation  to  the
         application, or in order to obtain documents from the Secretary  of
         State or a third party required in support of the application."


3.   The appellant appealed against the decision of the Secretary of  State.
     He asserted that there is no evidence that the  document  produced  is
    false and that the Secretary of State cannot discharge  the  burden  of
    proof.  The appeal was allowed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal P  A
    Grant  Hutchinson  following  a  hearing  on  13  September  2014.  The
    determination is dated 19 October  2014.   The  Judge  found  that  the
    Secretary of State had discharged the burden of proof and  allowed  the
    appeal under the Rules.

4.   Permission to appeal was granted to the Secretary of State by Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Saffer in a decision of 4 December 2014.   Thus
    the matter came before me.

5.   There is a rule 24 response from the appellant in which it is  asserted
    that there is no error of law and it was open  to  the  Judge  to  make
    findings in the appellant's favour.  The appellant opposes  the  appeal
    and it is argued that the Judge gave  cogent  reasons  to  justify  his
    decision and that his finding is rational.

The Evidence before the FtT and the Findings Made by the FtT.

6.   The appellant in support of his application  submitted  a  letter  from
    Faysal Bank Limited of 11 April 2013 (F of  the  respondent's  bundle).
    The author of the letter is  Danish  Hadi,  a  relations  manager  from
    Faysal Bank Limited and it is from an address in Karachi. In the letter
    it is asserted that the appellant and Mr  Quereshi  are  joint  account
    holders of an account which ends in the numbers 51.  Mr Hadi gives  the
    balance of the account.

7.   The appellant  submitted  a  bundle  that  was  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and which was received by the Tribunal on  26  September  2014
    (one day before the  hearing).   It  is  asserted  in  the  appellant's
    witness statement that the letter is genuine and the  appellant  relies
    on a further letter from Faysal Bank of 7 July  2014  (page  3  of  the
    appellant's bundle). The letter is from Faysal Bank in Karachi  and  it
    is addressed "To Whom It May  Concern"  and  it  refers  to  the  joint
    account of Mr Quereshi and the appellant which ends in the  numbers  51
    and it states as follows:

         "This certificate is being issued on the specific  request  of  the
         customer without any risk or responsibility on the part of the bank
         or any of its officers."


8.   It certifies that the account holders have been maintaining an  account
    since 6 December 2012 and the certificate is signed by two individuals.
     No typed names appear and the status of the individuals who signed the
    letter is not clear.

9.   The Secretary of State relies on a DVR (document  verification  report)
    which refers to the letter from Faysal Bank Limited of 11  April  2013.
    The contact is Mr Irfan Ali who is the assistant manager at the account
    maintenance unit of Faysal  Bank  Limited  at  an  address  in  Lahore.
    According to Mr Ali the account number written on the letter  does  not
    exist and the bank  statement  is  not  genuine.  He  refers  to  email
    correspondence between the bank and the immigration liaison officer  in
    Islamabad.

10.  The material findings of the Judge are contained at paragraphs  17  and
    18 of the determination and are as follows:

         "17. The only reason that this application [h]as  been  refused  is
         that the respondent does not accept  that  the  bank  letters  from
         Faysal Bank Limited were genuine.  If they were  genuine  then  the
         appellant would  [have]  been  entitled  to  the  required  points.
         Essential to the respondent's position is how much  weight  can  be
         given  to  the  Verification  Report.   Said  report  is  based  on
         information  provided  for  a  Mr  Irfan  Ali,  Assistant  Manager,
         accountant maintenance unit of a department based  in  Lahore.  The
         emails lodged in support of said support are brief in the  extreme.
         The appellant made the point that his account is in Karachi and has
         lodged letters in support of the maintenance of  the  existence  of
         the account.  In these circumstances I cannot find the verification
         report persuasive and accordingly the appeal is successful.


         18. I do not accept the reasons given  by  the  respondent  in  the
         refusal to allow entry clearance to the appellant.  The  respondent
         has not discharged the burden of proof and the reasons given by the
         respondent do not justify the refusal. Therefore  the  respondent's
         decision  is  not  in  according  with  the  law   and   applicable
         Immigration Rules."


The Grounds Seeking Leave to Appeal and Oral Submissions

11.  The grounds seeking leave to appeal argue  that  the  Judge  failed  to
    give adequate reasons why he gave no weight  to  the  DVR  and  why  he
    preferred the appellant's documents.   The  Judge  did  not  take  into
    account the Presenting Officer's submissions  regarding  the  new  bank
    letter provided by the appellant  and  has  provided  no  reasoning  in
    relation to those submissions.

12.  I heard submissions from both parties at the  hearing  before  me.   Mr
    Walker relied on the grounds of appeal and Miss Niama made submissions.
     She argued there is no error of law and that the Judge was entitled to
    reach the conclusion that he did.  The actual branch in Karachi was not
    contacted by the respondent at any point and there  was  no  reasonable
    explanation for this. The document verification report as a  result  is
    inadequate. She reminded me that the burden of proof is to  the  higher
    end of the balance of  probabilities.   In  her  view  the  failure  to
    contact the branch in Karachi is an inconsistency in the  Secretary  of
    State's evidence.  The appellant's  account  was  in  Karachi  and  not
    Lahore.

Error of Law

13.  In my view the Judge made a material error of law.  He gave  inadequate
    reasons for finding that the Secretary of State had not discharged  the
    burden of proof.  I have taken on board the submissions  made  by  Miss
    Niama but in my view there is no substance in them.

14.  That the branch in Karachi was  not  contacted  by  the  ECO  does  not
    undermine the veracity of the DVR.  Contact was made with  the  account
    maintenance  unit  in  Lahore  which  appears  to  me  to  be  entirely
    appropriate.  There is no reason why the ECO should have contacted  the
    branch in Karachi. There is no reason given by the  appellant  why  the
    information  given  by  the  account  maintenance  unit  would  not  be
    accurate.  It is not suggested that there was any  misunderstanding  as
    to where the appellant's account was held. It is  clear  from  the  DVR
    that it was understood by the ECO and the contact that the  appellant's
    account is held at the branch in Karachi.

15.  I set aside the decision pursuant to Section 12(2A)  Tribunals,  Courts
    and Enforcement Act 2007. I remake the decision.  No  further  evidence
    was produced by the appellant in accordance with the directions of  the
    Upper Tribunal which were issued with the grant of permission.

16.  At the hearing before me Miss Niama submitted a  series  of  statements
    relating to telephone calls made by the appellant  which  according  to
    the appellant show that he contacted the  Faysal  Bank  in  Karachi  on
    several occasions by telephone between May 2014 and November 2014.   Mr
    Walker objected to the admission of the evidence.  It  was  not  before
    the First-tier Tribunal and  it  had  not  been  served  and  filed  in
    accordance with the directions of the  Upper  Tribunal.  There  was  no
    reason given by Miss Niama for the late production of this evidence and
    I do not admit it.     In any event, considering the  evidence  in  the
    context of the evidence as a whole, it is not  reliable  in  accordance
    with Tanveer  Ahmed  [2002]  UKAIT  00439  and  does  not  further  the
    appellant's case.

17.  There is a  detailed  DVR  report  in  which  the  conclusions  of  the
    Secretary of State are  clearly  set  out.  The  appellant  denies  the
    allegation but his evidence in my view is  inadequate  and  lacking  in
    detail. The letter produced by the appellant from the bank  of  7  July
    2014 does not adequately address the issues. The author of  the  letter
    is not clearly identified and it does not refer to the letter submitted
    by the appellant with his application and  there  is  no  reference  to
    Danish Hadi. There is no reference to the assertions made  by  the  ECO
    and the allegation contains in the DVR. There is no statement from  the
    joint account holder or from Danish Hadi.

18.  In my  view  ECO  has  (at  least  on  the  balance  of  probabilities)
    discharged the burden of proof and I dismiss the appeal  under  Section
    322(1A) of the Immigration Rules.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration Rules.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Joanna McWilliam       Date 21 January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam




Fee Award

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed   Joanna McWilliam       Date 21 January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

