
[pic]
In the Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: IA/40691/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower Birmingham     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 13 July 2015                           |On 29 July 2015                  |
|                                          |                                 |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT
                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              ADANA FADIA SOWE

                                 Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:          Ms Sandhu of New Century Law

                               DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal against the decision promulgated on 4 July 2014  of
       First-tier Tribunal Judge Ghaffar which allowed the appeal of Ms Sowe
       against the refusal of  an  EEA  derivative  residence  card  as  the
       primary carer of an EEA national child.


    2. For the purposes of this decision we refer to the Secretary of  State
       as the respondent and to Ms Sowe as the appellant,  reflecting  their
       positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

    3. It is common ground that the appellant's daughter is a Danish citizen
       and that the appellant is her primary carer. On 14 September 2012 the
       appellant applied for a residence card recognising her derived  right
       of residence as the primary carer of an EEA national. The application
       was accompanied  by  a  letter  dated  13  September  2012  from  the
       appellant's legal advisers stating  that  the  application  was  made
       under Regulation 15A  (1)  and  (2)   of  the  Immigration  (European
       Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the EEA Regulations").

    4. Regulations 15A (1) and (2) state:

          15A. (1) A person ("P") who is  not  an  exempt  person  and  who
          satisfies the criteria in paragraph (2), (3), (4), (4A) or (5) of
          this regulation is entitled to a derivative right  to  reside  in
          the United Kingdom for  as  long  as  P  satisfies  the  relevant
          criteria.


          (2) P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if-


             (a) P is the primary carer of an EEA national ("the relevant
             EEA national"); and


             (b) the relevant EEA national-
                     (i) is under the age of 18;
                     (ii) is residing in the United Kingdom as a self-
                     sufficient person; and
                     (iii) would be unable to remain in the United Kingdom
                     if P were required to leave.

    5. Regulations 15A (1) and (2) incorporate the findings of the Court  of
       Justice of the European Union in Case C-200/02 Kunqian Catherine  Zhu
       and  Man Lavette Chen.


    6. The letter of 13 September 2012 that accompanied the application also
       referred to the case of C-34/09 Ruiz Zambrano,,  maintaining  that  a
       residence card should be issued here as to do otherwise would deprive
       the appellant's daughter of a genuine enjoyment of the  substance  of
       her rights as an EEA citizen.


    7. The application  was  refused  on  28  August  2013.  The  respondent
       indicated that it was her view that  this  was  a  Chen  case  not  a
       Zambrano case. The provisions of Regulations 15A (1) and (2) were not
       met where the appellant was not self sufficient, as required by  Chen
       and Regulation  15A(2)(b)(ii)  as  she  did  not  have  comprehensive
       sickness insurance cover.

    8. First-tier Tribunal  Judge Ghaffar found at [13]  to  [15]  that  the
       appellant's  daughter  was  self-sufficient  for  the   purposes   of
       Regulation 15(2)(b)(ii) as she had access to the NHS and could not be
       charged for that access.

    9. The respondent challenges that finding, maintaining  that  it  is  an
       incorrect application of the ratio  of  Chen  and  interpretation  of
       Regulation 15(2)(b)(ii).

   10. The  respondent relied on W (China) and X  (China)  [2006]  EWCA  Civ
       1494. There, the Court of Appeal dealt in terms with the question  of
       access to the NHS in the  context  of  an  EEA  national  being  self
       sufficient at [10]-[11], thus:
         "10. ... That was that in the case of the United Kingdom the
         requirement of sickness insurance was otiose, or automatically
         fulfilled, because health care was in any event available free of
         charge under the National Health Service. That argument overlooks
         the fundamental reason for the insurance requirement that was
         identified as the basis of the scheme of the Directive in Chen's
         case [2005] QB 325 to prevent the presence of the European Union
         citizen placing a burden on the host state. Use of free state
         medical services exactly creates such a burden. And in any event,
         even if the argument were otherwise valid its factual premise is
         false: Mr Gill did not demur from the assumption that, as citizens
         of a third country, W and X would not be entitled to free care
         under the NHS.
         11.  It is also because of the nature of the NHS that the social
         security payments currently being made by W do not count as
         "insurance" for these purposes. The NHS scheme is not financed
         solely out of the social security scheme, but is largely tax-
         financed. Contribution to the social security fund cannot
         therefore serve as any sort of proxy for insurance designed to
         remove from the taxpayer the burden of providing health care."
   11. To our minds, the passage cited is a complete answer to the issue  in
       dispute here. The ratio of Chen did not allow for reliance on the NHS
       if someone sought to show that they  were  self-sufficient.  Equally,
       the requirements of Regulation 15(2)(b)(ii)  cannot  be  met  by  the
       appellant's Danish child having free access to the NHS and where  the
       family do not have comprehensive sickness insurance cover.


   12. We therefore found that First-tier Tribunal  Ghaffar erred in law  in
       finding to the contrary such that the decision had to  be  set  aside
       and remade. We remade the appeal as refused on the basis of the  same
       reasoning. The appellant cannot meet the  provisions  of  Regulations
       15(2)(b)(ii).

   13. Ms Sandhu sought to re-argue other matters, in  particular  that  the
       First-tier Tribunal  should have applied the ratio  of  Zambrano  and
       made a decision under Article 8 of the ECHR.

   14. We did  not  accept  that  we  had  jurisdiction  to  consider  those
       arguments where no cross-appeal was made on any basis.

   15. In any event, as above, the decision here concerns  the  right  to  a
       residence card, not removal, and  the  appellant  can  apply  to  the
       respondent in the specified format if she wishes to make an Article 8
       claim.  In addition, nothing in the  evidence  that  was  before  the
       First-tier Tribunal here indicated that the family would be unable to
       live in Denmark such that  the  Zambrano  principle  could  have  any
       purchase.




Decision

   16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal   discloses  an  error  on  a
       point of law and is set aside.

   17. We re-make the appeal as refused finding that the  appellant  is  not
       entitled to a derivative residence card.


[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt                          13 July 2015
