
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/40789/2014
                                                               IA/40844/2014
                                                               IA/40873/2014
                                                               IA/40881/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15th February 2016                        |On 27th April 2016            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI

                                   Between

                            LINETTE MARIE AQUINO
                                ABNER AQUINO
                                   [A M A]
                                   [A J A]
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr D Coleman, Counsel, Pasha Law Chambers Solicitors
For the Claimant: Mr L Tarlow, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Fox  dismissing  the  Appellant's  appeals  against  the   Respondent's
    decision to refuse them further leave to remain under  the  Immigration
    Rules with reference to Appendix FM and Article 8 ECHR, and challenging
    removal directions under section 47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006.






 2.  The  Appellants  appealed  against  that  decision  and  were  granted
    permission to appeal by Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce.  The  grounds  upon
    which permission was granted may be summarised as follows:


      i) It is arguable that the judge erred in relation to  the  assessment
         of section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009
         concerning the children's best interests, with particular reference
         to the Presidential decision in JO and  Others  (section  55  duty)
         Nigeria [2014] UKUT 00517 (IAC).






 3. Aside from giving broad discretion to argue all grounds, Upper Tribunal
    Judge Bruce also noted that due  to  the  passage  of  time  the  third
    Appellant child had now been in the UK for in excess of seven years.  I
    shall return to this issue in conclusion.





    Error of Law


 4. At the close of submissions,  I  indicated  that  I  would  reserve  my
    decision, which I shall now give. I find that there was an error of law
    in the decision, such that it should be set aside. My  reasons  for  so
    finding are as follows.






 5. This appeal centred upon the Appellants' desire that  the  Respondent's
    omission to  consider  her  duty  under  section  55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 be rectified given  that  she  was
    charged with considering the welfare of every child and  ensuring  that
    her consideration took each child's welfare into  account.  Mr  Coleman
    for the Appellants submitted that the decision letter for  the  parents
    contained a two-paragraph consideration which was generic, whereas  the
    Refusal Letters for the children  only  demonstrated  consideration  of
    paragraph 276ADE(1) and contained no consideration  of  section  55  or
    their best interests or any exceptional circumstances.  Mr  Tarlow  for
    the Respondent did not disagree with this summary.






 6. Mr Coleman submitted that the judge should not have gone on to consider
    the section 55 matters for himself as the first instance matter  as  it
    was a question of the decision not being in  accordance  with  the  law
    given  that  the  statutory  duty  had  not  been  discharged  by   the
    Respondent. In particular, my attention was drawn to  paragraph  39  of
    the determination which stated in its final sentence that "...there  is
    no reliable evidence that  the  respondent's  obligations  are  engaged
    under section 55". Mr Coleman submitted that  the  Respondent  did  not
    have an obligation but a duty, which made  this  issue  a  question  of
    producing an unlawful decision.





 7. Mr Coleman further submitted that the Respondent was not represented at
    the  hearing  and  there  was  no  opposing  party  to  object  to  the
    Appellants' submission that the matter be remitted for consideration of
    such matters. He further relied upon the Presidential  decision  of  JO
    and Others  (section  55  duty)  Nigeria  [2014]  UKUT  517  (IAC)  and
    highlighted that the First-tier Tribunal determination failed to  refer
    to or show awareness of this decision and further  submitted  that  the
    underlying decision being appealed was unsustainable in light  of  that
    decision.






 8. So far as JO and Others is concerned its headnotes state as follows:

         (1)   The duty imposed by section 55 of the Borders Citizenship and
         Immigration Act 2009 requires the  decision-maker  to  be  properly
         informed of the position of a child affected by the discharge of an
         immigration etc function. Thus equipped, the  decision  maker  must
         conduct a careful  examination  of  all  relevant  information  and
         factors.


         (2)    Being  adequately  informed  and  conducting  a   scrupulous
         analysis are elementary prerequisites to the inter-related tasks of
         identifying the child's best interests and then balancing them with
         other material considerations.


         (3)   The question whether the duties imposed by  section  55  have
         been duly performed  in  any  given  case  will  invariably  be  an
         intensely fact sensitive and contextual one. In the real  world  of
         litigation,  the  tools  available  to  the   court   or   tribunal
         considering this  question  will  frequently  be  confined  to  the
         application or submission  made  to  Secretary  of  State  and  the
         ultimate letter of decision.





 9. A further perusal of [6-14] of JO  and  Others  demonstrates  that  the
    section 55 duty is not one to  be  taken  lightly.  To  reinforce  this
    simple  point,  the  following  extracts  from  [6]  and  [11]  are  of
    pertinence here:

         In the field of immigration, therefore, the enactment of section 55
         discharges an international law obligation of  the  UK  Government.
         While section 55 and Article 3(1)  of  the  UNCRC  are  couched  in
         different terms, there may not be any major difference between them
         in substance, as the decided cases have shown. The  final  striking
         feature of section 55 is that it operates to protect  all  children
         who are in the United Kingdom: there is no  qualification  such  as
         residence or nationality.


         I  consider  that,  properly  analysed,  there  are   two   guiding
         principles, each rooted in duty. The first  is  that  the  decision
         maker must be properly informed. The second is that, thus equipped,
         the decision maker  must  conduct  a  careful  examination  of  all
         relevant information and factors. These principles  have  a  simple
         logical attraction,  since  it  is  difficult  to  conceive  how  a
         decision maker could properly have regard to the need to  safeguard
         and  promote  the  welfare  of  the  child  or  children  concerned
         otherwise. Furthermore, they reflect long recognised  standards  of
         public law. Being adequately informed and conducting  a  scrupulous
         analysis are elementary prerequisites to the inter-related tasks of
         identifying the child's best interests and then balancing them with
         other material  considerations.  This  balancing  exercise  is  the
         central  feature  of  cases  of  the  present   type.   It   cannot
         realistically or sensibly be undertaken unless and until the scales
         are properly prepared.
         (emphases found in original)





10. In that light, it is clear that  when  faced  with  a  duty  where  the
    mandatory statutory  language  has  not  been  complied  with,  such  a
    decision is prima facie  not  in  accordance  with  the  law.  In  this
    instance, matters are somewhat  worse  given  that  the  judge  wrongly
    sought "reliable evidence" from the Appellants  that  the  "obligation"
    concerning section  55  was  engaged.  That  is  clearly  an  erroneous
    assessment of a child's section 55 in light of JO and  Others.  Section
    55 imposes a mandatory statutory duty which "operates  to  protect  all
    children who are in the United Kingdom" with "no qualification such  as
    residence or nationality".






11. In my view, Mr Coleman's submissions  are  supported  firmly  by  [12],
    which mentions the guidance "Every Child Matters" and makes  clear  the
    type of decision that will be necessary when considering a section 55:

        The second of the duties imposed by section 55 is,  per  subsection
         (3), to have regard to the statutory guidance  promulgated  by  the
         Secretary of State. In considering whether this discrete  duty  has
         been discharged in any given case, it will  be  necessary  for  the
         appellate or reviewing Court or Tribunal to take cognisance of  the
         relevant guidance emanating from the same  subsection,  juxtaposing
         this with the  representations  and  information  provided  by  the
         person or persons concerned and the ensuing decision. The  guidance
         is an instrument of statutory authority to which the decision maker
         "must" have regard: there is no element of  choice  or  discretion.
         The guidance was duly published in November 2009.  It  is  entitled
         "Every Child Matters: Change for Children". Notably,  at  paragraph
         2.7 it contains a series of "principles" which are rehearsed in the
         context of a  statement  that  UKBA  (the  United  Kingdom  Borders
         Agency, the Secretary of State's agents) "must ... act according to
         ......." same. Three of these principles are worthy  of  particular
         note:


        (a)           Ethnic identity, language,  religion,  faith,  gender
               and disability are taken into account when  working  with  a
               child and their family.


         (b)         Children should  be  consulted  and  the  wishes  and
               feelings of children taken into account whenever practicable
               when decisions affecting them are made.


         (c)          Children should have their applications dealt with in
               a timely way which minimises uncertainty.


        I consider that these provisions, considered  in  tandem  with  the
        principles enunciated by the  Supreme  Court  and  the  public  law
        duties  rehearsed  above,  envisage  a  process  of   deliberation,
        assessment and final  decision  of  some  depth.  The  antithesis,
        namely something cursory, casual or superficial, will  plainly  not
        be in accordance with the specific duty imposed by section 55(3) or
        the overarching duty to have regard to the need  to  safeguard  and
        promote the welfare of any children involved in or affected by  the
        relevant factual matrix. Ditto cases where  the  decision  making
        process and its product entail little more than giving lip  service
        to the guidance.
        (my emphasis)




12. For the Respondent, Mr Tarlow accepted that  the  decision  could  have
    been better written and indicated that certain matters would need to be
    read into the decision. However, he  also  accepted  that  the  judge's
    assessment  of  the  section  55  matters  at  paragraph  39   of   his
    determination were an error, though not a material.






13. In my view, it  is  unattractive  to  have  to  read  anything  into  a
    determination. It must stand unsupported otherwise it  will  fall.  The
    determination in  my  view  cannot  stand  in  light  of  its  directly
    contradictory stance to a Presidential decision on the very point which
    it seeks to decide. Mr Tarlow  was  quite  right  to  accept  that  the
    judge's notions concerning section 55 were an error, however the  error
    is clearly material as this matter runs through the heart of the appeal
    and goes to the very essence of the point on appeal that the Appellants
    sought to bring.






14. In light of the above  passages  I  have  referred  to  and  the  clear
    guidance in JO and Others,  I  find  that  the  decision  suffers  from
    fundamental errors concerning the approach to the section 55  duty  and
    in particular where a decision is lacking in substance as was the  case
    here.






15. In light of my findings, I have not gone on to consider  the  remainder
    of the grounds nor the remainder of Mr Coleman's exhaustive submissions
    which analysed each paragraph of the determination in detail, including
    matters such as the children's inability to read or write  in  Filipino
    and whether  they  could  continue  studies  in  that  country  without
    disruption in light of that linguistic disadvantage.





16. In the light of the above  findings,  I  set  aside  the  decision  and
    findings of the judge in totality.






17. If I found an error, Mr Coleman  invited  me  to  re-make  the  appeal,
    however I decline that invitation and remit that matter and the  appeal
    for consideration by the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I  observe,  as  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Bruce has done, that due to  the  passage  of  time  the
    third Appellant child has now been in the UK for  in  excess  of  seven
    years.






18. Consequently,  if  the  First-tier  Tribunal  wishes  to  consider  the
    substantive human rights of the children  without  an  informed  first-
    instance decision  from  the  Respondent,  the  child  would  fall  for
    consideration under section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and
    Asylum Act 2002. However, should the First-tier Tribunal be content  to
    remit the matter to the Respondent to await a fresh decision, it may be
    that the Respondent takes the view that the child's private life  ought
    to be considered anew under  paragraph  276ADE(1)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.





    Decision

19. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.




20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and the appeal  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal,  to  be  heard  by  a  differently
    constituted bench.


    Anonymity

21. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity order and I  was  not
    asked to make one and do not see reason to do so at present.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini


