
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/40370/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          | Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                   |
|On 14 October 2015                            | On 2 November 2015           |
|Oral judgment                                 |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON



                                   Between

                            ASHRAF HOSSAIN HEMAL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance.
For the Respondent:    Mr Ian Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  (FTT)
    Judge Morgan promulgated on 18 April 2015 following a hearing at Taylor
    House on 30 April 2015.  The judge noted on that  occasion  that  there
    was  no  attendance  by  either  the  appellant  or   the   appellant's
    representatives.  In paragraph 3 of the  FTT  determination  the  judge
    notes "neither  the  appellant  nor  his  representative  attended  the
    hearing before me.  However they did provide an appellant's bundle with
    an accompanying letter requesting for the matter to  be  considered  on
    the papers."  The judge, as the judge was entitled to do,  conducted  a
    hearing.  There was a Presenting  Officer  present.   Notice  had  been
    given of the date, time and place of the hearing.  The judge noted that
    it was not his or her role to review the decision, went on to  look  at
    the material, and found in paragraph 9 that the  respondent's  decision
    was unlawful.

2.   The basis of the refusal was that the appellant had applied  for  leave
    to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant. That  application  was
    refused in a notice of 23 September 2014  as  it  was  found  that  the
    appellant could not satisfy the requirements of paragraph 245ZX of  the
    Immigration Rules concerning leave to remain as a Tier  4  Migrant,  as
    the Secretary of State was not satisfied the appellant was entitled  to
    10 points claimed under the maintenance/funds provision because a  bank
    statement provided in support of the application was from Dutch-Bangler
    Bank, an institute the Secretary of State stated was  on  the  list  of
    unacceptable financial institutions published by the respondent.

3.   The judge was clearly aware that that was a key issue.  In paragraph  6
    the judge found as follows:

         "The respondent within the respondent's bundle provided no evidence
         that the bank in question was on the list of unacceptable financial
         institutions. Mrs Ojo had helpfully obtained this  information  but
         unfortunately there was no evidence as to when the  bank  had  been
         placed on this list.  Mrs Ojo also provided a copy of the Court  of
         Appeal jurisprudence in EK (Ivory Coast) [2014] EWCA Civ 1517. (the
         fairness jurisprudence)."

4.   The appellant's evidence which the judge found he had  no  good  reason
    not to accept, and which was not impugned  by  the  respondent  in  the
    witness statement, stated that when he submitted  his  application  the
    bank in  question  was  not  on  the  list  of  unacceptable  financial
    institutions and that it had been placed on the list subsequent to  him
    making the application and that the points for CAS had been awarded  by
    the respondent and that the course fee had been paid in its entirety.

5.   The Secretary of State challenges that decision on the  basis  that  at
    the date of the application, 18 August 2014, the list  of  unacceptable
    financial institutions to be found in Appendix  P  of  the  Immigration
    Rules showed that Dutch- Bangler Bank  was  included  in  the  list  in
    Appendix P, Table 11, and was therefore a  prohibited  organisation  at
    the date of application.

6.   Permission was granted on the basis that it appears  the  bank  was  on
    the list of prohibited  unacceptable  financial  institutions  and  the
    matter set down for the initial hearing today.

7.   Again there has  been  no  attendance  by  Victory  Solicitors  or  the
    appellant himself. Victory Solicitors have sent a fax to  the  Tribunal
    confirming they continue to act on behalf of  the  appellant,  claiming
    they were informed, presumably by  their  client,  that  owing  to  the
    predicament caused by  the  refusal  of  his  application  for  Tier  4
    (General) Student status by the Secretary of State he  has  experienced
    financial difficulties, is not in a position to bear  legal  costs  and
    therefore the solicitors will not be attending.

8.    The  explanation  for  their  non  attendance  is  noted   and   fully
    understood.  What the letter does not explain or provide any basis  for
    this Tribunal understanding is why the appellant himself has not turned
    up as he could turn up free of  charge  bar  any  travelling  expenses,
    although as he lives in E16 it has not been shown that expecting him to
    travel to this Tribunal would be unreasonable in all the circumstances.

9.   The Tribunal is satisfied that notice  in  accordance  with  the  Rules
    setting out the date, time and place of this hearing  has  been  served
    and is known to the appellant and his  representatives.   There  is  no
    application for an adjournment,  no  explanation  for  the  appellant's
    failure  to  attend  and  it  is  therefore  appropriate  in  all   the
    circumstances, including the overriding objectives and the interests of
    justice and fairness, that the best use is made of the Tribunal time in
    proceeding to determine this matter in the appellant's absence.

10.  I find that the judge  has  made  an  error  of  law  material  to  the
    decision to allow the appeal.  The archived  copy  of  the  Immigration
    Rules in force from 1 August 2014 to 20 October 2014 shows within Table
    11, financial institutions that do not satisfactorily verify  financial
    statements, the name of the Dutch-Bangler Bank Limited as one of  those
    financial institutions.

11.  At the date of the application identified by the Secretary of State  in
    the application for permission to appeal  the  Dutch-Bangler  Bank  was
    therefore one of those named financial institutions and the  statements
    provided by that establishment warrant no weight by placed upon them as
    they have not been shown to be reliable for  the  reasons  set  out  in
    Appendix P which states that an institution  may  be  included  on  the
    relevant list of those  who  do  not  satisfactorily  verify  financial
    statements if (a) on the basis of experience that it  does  not  verify
    financial statements to UKBA's satisfaction  in  more  than  50%  of  a
    sample of cases or it does not  participate  in  specified  schemes  or
    arrangements in the  country  of  origin  where  the  UKBA  trusts  the
    verification checks provided by banks  that  do  participate  in  those
    schemes.  There appears   therefore  to  be  a  good  basis  and  sound
    reasoning for why the named bank should appear in Table 11 and in those
    circumstances the judge erred in rejecting the  grounds  and  arguments
    put  forward  by  the  Secretary  of  State  which  were  supported  by
    verifiable evidence in the public domain.

12.  The First-tier Tribunal is a specialist  tribunal  and  although  these
    proceedings are litigious one questions whether there was a requirement
    on the judge in this case to investigate further in  relation  to  when
    the copy of Table 11  provided,  with  'archived'  written  across  it,
    actually related, albeit that there was a Presenting Officer there  who
    could no doubt have been expected to have provided such information  by
    way of a printout from the archived Immigration Rules.

Notice of Decision

13.  I set the determination aside on the basis of that factual  error  made
    by the judge.  The judge does not refer  to  any  additional  financial
    information which shows that the appellant has discharged the burden of
    proof upon him to show that he could meet the requirements of the  Tier
    4  (General)  Student  Migrant  route  under  paragraph  276X  of   the
    Immigration Rules.  There is no evidence upon which appropriate  weight
    may be applied  by  this  Tribunal  to  find  that  the  appellant  has
    discharged the burden of proof upon him to the  required  standard  and
    accordingly I dismiss the appeal.

14.  No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 30 October 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.





Signed                                  Date 30 October 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

