
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/40363/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |     Decision & Reasons          |
|                                             |Promulgated                      |
|On 26th October 2015                         |     On 4th January 2016         |
|                                             |                                 |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between


                              MR. KASHIF AJMAL
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Iqbal of Counsel instructed by SHN Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss K Pal: Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. This is an appeal  against  a  decision  and  reasons  by  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge  Lamb  promulgated  on  19th  May  2015  in  which  he
       dismissed the appellant's appeal against the  decision  made  by  the
       Secretary of State on 25th September  2014  to  refuse  to  vary  the
       appellant's leave to remain in the UK and to  give  directions  under
       s47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006  for  removal
       of the appellant from the UK.


 Background


    2. The appellant is a Pakistani national.  He entered the UK on 10th  of
       March 2009 and was given leave to enter as the spouse  of  a  Tier  1
       general migrant until 30th January 2012.  He was subsequently granted
       leave to remain in the UK as the spouse of a Tier 1  general  migrant
       until 13th June 2014.


    3. The appellant and his wife have three children born  on  20th  August
       2000, 3rd February 2005 and 3rd June 2006 respectively.  The children
       entered the UK at the same time as the appellant  and  his  wife  and
       they were aged 8, 4, and 2 when they arrived in the UK.


    4. On 3rd April 2014, the appellant's wife applied for indefinite  leave
       to remain in the UK.  The appellant and  their  three  children  were
       named  as  dependants  to  that  application.   It  seems  that   the
       appellant's wife and their three  children  were  granted  indefinite
       leave to remain, but the appellant's application was refused for  the
       reasons set  out  in  a  'Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter'  dated  25th
       September 2014. It was respondent's decision of 25th  September  2014
       that gave rise to the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.


    5. The appellant was refused  indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  the  UK
       because, as at the date of the  decision,  the  evidence  before  the
       respondent suggested that he was unable to satisfy  the  requirements
       of paragraph 319E(g) of the Immigration Rules.


    6. In her decision of 25th September 2014, the respondent noted that the
       appellant had stated in his application that he wished to rely on his
       family or private life established in the UK pursuant to Article 8 of
       the ECHR.  To that end, the respondent stated:


             "If you wish the UK Border Agency to consider  an  application
             on this basis you must make  a  separate  charged  application
             using the appropriate specified application form and  pay  the
             appropriate fee..."


     The respondent then stated:


             "It  has  also  been   considered   whether   the   particular
             circumstances  set  out   in   your   application   constitute
             exceptional circumstances which, consistent with the right  to
             respect for private and family life contained in Article 8  of
             the European Convention on Human Rights, might warrant a grant
             of  leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  outside   the
             requirements of the Immigration Rules."


    7. Having considered her duty under s55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and
       Immigration Act 2009,  and  the  family's  immigration  history,  the
       respondent concluded that there are no exceptional  circumstances  in
       the appellant's case, and that his application does not  fall  for  a
       grant of leave outside the rules.


The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lamb


    8. First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lamb  dismissed  the  appeal  under  the
       Immigration Rules.  His reasons for doing  so  are  far  from  clear.
       Insofar as the appellant  relied  upon  post  decision  evidence,  he
       stated:


             "I therefore  agree  that  I  can  consider  the  new  matters
             constituted by the certificates now obtained; the evidence  of
             the misleading conduct of the solicitors who previously acted;
             and the grant of indefinite leave to the  appellant's  family;
             but only in the context of the alternative argument  based  on
             Article 8." [22]


    9.  The Judge then referred to the Article 8 claim and dealt with it  in
       a very confused fashion.  Insofar as is relevant to the appeal before
       me, he stated:


             "25. Mr Parkin pressed an argument based on Article 8, set out
             in his skeleton argument,  and  I  am required  to   determine
             it:   s.  86(2)of  the  Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act
             2002.


             ....


             27.  I then consider whether  the  appellant  is  entitled  to
             consideration of his Article 8 claim  in  the  absence  of  an
             application having been made on that basis, and therefore of a
             decision on that point. I have decided that he is not, for two
             reasons.


             28.  Firstly, it seems  fundamentally  unfair  to  decide  the
             appeal on a  basis  which  has  not  been  the  subject  of  a
             decision, because none was sought.


             29.  Secondly, the caselaw concerning the relationship between
             Article 8 and the Rules requires a case to be considered under
             the Rules firstly, and under Article 8 only  if  there  is  an
             arguable case to do so: R (Nagre)  v  SSHD  (2013)  EWHC  720;
             Gulshan (2013) UKUT 00640. That principle would be breached if
             an appellant could pursue the course advocated in this case.


             ....


             31.  If I am wrong in the  statements  of  principle  set  out
             above, then it may be helpful if  I  consider  the  Article  8
             contention on its merits...


   10.  At paragraphs [32] to [42] of his decision, the Judge has regard  to
       the five stage test referred to by Lord Bingham  in  R  -v-  SSHD  ex
       parte Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.  He found that removal of the  appellant
       would amount to an interference with the family life of the appellant
       and his family. [32] He found that the interference with the right to
       family life would have consequences of such gravity as potentially to
       engage the operation of Article 8. [33] The  Judge  then  turned  his
       mind to the fifth and crucial question, of whether  the  interference
       is necessary and proportionate at paragraphs  [34]  to  [41]  of  the
       decision.  At paragraph [41] he concluded:


             ".... I am satisfied that removal  would  be  disproportionate
             and that the article 8 argument would succeed it I  were  free
             to make the assessment as I have."


       However, having previously  determined  that  the  appellant  is  not
       entitled to a consideration of his Article 8 claim in the absence  of
       an Article 8 application and decision by the  respondent,  the  Judge
       dismissed the appeal.





The Grounds of Appeal


   11. The appellant appeals on the grounds that the decision of  the  Judge
       is ambiguous insofar as the consideration of  the  appeal  under  the
       Immigration Rules is concerned, and that the Judge erred  in  failing
       to allow the appeal on Article 8 grounds, in light of the matters set
       out at paragraphs [31] to [41] of the decision.


   12. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Fisher
       on 30th July 2015.  In doing so, she noted that arguably the  Judge's
       somewhat confused treatment of the Article 8 aspects of this  appeal,
       amounts to an error of law.


 The hearing before me


   13. At the hearing before me on 26th October 2015, Mr Iqbal  adopted  the
       grounds of appeal and submitted that the Judge  noted  at  paragraphs
       [11] and [12] that since the  decision  of  the  respondent  of  25th
       September 2014, the appellant has in fact passed the Life in  the  UK
       test.  He has been awarded Grade 5 in  spoken  English;  entry  level
       certificate in ESOL International (Speaking and Listening) (Entry 3),
       B1.1 of the CEFR, with distinction.  He submits that the  failure  of
       the appellant to complete the tests and provide evidence  in  support
       of the application, was found by the Judge to have been caused  by  a
       failure on the part of the appellant's previous  representatives,  to
       advise the appellant of the need to provide the evidence that is  now
       available.


   14. Mr Iqbal submits that the Judge has dealt with the Article 8 claim in
       a confused manner.  Having accepted that the removal of the appellant
       would be disproportionate, the Judge appears to  have  dismissed  the
       appeal on the  basis  that  the  appellant  was  not  entitled  to  a
       consideration of his Article 8 claim in the absence of an  Article  8
       application having been made by the appellant, and a decision by  the
       respondent.


   15. The respondent has filed a rule 24 response.  In that  response,  the
       respondent concedes that "the judge has clearly failed to deal with a
       matter that he was obliged to, under s86(2) of the 2002 Act.  In that
       respect the Judge has erred in law".  Having  made  that  concession,
       the  respondent  goes  on  to  make  other   criticisms   about   the
       consideration of the evidence by the  Judge  and  in  particular  the
       Judge's acceptance of the evidence of the appellant  with  regard  to
       his previous representation, and the  lack  of  evidence  before  the
       Tribunal that any allegations of misconduct  have  been  put  to  the
       previous representatives.


   16. Miss Pal adopted the matters set out  in  the  respondent's  rule  24
       response and provided me with a copy of the  decision  of  the  Upper
       Tribunal in Philipson (ILR - not PBS:  evidence)  India  [2012]  UKUT
       00039 (IAC).


Decision as to 'Error of Law'


   17. It is common ground between the parties  that  the  decision  of  the
       Judge discloses a material  error  of  law.   For  my  part,  I  have
       carefully read the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  I  am
       entirely satisfied that the appellant's grounds of  appeal  are  made
       out.


   18. I find a material error of law in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal which shall be set aside.


   19. I note that the Upper Tribunal in  accordance  with  Part  3  of  the
       Practice Statement for the Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber  of  the
       Upper Tribunal is in terms of disposal of  appeals,  likely  on  each
       occasion to proceed to remake the decision, instead of remitting  the
       case to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
       satisfied that the effect of the error of  the  First  Tier  Tribunal
       Judge has been to deprive a party before the First Tribunal of a fair
       hearing or other opportunity for that parties case to be put to,  and
       considered by the First Tier Tribunal.


   20. In my view the most fair and proportionate way in which to deal  with
       this case and given the nature of the factual findings to be made, is
       to remit the matter for a de novo hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.




Notice of Decision


   21. The appeal is allowed.   The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       promulgated on 19th May 2015 is set aside and I remit the matter  for
       a de novo hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.


   22. No anonymity direction is applied for and none is made.

Signed                                  Date



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia



FEE AWARD


The First-tier Tribunal made no fee award, and whether or not  a  fee  award
is appropriate, is again  a  matter  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  due
course.

Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

