
[pic]


Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/40329/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Birmingham ET               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 January 2016                   |On 26 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before


                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                          MR KARNA SUDNHANA SARKAR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr H Sarwar, counsel instructed by Malik Law
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against a decision of FTTJ Pooler, promulgated on  13
    January 2015.

Background


 2. The appellant, aged 71, entered the United Kingdom with  limited  leave
    to remain as a visitor, on 25 March 2014. On 18 June  2014,  he  sought
    leave to remain on the basis of his private life. That application  was
    refused on 28 August 2014 because the respondent considered there  were
    not very significant obstacles to the appellant's integration in India,
    where he had lived for "74" years and from where he had  been  able  to
    maintain his relationship with his family. It was also considered there
    were no exceptional circumstances involved  because  medical  treatment
    was available in India to treat the appellant's condition.

 3. In his grounds of appeal, the  appellant  argued  that  the  respondent
    failed  to  consider  his  application  under  paragraph  317  of   the
    Immigration  Rules;  that  a  discretion  should  have  been  exercised
    differently in view of  the  fact  that  the  appellant  suffered  from
    medical conditions and had  no  family  members  in  India  to  provide
    support and the respondent had failed to consider the cultural  aspects
    of the case, in that there was an expectation that in Indian culture  a
    son would provide care and accommodation to his parents  in  their  old
    age.

The hearing before the FTTJ

 4. The appellant, his son and daughter-in-law  gave  evidence  before  the
    FTTJ.  The  FTTJ  concluded  that  the  respondent's  decision  was  in
    accordance with the law and declined to remit the matter  to  the  Home
    office on the basis that duty imposed by section  55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 had not  been  complied  with.  He
    dismissed the appeal under  paragraph  276ADE(vi)  of  the  Rules;  and
    Article 8 ECHR outside the Rules.

Error of law


 5. The grounds of appeal resurrect the argument that paragraph 317 of  the
    Rules, notwithstanding that this was not relied upon by counsel for the
    appellant at the hearing before the FTTJ. It was  further  argued  that
    the FTTJ's findings that the appellant could receive personal  care  in
    India were illogical given it was undisputed that  the  daughter-in-law
    had cared for the appellant in India for 8 months prior to his  arrival
    in the United Kingdom. Criticism was made of the failure of the FTTJ to
    consider the appellant's case in line with Appendix FM even if this was
    not pursued at the hearing.

 6. FTTJ Baker granted permission, finding there to be an arguable error of
    law for the FTTJ not to make findings under  Razgar  and  not  to  have
    considered the appeal under paragraph 317 of the Rules.

 7. The Secretary of State's response of 11 March 2015 submitted  that  the
    FTTJ directed himself appropriately and  that  paragraph  317  did  not
    survive the changes to the Immigration Rules, which  took  place  on  9
    July 2012  except  for  those  with  a  prior  application  under  that
    category.

The hearing


 8. Mr Sarwar expanded on the three grounds of appeal, the first  of  which
    he considered to be the  strongest.  In  addition,  while  noting  that
    permission to appeal had been granted on the basis that Razgar was  not
    taken into account, he commented that it was clear that  the  FTTJ  had
    done so. Mr Sarwar insisted that findings of fact in  relation  to  the
    requirements of paragraph 317 ought to have been made and  should  have
    guided the judge's  Article  8  consideration  outside  the  Rules.  He
    conceded that all references to paragraph 317 should in fact be to  the
    new Rules, that is E-ECDR 2.1 to 3.2.  With regard  to  the  other  two
    grounds,  he   accepted   that   the   sponsor's   changing   financial
    circumstances were taken into account at [36] of the decision and  that
    the FTTJ had indeed considered that the appellant's daughter in law had
    provided care to the appellant in India at {14] and that the  appellant
    suffered from chronic kidney disease, at [15].

 9. In response, Mr McVeety stressed that  the  appellant's  representative
    before the FTTJ had conceded  that  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Rules.  It was open to the FTTJ  to  consider  that
    submission and simply reject the case,  however  he  had  undertaken  a
    Razgar analysis approached through the prism of the Rules.    The  FTTJ
    had considered entry clearance rules. The  relevant  Rules  posed  many
    hurdles to cross including whether care was available in the country of
    origin, could the appellant access it and whether  it  was  affordable.
    Furthermore, at no stage has any part  of  the  Rules  been  identified
    which it is said the appellant met.  He  concluded  by  describing  the
    appellant's challenge as merely a disagreement with  a  well-determined
    decision.

10. Mr Sarwar replied by simply maintaining that the FTTJ failed to look at
    the Rules first.

Decision on Error of Law

11. At the end of the hearing, I decided that the FTTJ had made no error of
    law and upheld his decision. My reasons are as follows.

12. It is apparent from [8] of the FTTJ's  decision  that  the  appellant's
    counsel before the FTTJ "placed no reliance on  paragraph  317."  While
    this Rule would never have applied to the appellant given the  time  of
    his application, I take this as a reference to E-ECDR of  Appendix  FM.
    The FTTJ did likewise. From [35] of  the  decision  onwards,  the  FTTJ
    examined whether the appellant required long-term  care.  He  carefully
    considered the medical evidence before him and concluded on  the  basis
    of that evidence that there was no indication  as  to  "precisely  what
    care would be required by the appellant such that a comparison  of  the
    levels of care available can be properly made."

13. The FTTJ also considered whether care would be available and whether it
    would be affordable at [36] of the decision.  He  clearly  acknowledged
    that the appellant would have to rely on others for help if his son and
    daughter in law chose to remain in the United Kingdom, however the FTTJ
    was not satisfied, on the evidence before him, that such care could not
    be obtained.

14. The FTTJ also rejected the claim that care for the appellant  would  be
    too expensive on account of her failure to make any enquiries as to the
    availability of care. It was at this stage, that  the  FTTJ  took  into
    consideration the fact that the sponsor had recently moved to a  larger
    property and had larger mortgage payments. This also disposes of ground
    2, at paragraph 6 of the grounds.

15. As conceded by Mr Sarwar, the FTTJ  fully  considered  the  appellant's
    kidney complaint at [15] of the decision.

16. The appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Conclusion

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I uphold the decision of the FTTJ.

No anonymity direction was made by the FTTJ and I am  aware  of  no  reasons
for making such a direction now.


Signed      Date: 24 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

