
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/41828/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 19 September 2016                      |On 03 October 2016               |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                            muhammad fazlul haque
                       (anonymity directioN not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Danial of Counsel instructed by Law Dale
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal  from  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Petherbridge promulgated on 7 January 2016.  The appellant is a citizen
    of Bangladesh born  on  26  December  1981.   He  appeals  against  the
    respondent's refusal to issue him with a residence card. He claims that
    he was entitled to such a residence card pursuant to the provisions  of
    Regulation 8(2) of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations
    2006.  When the matter was before the First-tier Tribunal evidence  was
    heard and findings of fact were  made.  The  judge  accepted  that  the
    sponsor is an uncle of the appellant and that he became  a  citizen  of
    Italy (and hence an EEA national) in June 2013.  The appellant came  to
    the United Kingdom from Bangladesh in 2007. The Sponsor  moved  to  the
    United Kingdom from Italy in 2013 and at some stage came to live in the
    same household as the appellant.

2.   Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane  on
    9 August 2016.  He stated as follows:

         "It is arguable that the First-tier Tribunal  conflated  membership
         of a household with dependency; Regulation 8(2)  arguably  provides
         that an individual may establish that he/she is an 'extended family
         member' by showing membership of a  household  or  dependency  (see
         Dauhoo [2012] UKUT 79 (IAC)."

3.   A skeleton argument was lodged in support of  this  appeal  running  to
    some nine paragraphs.  Mr Danial  who  represents  the  appellant  this
    morning did not settle the skeleton argument but sought to rely on  it.
    I had some difficulty in persuading Mr Danial to focus on the  text  of
    First-tier Tribunal decision.  He did not have a copy of  the  decision
    with him and I provided him  with  mine.  He  had  some  difficulty  in
    demonstrating which paragraphs, if any, were flawed and where an  error
    of law was to be found.

4.   During his submissions to me he conceded that regulation 8(2)(a)  self-
    evidently did not apply in this case inasmuch as it is  styled  in  the
    present tense and is referring to somebody residing in a country  other
    than the United Kingdom.  He accepted that at the  material  time  with
    which the First-tier Tribunal Judge was concerned  both  the  appellant
    and the sponsor were residing in the United Kingdom. When afforded  the
    opportunity of responding to the submissions  made  by  Mr  Kandola  on
    behalf of the respondent, Mr Danial sought to depart from  his  earlier
    concession and to argue that regulation 8(2)(a) did in  fact  apply  to
    this case.  Justice requires that an appellant is not prejudiced by any
    error or misjudgment on the part of his legal representative.

5.   Regulation 8(2) provides:

         "A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if  the  person
         is a relative of an EEA national, his spouse or his  civil  partner
         and -


         (a)  the person is residing in a  country  other  than  the  United
             Kingdom  in  which  the  EEA  national  also  resides  and  is
             dependent upon  the  EEA  national  or  is  a  member  of  his
             household;


         (b)  the person satisfied the condition in  paragraph  (a)  and  is
             accompanying the EEA national to the United Kingdom or  wishes
             to join him there; or


         (c)  the person satisfied  the  condition  in  paragraph  (a),  has
             joined the EEA national in the United Kingdom and continues to
             be dependent upon him or to be a  member  of  his  household."
             (emphasis added)

6.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge dealt with the matter as follows:

         "39. For the purposes of determining  this  appeal  it  is  of  the
             utmost importance that it  is  established  when  the  Sponsor
             became an EEA national - I accept that he did so following the
             grant of Italian citizenship to him on 6 June 2013  -  because
             it is  only  after  that  date  that  any  dependency  or  the
             Appellant living in the same household of the Sponsor  can  be
             considered for the purposes of seeing whether the requirements
             of the Regulations have been satisfied.


         40.  As Mr Raja submitted, even  if  the  Sponsor  had  been  fully
             maintaining the Appellant whilst  he  was  in  Italy  and  the
             Appellant was in Bangladesh  Regulation  8(2)  could  only  be
             satisfied once the Sponsor had become an EEA national.


         41.  Even had that not been  the  case,  I  found  the  Appellant's
             evidence as to dependency,  that  has  to  be  established  to
             satisfy the Regulations, that he asserts he received from  the
             Sponsor  whilst  in  Bangladesh  to  be  such  as  not   being
             sufficient to satisfy the Regulations.


         42.  It seemed to me that if the Appellant  was  reliant  upon  the
             household of the Sponsor whilst in Bangladesh that evidence of
             property ownership would have  been  provided  such  as  being
             provided with regard to the establishment of the relationship.
              There was no evidence whatsoever of  any  money  ever  having
             been sent by the Sponsor to the Appellant in  Bangladesh.   It
             was said that it had been  sent  to  further  the  Appellant's
             education  and  yet  the   Sponsor   was   unaware   of   what
             qualification the Appellant had achieved.


         43.  The fact  is,  though,  that  such  financial  help  that  the
             Appellant was said to have received from the  Sponsor  had  to
             have existed before the Appellant came to the United  Kingdom,
             which was in 2007, and at that time the Sponsor  had  to  have
             been an EEA national.  That clearly was not the case.


         44.  If I were wrong as to my finding that  Regulation  8(2)  could
             only be satisfied once  the  Sponsor  had  become  an  Italian
             citizen  from  June  2013  I  consider  the  evidence  as   to
             dependency  on   the   Sponsor   since   that   date   to   be
             unsubstantiated."


     The judge then gives details as to the lack of such substantiation.

7.   The passage which I have cited up to the conclusion at paragraph 43  is
    sufficient to be dispositive of this appeal.  By the time  the  Sponsor
    became an EEA national in 2013, the appellant had long since ceased  to
    reside in "a country other than the United Kingdom". The provisions  of
    regulation 8(2) are not engaged.  I can find no fault in the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's assessment as to when it was necessary for sponsorship
    or household considerations to be  taken  into  account.   Any  matters
    which predated the sponsor becoming an EEA national were not relevant.

8.   In the circumstances it was  strictly  unnecessary  for  the  judge  to
    continue as he did at paragraphs  44  and  following  to  analyse  more
    recent incidents of dependency or household.  I accept, as is  advanced
    in the appellant's skeleton argument, that the concept of household  is
    materially  different  from  the  concept  of  dependency.  But   these
    considerations, however interesting they may be, have no bearing on the
    ultimate outcome of this appeal.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had
    rightly found that, on a proper reading, Regulation 8(2) did not  apply
    and it was therefore immaterial whether the consideration  was  one  of
    dependency or membership of a household.  In all the  circumstances,  I
    am not persuaded that there is  any  material  error  of  law  in  this
    determination and accordingly this appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Mark Hill                      Date     30 September 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC


