
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber   Appeal Number: IA/41644/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On the 21st October 2015             |On the 3rd November 2015              |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before:

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY


                                  Between:

                              MISS LANYING XUE
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Tan (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr Wilding (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Griffith in which he dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal
    against the Respondent's decision to refuse to grant  Indefinite  Leave
    to Remain outside of the Immigration Rules after she  had  completed  a
    period of 6 years Discretionary Leave to Remain.



Background

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of China. She was born  on  the  8th  August
    1965. The Appellant first came to the United Kingdom in 1997  with  her
    former husband. Her husband had claimed asylum and the Appellant was  a
    dependent upon that claim. That asylum claim was refused in 2000 and an
    appeal therefrom was dismissed on the 30th May 2001.  On  the  4th  May
    2004, the Appellant applied for Leave to Remain  as  the  spouse  of  a
    settled person, but a decision on that application was not in fact made
    until the 12th March 2008, when it was refused, but the  Appellant  was
    granted a period of Discretionary Leave for 3 years from the 12th March
    2008 until the 12th March 2011 and thereafter  was  granted  a  further
    period of 3 years Discretionary Leave from the 1st April  2011  to  the
    1st April 2014. In  an  Application  dated  the  25th  March  2014  the
    Appellant applied for Indefinite Leave  to  Remain,  having  previously
    been granted 6 years  Discretionary  Leave  to  Remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom. The Respondent was informed on the 6th August  2014  that  the
    Appellant's marriage was no longer subsisting and in a  decision  dated
    the 29th September 2014, the Respondent refused to grant the  Appellant
    Indefinite Leave to  Remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules. The Appellant sought to appeal  that  decision,  and
    that appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Griffith  sitting  at
    Taylor House on the 15th May 2015, and  he  dismissed  the  Appellant's
    appeal in a decision promulgated on the 9th June 2015.

 3. The full reasons for First-tier Tribunal Judge Griffith dismissing  the
    appeal are a matter of record and are set out within his  decision  and
    are therefore not repeated in full here, but in summary, the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge found that as the Appellant  was  granted  Discretionary
    Leave initially before the 9th July 2012, the Transitional Arrangements
    under Section 10 of the Home Office's  policy  on  Discretionary  Leave
    applied. He found at [26] that "However, a reading of the  Transitional
    Arrangements in their entirety leads me to conclude that the  grant  of
    any period of further Leave, including settlement after completion of 6
    years discretionary for those granted DL  before  the  9th  July  2012,
    depends upon the circumstances of the applicant remaining the same.  If
    they do not, then the applicant cannot qualify for a further  grant  of
    DL".

 4. The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  went  on  at  [28]  to  find  that  the
    Appellant's first grant of DL was on the basis of her marriage and then
    at [29] the First-tier Tribunal Judge found that, "There has since 2011
    been a material change to the Appellant circumstances. The  Appellant's
    relationship with her husband came to an end in 2012 and they  are  now
    divorced. In light of the material change of circumstances, and on  the
    basis of my understanding of the condition she had to meet in order  to
    qualify for settlement I am satisfied that the Respondent has  complied
    with her published policy on Discretionary Leave".

 5.  As  a  result  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did  not  accept  the
    Appellant's  argument  that  the  decision  was  in   breach   of   the
    Respondent's own policy, but he went on to consider whether or not  the
    decision amounted to a breach of the Appellant's  right  to  a  private
    life under paragraph 276 ADE of the Immigration Rules between [30]  and
    [36], but concluded that the Appellant could not bring  herself  within
    paragraph 276 ADE (vi) because she had not established that she had  no
    ties (including social, cultural or family) with China.

 6. The Appellant sought to appeal that decision to the Upper Tribunal, and
    permission to appeal has been granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Cox
    on the 21st August 2015. He found that it was arguable that in  respect
    of the first ground of appeal, the Judge had materially  erred  in  his
    interpretation and application of the relevant policy and that it  also
    may be arguable that the Judge had made mistakes  of  fact  leading  to
    material errors of law when considering the  Appellant's  private  life
    and the issue of "ties" under paragraph 276 ADE.

Submissions

 7. Mr Tan on behalf of the Appellant relied  upon  his  Skeleton  Argument
    contained within the grounds for application for permission  to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal. I have fully considered that  skeleton  argument
    in reaching my decision. Those arguments are a matter of record and are
    therefore not repeated  in  full  here,  but  in  summary,  within  the
    Skeleton Argument it was sought to be argued on behalf of the Appellant
    that the paragraph at bullet point 3 of Section 10 of the  Transitional
    Arrangements  does  not  apply  when  an  applicant  is  applying   for
    Indefinite Leave to Remain after completing 6  years  of  Discretionary
    Leave. That bullet point reads:

         "Decision makers must consider whether the circumstances prevailing
         at the time of the original grant of Leave continue at the date  of
         the  decision.  If  the  circumstances  remain  the  same  and  the
         criminality thresholds do not apply, a further period of 3 years DL
         should normally be granted. Decision-makers must  consider  whether
         there are any circumstances that may  warrant  departure  from  the
         standard period of leave. See section 4.4 above".

 8. Within the Skeleton Argument it is argued that "In the  case  where  an
    applicant, as in this case, is applying for ILR, after completing the 6
    years of DL, the test of whether the "circumstances remain the same" is
    no longer applicable, but instead the enquiry is on whether  there  are
    "significant changes" as set out in  bullet  point  4  of  Section  10.
    Bullet point 4 of Section 10 reads:

         "If there have been significant changes or the applicant  fails  to
         meet the criminality thresholds (see criminality exclusion  section
         above), the application for further Leave should be refused".

 9. It is argued within the Skeleton Argument that the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge erred in finding at [26] that the "circumstances  remain  in  the
    same" test applied to any period of further Leave granted, irrespective
    to whether or not this was Discretionary Leave or Indefinite  Leave  to
    Remain. It was argued that what constitutes significant changes for the
    purposes of the Transitional Arrangements  should  now  be  applied  in
    respect of Article 8 cases to those who  have  already  settled  for  6
    years under this Discretionary  Leave  system  under  the  Transitional
    Arrangements and that the fact that the Appellant had been abandoned by
    her husband after 8 years of marriage is a significant  change  to  her
    life, but whether it is a relevant significant change, it  was  argued,
    was a matter which was not explained within the determination and  that
    the  Appellant  was  prejudiced  without  the  basis  of  the   Judge's
    determination. It was argued that the  Judge  did  not  state  how  the
    Respondent had complied with her published policy when  the  Respondent
    had not made reference to the Transitional Arrangements.

10.  It  was  further  argued  within  the  Skeleton  Argument  that   when
    considering  the  issue  of  private  life  the  Judge  erred  in   his
    consideration of the facts, in that the Judge had found  that  although
    the Appellant had no family in China, she had made a number of trips to
    China, but in 2011, when she had made three trips to that  country  and
    stayed on one occasion for 3 months, which he took to be evidence  that
    she still had significant social and cultural ties to  China.  However,
    it was argued within the Skeleton Argument that the  Appellant  in  her
    statement said that she travelled to China, Hong Kong and Macau in  the
    past few years, purely for leisure and  to  Hong  Kong  and  Macau  for
    gambling and that she had been in 2009 for one week in China  and  Hong
    Kong, for less than one week for each of the  three  occasions  and  in
    2010 for gambling and for three weeks in Macau and Hong Kong  in  2012,
    again for gambling and that the Judge was wrong to mistake China, Macau
    and Hong Kong as being one country in his determination. It was  argued
    that the Appellant is from mainland China and that Macau and Hong  Kong
    are under different legal administrative systems  where  the  Appellant
    has no right of residence and to which she could not  be  returned  and
    that the Judge was wrong  in  law  to  conclude  that  the  Appellant's
    gambling  trips  to  Macau  and  Hong  Kong  were   relevant   to   the
    consideration of her ties with China.

11. In his oral submissions, Mr Tan argued  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge had not set out the circumstances prevailing as at  the  date  of
    the original grant of Discretionary Leave in 2008. He went on to  argue
    that bullet point 3 of Section 10 under the  Transitional  Arrangements
    did not apply when the Appellant was seeking Indefinite Leave to Remain
    and that that bullet point only applied to applications for  a  further
    period of 3 years  Discretionary  Leave.  He  argued  that  the  second
    sentence qualified the first sentence. However, somewhat  different  to
    the contents of his skeleton argument, he then went on  to  argue  that
    bullet point 4 equally limited bullet point 3 and was  a  qualification
    of bullet point 3 and that if someone was seeking Indefinite  Leave  to
    Remain,  all  that  applied  were  the  criminality  checks   and   the
    application of the criminality thresholds, and not a  consideration  as
    to whether or not the circumstances remain the same  or  whether  there
    had been significant changes.

12. Mr Tan then  tried  to  argue  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    findings at [28] in relation to the grant to the Appellant of the first
    period of Discretionary Leave was on the basis  of  her  marriage,  was
    perverse. However, he conceded that this had not been raised previously
    as a ground of appeal and was not argued anywhere within  his  Skeleton
    Argument. It was also apparent  that  permission  to  appeal  not  been
    granted on this basis.  I therefore did not permit  Mr  Tan  to  pursue
    this argument, and he did not seek permission to amend his  grounds  of
    appeal in this regard.

13. Mr Tan went on to argue that the Appellant's visits to  Hong  Kong  and
    Macau should not have been considered by  the  Judge  when  considering
    ties to China as he argued they were not part of the Chinese  territory
    and the Appellant would have no legal right to reside there. He  argued
    they were complete different jurisdiction, but he did agree  that  they
    were culturally similar.

14. In his submissions on behalf of the Respondent, Mr Wilding relied  upon
    his Rule 24 response.  In  that  it  was  argued  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had directed himself appropriately and  that  the  Judge
    properly concluded that the end  of  the  Appellant's  marriage  was  a
    material change, which as a  result  then  led  to  the  decision  that
    further Leave would be refused at [29]. It was  further  argued  within
    the Rule 24 response that it was open to the  Judge  to  conclude  that
    person who spoke Chinese and had made several trips to the  country  of
    China had major  cultural  ties  with  the  country  and  that  it  was
    indicative of the Appellant's ties that she chose to  return  to  China
    for the purposes of gambling.

15. Mr Wilding argued that First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Griffith  had  done
    nothing wrong. He argued that the Appellant was  seeking  to  read  the
    policy other than in the normal way in which it ought to  be  read  and
    the policy said what it said and that bullet point 4 was not stated  to
    be inapplicable to settlement cases, nor was it  said  that  the  first
    sentence of bullet point 3 only applied  to  applications  for  further
    Leave. He argued that at best the policy was silent  on  the  issue  of
    Indefinite Leave to Remain, but that did not  help  the  Appellant,  as
    then it was purely  at  the  discretion  of  the  Secretary  of  State.
    However, he argued that the policy was in fact clear  and  that  bullet
    point  3  told  decision-makers  when  the  grant  of  Leave  would  be
    appropriate and that bullet point 4 indicated when not to  grant  Leave
    but that each case would still be dealt with on a case-by-case basis.

16. Mr Wilding argued that at page 8 of the bundle  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge was the case record sheet which he said showed that  the
    Appellant had applied in 2004 as a spouse, but  that  the  decision  on
    that was delayed until 2007. He argued that there is  no  challenge  to
    the  finding  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  that  her  original
    application was based upon her marriage, and it  had  not  been  argued
    within the Grounds of Appeal that the decision was perverse. He  argued
    that within the case record the Appellant had been  asked  to  prove  a
    subsisting marriage on the 20th July 2007 and that  the  Appellant  had
    actually applied in 2004 for Leave to Remain as a spouse,  but  as  the
    Appellant had  not  met  the  criteria  under  DP3/395  C  ,given  that
    enforcement papers were served before her marriage, a period of 3 years
    Discretionary Leave had been granted under 395C.  He  argued  that  the
    findings made by the Judge in respect of  the  discretion  policy  were
    open to him.

17. He further argued that the argument of  the  Appellant  in  respect  of
    paragraph 276 ADE is misconceived  and  that  on  the  Appellant's  own
    evidence she was familiar with  the  Chinese  language  and  had  given
    evidence in Chinese at the original hearing.  He  argued  that  it  was
    wrong to say that Macau and Hong Kong should be taken to be  irrelevant
    for ties to China, and that the Appellant's own evidence was  that  she
    had been to China for 3 months in 2011.

18. In reply Mr Tan argued that the grant of Leave based on paragraph  395C
    was not exclusively based upon the Appellant's  marriage  but  also  on
    issues such as the strength of her connections to the  UK  and  it  was
    second guessing to consider the reasons for the grant of  Discretionary
    Leave and that there was no evidence to show that the marriage was more
    important than other factors. He asked me to allow the appeal.

My Findings on Error of Law and Materiality

19. In my judgement, the First-tier Tribunal Judge Griffith,  when  finding
    at [26] that, "However, a reading of the Transitional  Arrangements  in
    their entirety leads me to conclude that the grant  of  any  period  of
    further  Leave,  including  settlement  after  completion  of  6  years
    discretionary for those granted DL before the 9th  July  2012,  depends
    upon the circumstances of the applicant remaining the same. If they  do
    not, then the applicant cannot qualify for further  grant  of  DL",  is
    wrong. Although I do not accept the argument from Mr Tan on  behalf  of
    the Appellant that bullet .3 of Section 10 relating to the Transitional
    Arrangements of the Respondent's policy relates  only  to  applications
    for Discretionary Leave, given that the first paragraph of  Section  10
    states specifically that "those who, before the 9th July 2012, had been
    granted Leave under the DL policy in force at the time  would  normally
    continue to be dealt with under that policy through  to  settlement  if
    they qualify for it" and the first sentence of bullet point 3 does  not
    state that decision-makers  must  consider  whether  the  circumstances
    prevailing at the time of the original grant of Leave  continue  as  at
    the  date  of  the  decision,   when   considering   applications   for
    Discretionary Leave only.  It is  a  general  requirement.  The  second
    sentence of bullet point 3, simply qualifies that  general  requirement
    such that if the circumstances remain the same then and the criminality
    thresholds do not apply, then a further period of 3 years Discretionary
    Leave should normally  be  granted  to  those  who  apply  for  further
    Discretionary Leave.

20. However, this does not mean that decision-makers  should  not  consider
    whether or not the circumstances prevailing at the time of the original
    grant of Leave continued as at the date of decision,  when  considering
    applications for Indefinite Leave to Remain.  Although  decision  maker
    must consider whether or not the circumstances prevailing at  the  time
    of the original grant of Leave continue, I do not accept  that  if  the
    circumstances do not remain the same, then  no  further  Leave  can  be
    granted, it is simply that if the circumstances  do  remain  the  same,
    then a further period of Leave should be granted.

21. There may well be circumstances  in  which  the  circumstances  do  not
    remain the same, but there have not been significant  changes  for  the
    purposes of bullet point 4, where it would be down to the discretion of
    the Respondent as to whether or not to grant  the  application.  In  my
    judgement, bullet point 4 again simply gives  guidance  that  if  there
    have been significant changes  or  the  applicant  fails  to  meet  the
    criminality thresholds an  application  for  further  Leave  should  be
    refused.

22. In my judgement, the Transitional Arrangements makes it clear that  for
    those who before the 9th July 2012 had been  granted  Leave  under  the
    discretionary policy in force at the time will normally continue to  be
    dealt with under that policy through to settlement.   In  my  judgement
    all the bullet points under Section  10  actually  apply  even  if  the
    person is applying for  Indefinite  Leave  to  Remain,  rather  than  a
    further  extension  of  Discretionary  Leave,  and  not,  in  cases  of
    Indefinite  Leave  to  Remain,  simply  the  criminality   checks   and
    criminality threshold test under  bullet  point  2.  In  my  judgement,
    bullet point 4 clearly does apply in the  circumstances  in  this  case
    when the Appellant had  been  granted  Discretionary  Leave  under  the
    policy before the 9th July 2012, and was then applying  for  Indefinite
    Leave to Remain.  Nothing within the wording of Section 10  limits  its
    application in the manner contested for by Mr Tan.

23. In such circumstances, although First-tier Tribunal Judge Griffith  was
    wrong at [26] to find that the grant of any  further  period  of  Leave
    including settlement after  completing  6  years  Discretionary  Leave,
    dependent upon the circumstances of the applicant remaining the same, I
    do not consider that his error in that regard was material, given  that
    at [29] the First-tier Judge  clearly  found  that  there  had  been  a
    material change to the Appellant's circumstances since 2011, given that
    the Appellant's relationship with her husband had come  to  an  end  in
    2012 and they were divorced. In my judgement, under bullet point  4  of
    the Transitional Arrangements, which I  considered  did  apply  to  the
    application  for  Indefinite  Leave  to  Remain,  there  had   been   a
    significant change such that the application under the policy failed to
    be refused.  Further, given that the  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  find
    that the first grant of Discretionary Leave was on  the  basis  of  her
    marriage, First-tier Tribunal Judge Griffith did adequately explain the
    basis for the material change in circumstance, given that the appellant
    was previously married, but she was no longer in a subsisting marriage.
     The reasoning this regard is perfectly clear  and  adequate  and  does
    adequately explain to the appellant the reason for the decision.

24. Although Mr Tan before me sought to argue that the  finding  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Griffith at [28] that the first grant of DL was  on
    the basis that her marriage was perverse, the Appellant had not  sought
    to argue that within her Grounds of Appeal, permission was not  granted
    to appeal on that basis. I therefore did not allow him to  pursue  that
    argument, when permission has not been granted for that argument to  be
    run before the Upper  Tribunal.   Mr  Tan  did  not  formally  ask  for
    permission to amend his Grounds of Appeal, and in any  event,  I  would
    not have allowed such amendment, given the  lateness  of  the  proposed
    argument. In any event, even if I am wrong in that  regard,  I  do  not
    consider that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  in  that
    respect could be considered perverse, given that he has fully set  out,
    clear, sufficient and adequate reasons for his finding within [28]  and
    referred specifically to the screenshot of the Respondent's records, to
    which I was referred, at page 8 of the Appellant's  bundle  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, where the Appellant had been requested to  provide
    further evidence to prove a subsisting marriage on the 20th July  2007,
    before the grant of leave in 2008. It is also relevant in  that  regard
    that the Appellant did not  meet  the  criteria  under  DP3/395  C,  as
    enforcement papers were served before her  marriage,  and  further,  as
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Griffith found, the Appellant would not  have
    met the necessary criteria for a further grant of  Discretionary  Leave
    in 2011, had the circumstances changed. He was  perfectly  entitled  on
    the evidence before him to consider that the first grant of DL  was  on
    the basis of her marriage.

25. In such circumstances, the error on the part of the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge in respect of his interpretation the  policy  was  not  material,
    given that there had been  a  significant  change  in  the  Appellant's
    circumstances since the first grant of Discretionary  Leave,  and  that
    she was now divorced and the relationship  with  her  husband  had  now
    ended.  Her application would therefore  have  fallen  to  be  rejected
    under the policy in any event.

26.  Even  though  the  Appellant  did  not  qualify  under   the   policy,
    consideration was properly given by the First-tier Tribunal Judge as to
    whether or not she satisfied the provisions under paragraph 276 ADE  in
    respect of her private life. In that regard,  at  [13]  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had recorded the oral evidence of the Appellant  at  the
    First-tier Tribunal hearing and at that stage she had said that she had
    been to China 5 times since 1997 and in 2011 had  stayed  there  for  3
    months. He further noted that the Appellant had said that  she  had  no
    family in China but that she had worked in China before coming  to  the
    United Kingdom in 1977.  This  was  the  oral  evidence  given  by  the
    Appellant, and the Judge's reliance upon the same did not amount to  an
    error of law.

27. Further, although in her statement the Appellant had  stated  that  she
    had travelled to China, Hong Kong and Macau, her specific evidence  and
    the statement in respect of that  was  "although  I  had  travelled  to
    China, Hong Kong and Macau in the past few years,  it  was  purely  for
    leisure, and in Hong Kong and Macau for gambling. I travelled to  those
    places because I am culturally familiar, and not because my social ties
    there were stronger than here. My travels to the Far East  were  mostly
    for short periods: 2009 for one week in China and Hong Kong;  for  less
    than one week for each of the 3 occasions in 2010 for gambling; and for
    3 weeks in Macau and Hong Kong in 2012, again  for  gambling.  In  that
    regard it was the Appellant's own evidence regarding her travelling  to
    Hong Kong and Macau and China, because she was culturally familiar with
    those places. Although Hong Kong and Macau are  under  different  legal
    administrative systems, Hong Kong returned to  Chinese  sovereignty  on
    the 1st July 1999 and Macau returned to Chinese sovereignty on the 20th
    December 1999.  Hong Kong and Macau,  although  under  different  legal
    administrative systems, and to which clearly the Appellant could not be
    returned and would not necessarily be entitled to go to without a  visa
    or other clearance document, that does not  mean  that  Hong  Kong  and
    Macau simply being under different legal  administrative  systems,  are
    not actually formally parts of China, or that they are  not  culturally
    similar to China.

28. Indeed, the Appellant's own evidence was that she  went  there  because
    they were  culturally  similar.  Therefore,  the  Judge  was  perfectly
    entitled to take account of her trips there,  and  also  her  trips  to
    China, Hong Kong and Macau in considering whether or not  she  actually
    did have any social and cultural ties to  China  for  the  purposes  of
    paragraph 276 ADE (vi). The paragraph in the Immigration Rules  related
    to social and cultural ties,  not  to  a  jurisdictional  issue  as  to
    whether she could actually be returned there.

29. However, in any event, even if I am wrong in  that  regard,  given  the
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal Judge, that the  Appellant  had
    revisited China, and still spoke Chinese, such that she  gave  evidence
    through an interpreter at the First-tier Tribunal, there is  more  than
    sufficient evidence for him to find that she still  did  have  cultural
    and social ties to China. The Judge's findings in this regard were open
    to him on the evidence before him, and there was no material  error  of
    law in this regard.

30. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Griffith not  disclosing  any
    material error of law, the decision is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Griffith  does  not  contain  a
material error of law and is maintained;

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to  Rule  13  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)
Rules 2014 and no application for an anonymity order was made before me.  No
such order is made.


Signed                                                                 Dated
22nd October 2015

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty
