
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/41027/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Sheldon Court               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 25th July 2014                               |On 12th August 2014        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                 ms bato bi
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M J Aziz (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Obhi promulgated on  23rd  April  2014,  following  a  hearing  a
    Birmingham Sheldon Court on 11th April 2014.  In the determination, the
    judge allowed the appeal of Mrs Bato Bi.  The Respondent  Secretary  of
    State subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission  to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan who was  born  on  1st  January
    1932.  She is 84 years of age.  She appeals against the decision of the
    Respondent dated 26th  September  2013  refusing  her  application  for
    indefinite leave to remain outside of the Immigration Rules.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that she entered the UK as a visitor  on  14th
    April 2012 and then on 28th September  2012  made  an  application  for
    leave to remain.  The basis of her claim was  that  she  was  insecure,
    vulnerable, and frightened to live a life of solitude  in  Pakistan  at
    her age.  The thought of being separated from  her  family  caused  her
    stress and was aggravating her psychological state.

 4. Furthermore, the level of care she would  need  in  Pakistan  was  very
    expensive and one that she could not support.   The  Appellant  alleged
    that she required constant care and attention and that she  had  eleven
    relatives in the UK to care for her.

The Judge's Findings

 5. The judge considered the evidence before her  that  the  Appellant  had
    osteoarthritis, iron deficient anaemia,  and  stress  related  problems
    (paragraph 10).  She alleged that she was alone in Pakistan  (paragraph
    11).  She needed to be  cared  for  and  could  not  cook  for  herself
    (paragraph 12).

 6. Within a short time of her arrival in the UK "her age related illnesses
    progressed to the point that she now requires substantially  more  care
    and that this was not available to her in Pakistan" (paragraph 18).

 7. The judge observed that there had been a contrived effort on  the  part
    of her family members in the UK

         "to evade the Immigration Rules, as they could  have  supported  an
         application by the Appellant to come  to  the  UK  as  a  dependant
         relative, and in the light of her age, if what they say is true, it
         is likely to have been a successful  application.   The  fact  that
         they chose not to do that suggest that they are now, or did in  the
         past mislead the  Secretary  of  State,  as  to  her  situation  in
         Pakistan" (paragraph 19).

 8. Nevertheless, the judge went on to then conclude that, be  that  as  it
    may, the position that the Secretary of State was  now  presented  with
    was a fait accompli because the Appellant was living with  her  family,
    and had done so for two years and was weak  and  frail  (see  paragraph
    20).

 9. Given this, the appeal would be allowed outside the  Immigration  Rules
    on the basis of Article 8 jurisprudence because  the  Appellant  was  a
    frail elderly woman who was in the final stages of her life in Pakistan
    (paragraph 21).

Grounds of Application

10. The grounds of application state that  there  had  been  a  failure  to
    consider established case law such as Gulshan [2013] UKUT  00640  which
    required a decision maker to show that there  was  circumstances  which
    were  unusual  or  exceptional  before  recourse  could   be   had   to
    freestanding Article 8 jurisprudence.

11. On 23rd May 2014, permission to appeal was granted.

Submissions

12. At the hearing before me on 25th July  2014,  Mr  Smart,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Respondent Secretary of State, relied upon the grounds of
    appeal.  In particular reliance was placed on the case of  Nagre  where
    Sales J had stated that "It will be necessary for Article 8 purposes to
    go on to  consider  whether  there  are  compelling  circumstances  not
    sufficiently recognised under the new Rules ..." (paragraph 29).

13. In this case the judge had  referred  to  the  Appellant  as  a  "frail
    elderly woman who is in the final stages of her  life"  (paragraph  21)
    but Appendix FM provided a method by which an individual  could  obtain
    entry clearance and  subsequently  indefinite  leave  to  remain  as  a
    dependant adult relative and this course had not been  adopted  by  her
    relatives.

14. Given that the judge had  observed  that  "There  is  a  need  for  the
    Immigration Rules to be respected and this is a classic case where they
    have been deliberately evaded", the judge  should  have  dismissed  the
    appeal.

15. For his part, Mr Aziz submitted that  the  judge  was  clear  that  the
    Appellant could not succeed under the Immigration  Rules.   Indeed,  at
    paragraph 19 the judge had made it expressly plain that there had  been
    a deliberate attempt to evade  the  Immigration  Rules.   However,  the
    judge had then considered (at paragraph  20)  that  the  Appellant  was
    getting more and more frail with her old age.  She  then  had  specific
    regard to the "public interest".

16. She did not expressly say that the Secretary of State would not  remove
    her given her age.  This was not a consideration that  she  had  regard
    to.  Instead, she had specific regard  to  the  Appellant's  particular
    circumstances.

17. On that basis it was decided that if consideration  was  given  to  the
    position  as  it  existed  now,  the   balance   of   public   interest
    considerations fell in her favour.  As a decision that was made outside
    the Immigration Rules, this was a decision that was open to the judge.

18. In reply, Mr Smart submitted that the judge was wrong to have  referred
    to the position as one of "fait accompli" and to then add also that  it
    was not in the public interest to remove a frail old woman.

No Error of Law

19. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside this decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  This is because, in what was clearly a difficult case before
    the judge, consideration was given to  all  the  relevant  issues.   In
    particular, it was recognised that there had been a deliberate  attempt
    to evade the Immigration Rules (paragraph 19).  This was  done  not  by
    the Appellant herself but her relatives in the UK.  The judge was clear
    that "They are now, or did in the past mislead the Secretary  of  State
    ..." (paragraph 19).  However, since then the Appellant had been in the
    UK for two years.

20. In using the word "fait accompli" the judge was simply recognising  the
    position as it existed now.  That position had, as the judge explained,
    the following particular elements to it.  First, that the Appellant was
    living with her family in the United Kingdom.   Second,  that  she  had
    been in the UK for two years.  Third, that she was a person of "such an
    advanced age," that "it is  likely  that  she  has  become  weaker  and
    frailer since she has been in the UK.  Fourth, that the  Appellant  may
    also have "capacity problems which are likely to  make  her  even  more
    vulnerable .." (paragraph 20).

21. As to  the  attempt  to  evade  immigration  controls,  by  her  family
    relatives, the judge was aware of the fact that the family  members  in
    all probability acted with the best interest at heart of the  Appellant
    and that  they  are  "providing  increasing  levels  of  care  to  her"
    (paragraph 20).

22. Thereafter, as far as  Article  8  ECHR  jurisprudence  was  concerned,
    proper consideration had to be given by the judge  to  the  balance  of
    public interest considerations.  This the judge did do.  It was open to
    her in this respect to conclude that, "It is not in the public interest
    to return a frail elderly woman, who is in  the  final  stages  of  her
    life, to Pakistan to an uncertain situation" (paragraph 21).

23. The challenge to her determination on the basis of what was said by the
    Upper Tribunal in Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640 amounted  to  nothing  more
    than a disagreement with the judge's findings because the judge does in
    the next breath then refer specifically to Gulshan  pointing  out  that
    she has taken this decision  into  account,  and  observing  that  "The
    circumstances of the Appellant's  case  are  unusual  and  exceptional"
    under Article 8 the ECHR (see paragraph 21).

24. This is exactly the application of the test propounded in cases such as
    Gulshan.  Another judge may  well  have  decided  the  matter  entirely
    differently.  This  judge,  however,  decided  it  in  this  way.   The
    question is whether the process of reasoning and the application of the
    law is wrong.  It is not.  It is well-established that the  requirement
    of "perversity" is one which  "represents  a  very  high  hurdle"  (see
    Brooke LJ in R (Iran) [2005] EWCA Civ 982).





Decision

25. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

No anonymity order is made.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 9th August 2014

