

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)   Appeal Numbers: IA/34961/2013
       IA/34975/2013

      IA/37455/2013
      IA/37821/2013
        IA/37828/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
Heard at Sheldon Court
                        Determination Promulgated
On 7th October 2014                                              On 10th
October 2014
Prepared 8th October 2014

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

                            MOHAMMED ALMIN JAMMEH
                                                             First Appellant
                                     And

                              FATOUMATTA JAMMEH
                                                            Second Appellant
                                     And

                              RAMATULIE JAMMEH
                                                             Third Appellant
                                     And

                                SALLY JAMMEH
                                                            Fourth Appellant
                                     And

                            MOHMMED LAMIN JAMMEH
                       (Anonymity directions not made)
                                                             Fifth Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant: Mr M Sharif (Solicitor, SH&Co, Solicitors)
For the Respondent: M (Home Office Presenting Officer)



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Appellants applied to vary their leave to remain in the UK and
   sought to remain relying on article 8. The applications were refused
   under the Immigration Rules including Appendix FM and article 8. The
   appeals were heard by Judge Kirvan on the 28th of May 2014 at Sheldon
   Court and dismissed in a determination promulgated on the 9th of June
   2014.

2. Having set out the background to the Appellants' case the Judge found
   that the children were integrated into the UK and analysed the
   educational position and the positive aspects of the case. Having found
   that they did not qualify under the Immigration Rules the issue was
   whether it was reasonable to expect the family to return to Gambia given
   that the children had been in the UK for over 7 years. Having set out the
   case of Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 the Judge found that the Appellant could be
   returned to Gambia.

3. The Appellant's sought permission to appeal on the basis that the
   Immigration Judge had not mentioned section 55 of the Borders,
   Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and that the decision would not be
   sound if section 55 had not been considered. It was also asserted that
   the Judge had not sought to ascertain the wishes of the children and had
   not applied relevant case law including Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74 and the
   effect of removal on the children.

4. Permission was granted by Judge Levin on the 27th of June 2014. He did
   so on the basis that it was arguable that the Judge had failed to carry
   out a proper assessment of the children's best interests under section 55
   of the 2009 Act but refused permission on the article 8 point raised. At
   the hearing Mr Sharif sought to raise article 8 which was allowed as
   consideration of points under section 55 are integral to an article 8
   submission and in my view it is unrealistic to separate them.

5. Following submissions at the hearing I indicated that in my view the
   determination did not contain any errors of law and the appeal to the
   Upper Tribunal would be dismissed with reasons given in writing later. I
   now set out the reasons for that decision.

6. The Judge did not mention section 55 by name but stated at paragraph 46
   that she had to take into account their best interests, that was a more
   than sufficient reference to the obligations that applied. In any case
   the important issue is whether the children's welfare was considered by
   the Judge in making the decision and whether sufficient reasons were
   given. There is abundant authority from the Court of Appeal that it is
   not an error of law not to quote a statute or case name but it is an
   error not to apply the appropriate principles in a case.

7. The evidence was summarised in the determination at paragraphs 21 to 34.
   Starting with the First Appellant the Judge summarised the position of
   each Appellant in turn. It is clear that the Judge had in mind the
   circumstances of each Appellant, their time in the UK and the state of
   their education or employment, their language skills and degree of
   integration in the UK. Positive factors in the Appellants cases were
   referred to, in the course of submissions while it was suggested that the
   Judge had not given appropriate weight to the children's length of
   residence there was no part of the determination highlighted to show
   where factors had been overlooked or ignored.

8. The question of the children's removal to Gambia was considered from
   paragraph 50 onwards and she referred to the interests of the family
   being weighed against the interests of the authorities in the UK. In the
   following paragraphs the Judge considered the circumstances of the
   family, that the youngest child had not been to Gambia and the
   differences in the educational opportunities that would be available.

9. It is not necessary for a Judge to give each and every factor that
   influences the decision made, if sufficient reasons are given and they
   are justified by the evidence presented and accepted or rejected then
   that discharges the Judge's obligations. In all cases the determination
   has to be read as a whole and it is inappropriate to take sections out of
   context. Later findings and assessments are to be read in the light of
   earlier findings and the evidence provided.

10. In this determination it is clear that Judge Kirvan had regard to all
   of the relevant evidence, case law and statutes and applied the relevant
   principles to the facts of the Appellants' case. It cannot be said that
   she did not consider irrelevant matters or failed to consider relevant
   factors. Read overall the determination shows a fair and balanced
   approached to the case and does not reveal any errors of law.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I make no
order.

Fee Award

In dismissing the appeal I make no fee award.

Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 9th October 2014


