
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/41734/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 28th  January 2015                         |    On 9th February 2015     |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge POOLE

                                   Between

                          MRS NADERA JIRJEES DAWOOD
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Louise Dickinson, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr Irwin Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant is a female citizen of Iraq, born 24 December 1943.

   2. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom  on  18  July  2013,  with
      entry clearance as family visitor.  This visa  expired  on  24  August
      2013.  Some days prior to that date the appellant applied for leave to
      remain upon the basis of her family and private life.  She had a  son,
      daughter-in-law and grandchildren living in the  United  Kingdom,  and
      she suffered with medical problems.
   3. By a letter  dated  25  September  2013  the  respondent  refused  the
      appellant's application.  The appellant appealed that decision.

   4. The appeal came before Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal Holder sitting
      at Newport on 23 June 2014.  An oral hearing was held and both parties
      were represented.  Judge Holder heard evidence and in a decision dated
      3 July 2014 he dismissed the appellant's appeal both  "on  immigration
      grounds" and on human rights grounds.

   5. The appellant then sought leave to appeal.  There  are  seven  grounds
      alleging error which can be summarised  as  follows.   The  judge  had
      failed to consider the appropriate paragraph of the Immigration  Rules
      (as had the respondent).  The correct outcome was  to  find  that  the
      decision was "not in accordance with the law".   The  judge  was  thus
      unable to rectify the respondent's error.  The judge had  adopted  the
      wrong test with regard to the appellant's illness and  had  failed  to
      properly take into account Country of Origin Guidance.  The judge  had
      failed to deal  adequately  with  "proportionality",  additionally  by
      considering the wrong Immigration Rule.

   6. This application came before another judge of the First-Tier  Tribunal
      who refused the application for reasons set out in a  decision  notice
      dated 29 August 2014.  Although containing  what  might  be  a  simple
      typographic error, the judge was  of  the  view  that  if  the  proper
      paragraph of the Immigration Rules had been considered the application
      would still have failed because the appellant had entered  the  United
      Kingdom as a visitor will leave for only 6 months.  It was then  noted
      that Judge Holder had proceeded to consider the matter "under  Article
      8" which would have been the same area of  consideration  of  whatever
      rule was considered and that accordingly there was no  arguable  error
      of law.

   7. The appellant renewed the application before the Upper  Tribunal.   In
      the main the grounds were a repetition of  the  original  application,
      although a number of grounds had been amplified,  although  additional
      criticism is levelled at the decision of the judge who  refused  leave
      to appeal in the First-Tier.

   8. In granting leave to appeal Upper Tribunal  Judge  Kebede  found  that
      there was arguable merit in the argument that  the  wrong  Immigration
      Rule had  been  considered  and  this  had  an  impact  on  Article  8
      consideration.

   9. The respondent (by a letter dated 27 October 2014) lodged  a  response
      under Rule 24 as follows:

         "1.  The respondent to this appeal is the Secretary  of  State  for
      the Home Department.  Documents relating to this appeal should be sent
      to the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department,  at  the  above
      address.


      2.  The respondent opposes the appellant's appeal.   In  summary,  the
      respondent will submit inter alia that the  judge  of  the  First-Tier
      Tribunal directed himself appropriately.


      3.  The grounds complain that the judge did not consider the dependent
      relative  part  of  Appendix  FM,  EC-DR/E-ILRDR.    The   ground   is
      misconceived as an application under this part of the  rules  requires
      that the initial application be made from abroad.


      4.  The respondent requests an oral hearing".

  10. Thus the matter came before me in the Upper Tribunal.

  11. Miss Dickinson in her submission  said  that  the  decision  of  Judge
      Holder should be set  aside  and  re-made  allowing  the  appeal.   An
      incorrect paragraph of the rules had been applied and she referred  me
      to paragraph 18 of the determination.  Miss Dickinson said that it was
      clear that neither rule applied at the time of  application  and  that
      therefore the judge could not adequately deal with the balancing  act,
      and the effect of having  to  apply  again  from  Iraq  had  not  been
      properly considered.  The judge should have allowed the appeal in that
      it was not in accordance with the law.  Miss Dickinson  also  referred
      to paragraph 30(c) in that the judge had applied the  wrong  test  and
      should also have taken into account the Country of  Origin  report  on
      Iraq and the situation that existed in that country at the time of the
      hearing.

  12. Miss Dickinson referred to paragraph 30(e) and the  difficulties  that
      the appellant's son would have in  accompanying  his  mother  back  to
      Iraq, which should be added the fact that his wife would have to  give
      up work to look after the children and the effect of Section 55 should
      be taken into account.  There was also a  risk  to  the  appellant  on
      return because she is a Christian.

  13. Mr Richards in reply indicated that the decision of the respondent had
      been clearly made outside the Rules and had been treated as such  both
      by the Home Office and by the Immigration Judge.  There  could  be  no
      argument with regard to which rule as neither rule could have applied.
       The judge had  very  fairly  (paragraph  23)  considered  the  matter
      outside the rules and had  carried  out  a  balancing  exercise.   Any
      medical evidence was very brief indeed and certainly not sufficient to
      support an Article 8 appeal on  medical  grounds.   In  conclusion  Mr
      Richards indicated  the  grounds  amounted  to  nothing  more  than  a
      disagreement with the findings of the judge.

  14. Miss Dickinson had no further comment to make in response.

  15. At the end of the hearing I indicated that I found no  material  error
      of law and the appeal of the appellant would be dismissed.  I now  set
      out my reasons for reaching this conclusion.

  16. It may well be the case that error has been made with  regard  to  the
      appropriate Immigration Rule to be considered.  There appears to  have
      been confusion  between  an  application  under  Section  R-LTRPT  and
      Section EC-DR/E-ILRDR.  Each relate to matters for consideration under
      Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules.

  17. It does appear from the refusal letter that the respondent dealt  with
      the application under R-LTRPT, whilst there is nothing in  the  letter
      of application submitted by the appellant's solicitors to suggest that
      this was the appropriate section.  The appellant's  son  was  over  18
      years of age and that  section  was  clearly  inappropriate,  and  the
      application was doomed to failure.

  18. Turning now to the determination of Judge Holder, he quite  accurately
      noted the proper application in paragraph 3 of his  determination  and
      whilst not making specific reference to it, he  has  not  fallen  into
      error in the same way as the respondent in the decision  notice  under
      appeal.   Miss  Dickinson  refers  me   to   paragraph   18   of   the
      determination, but in fact the judge here is merely  saying  that  the
      appellant did not meet the requirements of R-LTRPT.

  19. Whilst there is some  suggestion  that  the  appropriate  section  for
      consideration would be Section EC-DR (Adult  Dependent  Relative)  the
      respondent now clearly makes the point that an application under  that
      section would again fail because it must be made outside the  UK  (EC-
      DR.1.1.(a)).  However Miss Dickinson in her submission to me indicates
      that it is clear that neither "rule" would apply at the  time  of  the
      application.

  20. I therefore take the view that even if there were to be  an  error  in
      the determination of Judge Holder with regard to the  precise  section
      to be considered, that  error  would  not  be  material  as  the  same
      conclusion must be reached.  Quite simply the appellant did  not  meet
      the requirements of either section.

  21. Judge Holder conducted an exercise in examining the evidence necessary
      to consider the appeal under what can be described as  the  Article  8
      Provisions of Appendix FM and he quite properly reached the conclusion
      that the appellant  did  not  succeed  under  such  provisions.   Such
      provisions would be the same whichever substantive  section  had  been
      considered.

  22. Having reached a conclusion thus far, Judge Holder then (paragraph  22
      onwards) considered whether or not he  could  proceed  to  consider  a
      stand alone appeal under Article 8.  Paragraph 23 of the determination
      shows that after directing himself at paragraph 22 on the law, he then
      found  good  grounds  for  considering  there  were   exceptional   or
      compelling circumstances to be looked at outside  the  rules.   Having
      reached this conclusion he then went on (paragraph 24) to consider the
      five step approach of Razgar and paragraphs  25  to  32  set  out  his
      reasons for finding that the respondent's decision  was  proportionate
      in maintaining effective immigration control.

  23. Judge Holder noted in particular the case of Chikwamba v  SSHD  [2008]
      UKHL 40.  He also expressed a view on the medical  evidence  which  he
      considered to be "insufficient" in explaining the appellant's  medical
      condition.

  24. The challenge raised  to  the  judge's  findings  do  amount  to  mere
      disagreement with those findings.  The judge was entitled to reach his
      conclusions based upon the evidence that was placed  before  him.   In
      particular  he  has  given  adequate  consideration  and  reasons  for
      concluding that the respondent's decision was proportionate.

  25. For these reasons I find no material error  of  law.   The  appeal  is
      dismissed and the decision of Judge Holder must stand.





Signed                                  Date 06/02/2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Poole


