
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/41977/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th February 2018                         |On 27th February 2018         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                          Annie Stacia Alicia smith
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Jafurally of Callistes Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant is a female Jamaican citizen born 12th January 1988.  She
    appealed against the decision of Judge R G Walters  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated following a  hearing  on  22nd  December
    2016.

 2. The Appellant had arrived in the UK on 19th June  2002  as  a  visitor.
    The initial application made by the Appellant was for indefinite  leave
    to  remain,  based  upon  her  relationship  with  her  sister.    This
    application was refused in September 2003.   Refusal  was  reconsidered
    and maintained.  The Appellant remained in the UK.

 3. On 23rd September 2014 the Appellant applied for leave to  remain,  the
    application being based upon Article 8 of the 1950 European  Convention
    on Human Rights.  This application was based upon family life with  her
    sister and her sister's son and  private  life.   The  application  was
    refused on 10th October 2014.  The Respondent  considered  family  life
    pursuant to Appendix FM, noting that  the  Appellant  did  not  have  a
    partner or children.  Her private life was considered with reference to
    paragraph 276ADE(1)  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  the  Respondent  not
    accepting that the Appellant could  satisfy  any  of  the  requirements
    therein.  The application was also considered  pursuant  to  Article  8
    outside the Immigration Rules, the Respondent  finding  no  exceptional
    circumstances which would justify granting leave to remain.

 4. The Appellant's appeal  was  heard  by  the  FTT  (Judge  Higgins)  and
    dismissed in a decision promulgated on 18th November 2015.  However the
    FTT decision was set aside by the Upper Tribunal  (Judge  Roberts)  who
    found an error of law, and remitted the appeal to be reheard afresh  by
    the FTT.

 5. The appeal was then considered by Judge Walters and dismissed.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Pooler who found it  arguable
    that the FTT had erred by failing to deal with submissions made on  the
    Appellant's behalf, that by the time of the FTT hearing,  she  was  the
    wife of a British citizen, and it  was  submitted  that  she  satisfied
    Appendix FM, and the FTT should have considered section EX.1.(b) as  it
    was  contended  that  the  Appellant  had  a  genuine  and   subsisting
    relationship with her British husband, and  there  were  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life continuing outside the UK, as her husband  has
    a daughter from a previous relationship in the UK.



Error of Law

 7. On 21st September  2017  I  heard  submissions  from  both  parties  in
    relation to error of law.  On behalf of the Respondent it was  accepted
    that the FTT had  materially  erred  in  law  in  failing  to  consider
    Appendix FM.  The hearing was adjourned  for  further  evidence  to  be
    given.  Full details of the application for permission,  the  grant  of
    permission, submissions made by both parties, and  my  conclusions  are
    contained in my decision promulgated on 29th September 2017.  I set out
    below paragraphs 13 - 17 which contain my conclusions and  reasons  for
    setting aside the FTT decision;

         "13. As I announced at the hearing, the decision of the FTT is  set
             aside.  The FTT erred in  law  as  contended  in  the  grounds
             submitted on behalf of the Appellant, read together  with  the
             grant of permission.

         14.  The Appellant made it clear to the FTT that she wished to rely
             upon her relationship with the Sponsor, and it was argued that
             she  satisfied  the  requirements  of  Appendix  FM,  and   in
             particular EX.1.(b).  The FTT did not make any  findings  upon
             Appendix FM and that constitutes a material error of law.

         15.  This appeal had previously  been  remitted  to  be  considered
             afresh before the FTT.  In my view it is not appropriate for a
             further remittal to take place.  I have considered paragraph 7
             of the Senior President's Practice Statements.

         16.  I agreed that it would be appropriate for  further  up-to-date
             evidence to be given by the Appellant and Sponsor in  relation
             to their claim that insurmountable obstacles exist  to  family
             life continuing outside the UK.

         17.  The hearing was adjourned for further evidence to be provided.
               The  FTT  finding  that  the  Appellant  and  Sponsor   have
             established family life is preserved."



Re-Making the Decision

 8. The human rights application considered by the  FTT  in  December  2016
    contained different circumstances to the application that was initially
    made and refused in October 2014.  That was because the  Appellant  had
    married Anthony James Williams (the Sponsor) a British citizen on  22nd
    June  2016.   The  Sponsor  had  a  British  child  from   a   previous
    relationship born on 7th January 2013.

 9. At the commencement of the Upper Tribunal hearing on 13th February 2018
    I ascertained that the Tribunal had all documentation  upon  which  the
    parties intended to rely, and each party had served the other with  any
    documentation upon which reliance was to be placed.  The  Tribunal  had
    received the Respondent's bundle which was before the FTT, with Annexes
    A - K, and bundles served on behalf of the Appellant which are in three
    sections, comprising a total of 354  pages.   These  bundles  contained
    some evidence that had not been before the FTT,  admitted  pursuant  to
    rule 15(2A) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
    without objection.

10. Mr Jafurally sought to introduce  further  documentary  evidence,  that
    being a birth certificate of a child born to the Appellant and  Sponsor
    on 7th January 2018 and the British passport of that child.   Mr  Avery
    did not object and I decided that it was appropriate for that  evidence
    to be submitted if the birth of the child was going to play a  part  in
    the appeal.

11. There was therefore a different set of circumstances before  the  Upper
    Tribunal, in that I was now being asked to consider that the  Appellant
    and Sponsor had a British child, which was relevant to consideration of
    EX.1.,  and  also  relevant  if  section  117B  of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 was considered, in  particular  section
    117B(6).

12. Mr Avery indicated that the Respondent did not object to  the  Tribunal
    considering the  change  of  circumstances,  and  stated  that  it  was
    appropriate to consider that  the  Appellant  and  Sponsor  now  had  a
    British child.  Mr  Avery  had  seen  the  birth  certificate  and  the
    passport and was satisfied that the child is British.



Oral Evidence

13. Oral evidence was given  by  the  Appellant  who  adopted  her  witness
    statements dated 6th January 2015, 16th December 2016, and 4th  January
    2018.  The Appellant was not asked further questions by Mr   Jafurally,
    and was cross-examined by Mr Avery only in relation  to  the  Sponsor's
    contact with his daughter from a previous relationship.  Oral  evidence
    was then given by the Sponsor who adopted his witness statements  dated
    22nd December 2016 and 13th February 2018.  He was not questioned by Mr
    Jafurally and was asked by Mr Avery as to when he had contact with  his
    daughter from a previous relationship.  He said that he had contact  on
    a monthly basis.  His daughter lives in  Manchester  and  he  lives  in
    London.  He did not see her in December because the  Appellant  was  in
    the later stages of her pregnancy.



Oral Submissions

14. Mr Avery questioned whether the relationship between  the  Sponsor  and
    his  daughter  from  a   previous   relationship   meant   there   were
    insurmountable obstacles to the Sponsor and Appellant continuing family
    life outside the UK.   However,  with  reference  to  EX.1.(a)  it  was
    accepted that the Sponsor had a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
    with her British  child,  and  Mr  Avery  accepted  that  it  would  be
    appropriate to follow the Respondent's policy in  relation  to  British
    children, which is referred to in SF Albania [2017] UKUT 00120 (IAC).

15. Mr Jafurally submitted that the appeal should be allowed on  the  basis
    that the Respondent  accepted  that  the  suitability  and  eligibility
    requirements of Appendix FM were satisfied, and the evidence  indicated
    that EX.1.(a) and (b) were satisfied.  Mr Jafurally submitted  that  it
    was appropriate to rely upon the guidance in SF, and  the  Respondent's
    policy was that it was not reasonable to require  a  British  child  to
    leave the UK.

16. With reference to EX.1.(b) I was asked to find that the  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life between the Appellant and  Sponsor  continuing
    outside the UK, resulted from the Sponsor having a British child from a
    previous relationship.   There  is  a  Family  Court  order  in  place,
    permitting him contact with that child, and he  exercises  his  contact
    rights.

17. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.



My Conclusions and Reasons

18. The Appellant and Sponsor have family life with  each  other  and  with
    their daughter born 7th January 2018.  Article 8 is therefore  engaged.



19. The Respondent does  not  dispute  that  the  Appellant  satisfies  the
    suitability requirements and the eligibility requirements set out in E-
    LTRP.1.2 - 1.12 and E-LTRP.2.1 - 2.2 and  that  it  is  appropriate  to
    consider EX.1. and EX.2. which are set out below;

         "EX.1.   This paragraph applies if

                (a)    (i)  the  applicant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
                        parental relationship with a child who -

                        (aa)   is under the age of 18 years, or  was  under
                             the age of 18  years  when  the  applicant  was
                             first granted leave  on  the  basis  that  this
                             paragraph applied;

                        (bb)   is in the UK;

                        (cc)   is a British Citizen or has lived in the  UK
                             continuously  for  at  least  the  seven  years
                             immediately preceding the date of  application;
                             and

                    (ii)   it would not be reasonable to expect the child to
                        leave the UK; or

                (b)     The  applicant  has   a   genuine   and   subsisting
                    relationship with a partner who is in the UK  and  is  a
                    British Citizen, settled in the UK or  in  the  UK  with
                    refugee leave or humanitarian protection, and there  are
                    insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life  with   that
                    partner continuing outside the UK.

         EX.2.    For the purposes  of  paragraph  EX.1.(b)  'insurmountable
                obstacles' means the  very  significant  difficulties  which
                would  be  faced  by  the  applicant  or  their  partner  in
                continuing their family life together  outside  the  UK  and
                which could not be overcome or  would  entail  very  serious
                hardship for the applicant or their partner."

20. I find that  the  Appellant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with her daughter and I am satisfied, as accepted  by  the
    Respondent, that the daughter is a British citizen.

21. I must therefore consider whether it would be reasonable to expect  the
    daughter to leave the UK.  In  considering  this  point  I  follow  the
    guidance given in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705.  I must not  focus
    on the position of the child alone but must have regard  to  the  wider
    public interest, including the immigration history of the parents.

22. The fact that a child is British is a  weighty  consideration  and  was
    described in ZH  (Tanzania)  [2011]  UKSC  4  as  being  of  particular
    importance.  I take into account the guidance  in  SF  which  indicates
    that a Tribunal ought to take into account  the  Secretary  of  State's
    guidance if it points clearly to a particular outcome in a case as only
    in that way can consistency be obtained between those  cases  that  do,
    and those cases that do not,  come  before  the  Tribunal.   That  case
    involved considering whether it would be  unreasonable  for  a  British
    child to be removed from the UK and reference was made to the Secretary
    of State's own guidance on that point, and that guidance is relevant in
    this case.

23. In brief summary, the guidance  indicates  that  where  a  decision  to
    refuse an application would require a parent or primary carer to return
    to a country outside  the  European  Union  the  case  must  always  be
    assessed on the basis that it would be unreasonable to expect a British
    child to leave the EU with that parent or primary  carer.   It  may  be
    appropriate to refuse to grant leave where the conduct of the parent or
    primary carer gives rise to considerations of such weight as to justify
    separation if the child could otherwise stay  with  another  parent  or
    alternative primary carer in the UK or in the  EU.   Such  cases  would
    involve criminality or a very poor immigration history where  a  person
    has repeatedly and deliberately breached the Immigration Rules.

24. There is no suggestion of  criminal  convictions  in  this  case.   The
    Appellant has remained in the UK without leave for a very  considerable
    period of time, but I do not find her immigration history is such  that
    it would be appropriate to refuse her leave to remain in the  UK.   The
    best interests of the child are  clearly  to  be  brought  up  by  both
    parents if possible, and as it is accepted that the child  is  British,
    my conclusion is that it would not be reasonable to expect the child to
    leave the UK.  Therefore  the  Appellant  succeeds  with  reference  to
    EX.1.(a).

25. I find that the Appellant also succeeds with reference to EX.1.(b).  It
    is accepted that she has a genuine and subsisting relationship with the
    Sponsor who is a British citizen.  A  copy  of  the  Manchester  Family
    Court order dated 9th February 2017  is  included  in  the  Appellant's
    bundle at page 327.  This confirms that  the  Sponsor  is  entitled  to
    contact with his daughter on a  monthly  basis.   If  the  Sponsor  and
    Appellant had to relocate to Jamaica, this would mean that the  Sponsor
    and his daughter from the previous relationship would no longer be able
    to have physical contact.  In  my  view,  that  would  amount  to  very
    serious  hardship  for  the  Sponsor  and   therefore   I   find   that
    insurmountable obstacles to  family  life  continuing  outside  the  UK
    exist.  Therefore the appeal succeeds with reference  to  Appendix  FM.
    As set out in GEN.1.1. Appendix FM sets out the requirements to be  met
    and, in considering applications under this route, reflects how,  under
    Article 8 the balance will be struck between the right to  respect  for
    private and family life and the legitimate aims of protecting  national
    security, public safety and the economic  well-being  of  the  UK,  the
    prevention of disorder and crime, the protection of health  or  morals,
    and the protection of the rights  and  freedoms  of  others.   It  also
    reflects the relevant public interest considerations set out in Part 5A
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002,  and  takes  into
    account the need to safeguard and promote the welfare  of  children  in
    the UK, in line with the Secretary of State's duty under section 55  of
    the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.

26. Had I been considering this appeal with reference to Article 8  outside
    the Immigration Rules, the result would have been the same in that  the
    appeal would be allowed.  I must have regard to the  considerations  in
    section  117B  of  the  2002  Act.   Section  117B  confirms  that  the
    maintenance  of  effective  immigration  controls  is  in  the   public
    interest.  It is in the public interest that a person seeking leave  to
    remain can speak English.  The Appellant  can  speak  English  although
    this is a neutral factor in the balancing exercise.

27. It is also in the public interest that a person seeking leave to remain
    is financially independent.  The Sponsor has employment, but I  do  not
    find that evidence has been submitted to prove that  the  Appellant  is
    financially independent.

28. Little weight should be given to  a  private  life  or  a  relationship
    formed with a qualifying partner established by a person at a time when
    the person is in the UK  unlawfully.   The  Appellant  was  in  the  UK
    without leave when she commenced her relationship with the Sponsor.

29. Section 117B(6) states that in the case  of  a  person  not  liable  to
    deportation, the public interest does not require the person's removal,
    where the person has a genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship
    with a qualifying child, and it would not be reasonable to  expect  the
    child to leave the UK.  This therefore is the same test as in EX.1.(a).
     The Appellant does have a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
    with her daughter who is a qualifying child  because  she  is  British.
    For the reasons given earlier, it would not be reasonable to expect the
    British child to leave the UK.

30. Therefore, notwithstanding financial independence has not been  proved,
    and the Appellant has been in the UK without leave for  a  considerable
    period of time, my conclusion is that section 117B(6)  means  that  the
    appeal should be allowed, which reinforces my finding  in  relation  to
    section EX of Appendix FM.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law and was set aside.   I  substitute  a  fresh  decision.   The
appeal is allowed.


Anonymity

No anonymity direction was made by the FTT.  There has been  no  application
to the Upper Tribunal for anonymity and I see no need to make  an  anonymity
direction.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             16th February 2018




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Although the appeal has been allowed I do not make a  fee  award.   Evidence
was considered by the Tribunal which was not  before  the  initial  decision
maker.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             16th February 2018
