
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/41372/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 15th February 2016                    |On 6th April 2016                   |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before


                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Mr TOM PETER IYARE
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Sreeraman, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Uzdechima, instructed by Patterson & Co,
Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the  Secretary  of
    State but nonetheless I  shall  refer  to  the  parties  as  they  were
    described  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   In  this  instance  the
    Secretary  of  State  appeals  with  permission  against  the  decision
    promulgated on 24th August  2015  by  Judge  Seifert  who  allowed  the
    appellant's appeal  on  Article  8  grounds  against  the  respondent's
    decision to refuse to grant him leave to remain and to  remove  him  to
    Nigeria as an overstayer by reference to Section 10.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 10th September  1993  and
    he entered the United Kingdom on 22nd December 2006, as  a  minor,  and
    with his family as a visitor, with leave valid only from 17th May  2006
    to 17th May 2008.

 3. On 25th September 2012 the appellant was included as a dependant in his
    mother's EEA  residence  card  non-EEA  national's  application.   That
    application was refused on 26th February 2013 and he was served with  a
    form IS151A notifying him on 18th August 2014 of his immigration status
    and liability to detention and removal.

 4. On 25th September 2014 a decision which is the subject of  this  appeal
    was made to refuse the application for leave to remain  on  the  ground
    that the decision would not place the UK in breach of  its  obligations
    under the Human Rights Act and gave directions under Section 10 of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 for the appellant's removal.

 5. The appellant's solicitors submitted that the appellant had  overstayed
    because it was the fault of his parents and because their  relationship
    had broken down and he had resided in the UK for eight  years,  was  of
    good character with no criminal  convictions  nor  recourse  to  public
    funds and was currently studying at university and  had  no  connection
    with Nigeria as his family unit remained in the UK.

 6. The respondent made an application for permission  to  appeal  pointing
    out that one  of  the  findings  at  paragraph  26  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision was that the appeal of the appellant's  mother  and
    three  younger  siblings  was  allowed  in  a  decision  with   reasons
    promulgated on 27th January 2015.  It was recorded "Mrs Iyare confirmed
    that leave was granted to her and Mr Iyare's three younger siblings who
    are between 8 and 15 years of age.  Together with Mr Irye, they  are  a
    family unit.  She confirmed that Mr Iyre has been in the UK since  22nd
    December 2006. "

 7. It was submitted on application for permission that the judge had  been
    misinformed on this point and this had led to a material error in  law.
    Mrs Iyare and her three children had not been granted leave  after  the
    Secretary of State was successful in challenging the decision  and  had
    been granted permission to appeal the decision on  27th  January  2015.
    There was to be an Upper Tribunal hearing on 3rd September 2015.

 8. At  paragraph  46  the  judge  found  that  the  appellant  would  face
    significant obstacles to integration into Nigeria "having no  home,  no
    relatives and a different accent than others.  He would not be able  to
    complete his current university course."

 9. It was further submitted that  the  appellant  would  not  be  able  to
    complete his university course but the judge had erred  by  not  taking
    into consideration the case law of Nasim and Others  Article  8  [2014]
    UKUT 0025 and Patel and Others and The Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department [2013] UKSC 72 which confirmed at paragraph 57
         "57. It is important to remember that article 8 is not a general
             dispensing power. It is to be distinguished from the Secretary
             of State's discretion to allow leave to remain outside the
             rules, which may be unrelated to any protected human right.
             The merits of a decision not to depart from the rules are not
             reviewable on appeal: section 86(6). One may sympathise with
             Sedley LJ's call in Pankina for "common sense" in the
             application of the rules to graduates who have been studying
             in the UK for some years (see para 47 above). However, such
             considerations do not by themselves provide grounds of appeal
             under article 8, which is concerned with private or family
             life, not education as such. The opportunity for a promising
             student to complete his course in this country, however
             desirable in general terms, is not in itself a right protected
             under article 8."

10. It was submitted that the obstacles given to integration  into  Nigeria
    were not "very significant" the  appellant  spoke  English  and  indeed
    English was the official language of Nigeria.  The  appellant  had  the
    advantage of an English education and there was a reintegration package
    that the appellant could access.

11. Permission to appeal was granted stating that the  judge  was  shown  a
    decision of Judge O'Garro allowing the mother's appeal but not told the
    respondent had been granted permission to appeal.   The  decision  also
    displayed a failure to engage with the  proper  approach  to  paragraph
    276ADE SS Congo v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 317  and to an Article 8  appeal
    outside the Immigration Rules.  Had the judge known the  true  position
    of the appellant's mother and children he would not  have  reached  the
    conclusion that the appellant would be returning to Nigeria  alone  and
    without family support.  The  judge  failed  to  ask  himself  how  the
    appellant gained admission to a university degree course without having
    leave to remain and why he should be allowed to  conclude  that  course
    when he did not meet the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules  as  a
    student.

12. In addition it was arguable that the judge  failed  to  apply  Sections
    117A to D and the guidance to be found in AM Malawi.  Overall there was
    a flawed approach.

13. A Rule 24 reply was submitted by Mr Iyare's  solicitors  on  the  basis
    that no issue was taken in the submission by the  respondent  regarding
    the mother's status.  The relevant date is the date of the hearing  and
    the Tribunal should decide a case based on the current evidence at  the
    date of the hearing.  Removing the appellant jointly  with  his  family
    members was not part of the respondent's reasons for refusal letter and
    not  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  and   the   respondent's
    submissions  with  regard  the  judge's  finding  on  an  obstacle   of
    reintegration was simply a disagreement.

14. The appeal was allowed under paragraph 276ADE(1)(6) and family members'
    immigration status or relationship was immaterial to the application of
    sub-paragraph (6) of the Rule and such consideration was irrelevant  to
    the satisfaction of that Rule as the  Rule  was  individualistic.   The
    judge made clear at paragraph 48 that Appendix FM  was  not  satisfied.
    The perceived error and reference to the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    finding at 26 was misconceived in that such a finding related to family
    life outside the Rules as made clear.

15. The respondent's challenge to the First-tier Tribunal's finding of fact
    on the university education was again misconceived the judge was making
    a finding of fact under the Rule not under Article 8.

16. The judge accepted that the appellant remained in the UK as a child and
    it was not the appellant's choice or fault [paragraphs 27 and  34]  and
    therefore the judge was right to take into account  at  [46]  that  the
    appellant's education would suffer.

17.  The  appellant  would  face  destitution.   There  was  no  subsisting
    relationship with the father or anyone in the country.   He  could  not
    speak the local language or 'Pidgin' English.  He spoke English with  a
    foreign language.  The judge considered all of the  evidence.   It  was
    not open to the Secretary of State to introduce new evidence.

18. The respondent's position during the application was to the effect that
    the appellant was an independent adult  therefore  separated  from  his
    mother and siblings' application.   It  was  unarguable  the  appellant
    cannot meet the requirement of the Rules simply because the  respondent
    is proposing after the hearing  to  remove  him  with  his  mother  and
    siblings as a family.  This argument was perverse.

19. The case of  AM  (S  117B)  Malawi  [2015]  UKUT  0260  (IAC)  was  not
    specifically raised in the respondent's grounds and the judge  properly
    directed his mind to the relevant part of the law Section 117B.  It was
    submitted that AM Malawi (The statutory duty to  consider  the  matters
    set out in s 117B of the  2002  Act  is  satisfied  if  the  Tribunal's
    decision shows that it has had regard  to  such  parts  of  it  as  are
    relevant) at paragraph 8 proved the judge's approach.

The Hearing

20. At the hearing Ms Sreeraman submitted the judge had misdirected himself
    under paragraph 276ADE.  The court had been misinformed by  the  mother
    that she had been granted leave.  That was clear from the fact that the
    mother had not been  granted  leave  as  the  Secretary  of  State  had
    challenged the decision allowing her appeal and the Secretary of  State
    had been granted permission on 23rd March 2015.

21. Mr Uzdechima on behalf of the appellant confirmed that the  mother  was
    at the hearing and the judge was  entitled  to  presume  that  she  had
    settled in the UK because her appeal was allowed.  The hearing was held
    on 3rd July 2015.

22. He referred to a skeleton argument which he submitted at  the  hearing.
    He confirmed that the Secretary of State was  not  represented  at  the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal but he stated that the  date  of
    the hearing was relevant and this could be seen from the decision of J1
    v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 279.  I  was  referred  to  paragraph  55  which
    stated that at (i) in cases where the Claimant seeks asylum or a  right
    to remain in the UK on human rights grounds the court or Tribunal  must
    determine that claim on the basis of current  evidence.   He  submitted
    that at the date of the hearing the mother was not  removable.   Indeed
    he stated that there  had  been  an  Upper  Tribunal  hearing  but  the
    mother's appeal although dismissed  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  had  been
    granted permission to appeal to the Court of  Appeal.   Notwithstanding
    that, this was an individual claim by the appellant.  It was  not  that
    the Secretary of State was stating he should be removed  together  with
    his mother and family and the judge had made that clear.   This  appeal
    was not granted under Appendix FM but the judge had made findings  that
    the appellant had nowhere to go and no home to go to and that he  would
    be destitute as he had no relations with anyone in Nigeria.   He  would
    not have anyone to pick him up at the airport and he was  currently  in
    education here.

23. The judge had even stated that if he was wrong about his findings under
    the Immigration Rules the appeal should be allowed under Article 8.

24. Ms Sreeraman submitted that the mother had never been granted leave and
    that the judge had not fully  considered  Section  117A  to  D  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act particularly with regard to  AM
    Malawi.  There had been no conferring of lawful status  on  the  mother
    and the fact was that the  appeal  had  been  conducted  in  the  wrong
    factual matrix.

Conclusions

25. The Secretary of State in her reasons for refusal dated 25th  September
    2014 has set out the considerations of the appellant's private life and
    as a factor in an assessment  of  the  private  life  referred  to  the
    appellant's family members in the UK and that it was  not  demonstrated
    that  those  relationships  constituted  anything  more   than   normal
    emotional ties.

26. In the  decision  Judge  Seifert  found  at  paragraph  45  that  those
    relationship ties went beyond normal emotional ties and amounted to  an
    ongoing family life.  He found that  the  appellant  did  not  live  an
    independent family life and had only stayed away during the  university
    term intending to return  to  the  family  home  when  his  course  was
    completed.

27. The judge also found at paragraph 46 that the appellant had established
    a private life in the UK.  As part  of  that  private  life  the  judge
    factored in the previous paragraphs (in relation to the finding of  the
    relationship with the family) and  found  that  the  appellant,  if  he
    returned to Nigeria, would face significant obstacles  having  no  home
    and no relatives and a different accent than others.   The  judge  also
    added he would not be able to complete his current  university  course.
    The judge proceeded to allow the appeal under paragraph  276ADE  having
    considered whether there would be significant obstacles to his  return.
    One of the factors under that consideration  must  be  the  appellant's
    ties in the UK as well as ties in Nigeria.  The judge at  paragraph  45
    found that the appellant was not independent from his mother and family
    and a significant factor  in  the  deliberations  was  therefore  legal
    immigration status of the appellant's mother and family.    Even  if  I
    were  to  agree  with  Mr  Uzdechima  that  the   relevant   date   for
    consideration of the facts in relation to human rights was the date  of
    the hearing the mother and family had not been granted leave to remain.



28. It was submitted before the First-tier Tribunal Judge  that  there  had
    been  a  decision  promulgated  on  27th  January  2015  allowing   the
    appellant's mother and younger siblings to remain in the  UK.   It  was
    recorded "Mrs Iyare confirmed that leave was  granted  to  her  and  Mr
    Iyare's three younger siblings who are between 8 to 15  years  of  age.
    Together with Mr Iyare they are a family unit."

29. The judge took that to mean that "they have leave to remain" [40].

30. There are two difficulties with that.  The first is that  Mr  Uzdechima
    confirmed before me that he acted for both the appellant and his mother
    and family, that that on 23rd March 2015, and prior to the  hearing  in
    Mr Iyare's appeal,  permission  to  appeal  been  granted  against  the
    decision allowing the mother's appeal.  Secondly, even if  that  appeal
    was allowed that did not confirm that the appellant's mother and family
    had leave to remain as the judge found.   Indeed  Mr  Uzdechima  agreed
    that their status as at the date of hearing on  3rd  July  2015  before
    Judge Seifert was that they would not be required to leave rather  than
    they would be granted leave to remain.

31. FP Iran v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ12 confirms that  new  evidence  can,  in
    certain circumstances, be relied upon to establish  an  error  of  fact
    amounting to an error of law.  Following the guidance  in   E  and  The
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004] EWCA Civ 42,  I  find
    there was a mistake in this case as to existing fact - that  being  the
    mother's and family's status, which was capable  of  being  objectively
    verifiable, the Secretary of State was not responsible for the mistake,
    (unfortunately the Secretary  of  State  was  not  represented  at  the
    hearing) and the mistake  for  the  reasons  given  above  did  play  a
    material (it does not need to  be  decisive)  part  in  the  Tribunal's
    reasoning.

32. It is not clear whether the judge proceeded to allow the  appeal  under
    Article 8 because he only recorded that the appeal  was  allowed  under
    the Immigration Rules.  That said the judge having failed to  have  the
    correct information in relation to the  mother's  and  family's  status
    stated at paragraph 49

         "Although he did not have immigration status to remain he explained
         that his circumstances at that time were that he  regarded  himself
         as part of the family unit of his mother, her EEA partner  and  his
         siblings.  Although I have taken into account that little weight be
         attributed to private life established when immigration  status  is
         precarious this does not require no  weight  to  be  given  to  the
         private   and   family   life   established    in    this    case."



33. The  judge  did  not  have  correct  information  in  relation  to  the
    immigration status of the family and it was Ms  Sreeraman's  case  that
    the mother did not at any time have immigration status.  Thus the judge
    failed, because of the use of a fundamentally flawed factual matrix, to
    apply correctly Sections 117A to D and the guidance found in AM Malawi.

34. I therefore set the decision aside and the matter is  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  It is a matter of regret that the judge  was  not
    given the full picture in relation to the  immigration  status  of  the
    mother and I direct that the Secretary of State should  serve  evidence
    on both the Tribunal and the appellant's representatives regarding  the
    immigration status of the appellant's family.

35. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified. I set aside  the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent
    of the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007  and  further
    to 7.2 (b) of the Presidential Practice Statement.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                                  Date 24th March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington


