
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/41086/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 12th June 2015                        |On 19th June 2015                   |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                          mr rodrigo martins leite
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No representative
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Brazil whose appeal under Article 8  ECHR
    was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lloyd-Smith  in  a  decision
    promulgated  on  26th  February  2015.   The  grounds  of   application
    essentially say that the judge should have considered  the  Appellant's
    appeal under the EEA Regulations and it was a material error of law not
    to do so.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis of what was said  in  the
    grounds.  The Secretary of State lodged a short response under Rule 24.

 3. The appeal came before me on the above date.

 4. I was grateful to Mr Tufan, the Senior Home Office  Presenting  Officer
    for acknowledging that the judge had made a material error  in  law  by
    not considering the EEA Regulations.  That decision was before  her  to
    consider and, for whatever reason, it had not been.   I  was  asked  to
    send the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal so that a full  hearing
    could take place on all issues.

 5. As such the outcome of the appeal before me  is  straightforward.   The
    main case of the Appellant was not Article 8 ECHR but rather that he be
    allowed to remain here under the  EEA  Regulations.   It  is  therefore
    necessary to set the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  aside
    and remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal for a  fresh  hearing  on
    all matters. The Appellant was present and I explained the  outcome  to
    him suggesting that he  contact  a  solicitor  to  assist  him  in  the
    preparation of the appeal.

Notice of Decision

 6. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

 7. I set aside the decision.

 8. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a  fresh  hearing  on
    all matters.

 9. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald
