
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/41482/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Taylor House                        |     Decision & Reasons          |
|                                             |Promulgated                      |
|On 20 October 2015                           |     On 24 November 2015         |
|                                             |                                 |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

                            mISS. MERCY STEPHENS
                       (anonymity direction NOt made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. S. Karim of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms. E. Savage, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge C. M. Phillips promulgated on 29 May 2015  in  which  he
    dismissed the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision to refuse to issue a permanent residence card to the Appellant
    under the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006  (the
    "EEA Regulations").


 2. Permission to appeal was granted on the ground  that  it  was  arguable
    that the judge should have considered the Appellant's rights bearing in
    mind that on his findings, the Appellant was  the  mother  and  primary
    carer of an EEA national child, and the Appellant did not need to  make
    a separate application for such rights to be considered.  Other grounds
    were advanced, but the grant of permission was limited to this issue.


Error of law

 3. Mr. Karim provided a skeleton argument prior to the  hearing  with  two
    cases, MDB and others (Article  12,  1612/68)  Italy  [2010]  UKUT  161
    (IAC), and Amirteymour and others (EEA appeals;  human  rights)  [2015]
    UKUT 00466 (IAC).  He submitted in the skeleton that these  cases  were
    authority for the fact  that  the  judge  should  have  considered  the
    Appellant's rights under regulation 15A.


 4. Paragraph (v) of the headnote to MDB states:


    "In a case concerned with an EEA decision the tribunal judge is obliged
    by section 84(1)(d) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
    to decide whether the decision breaches any of the  appellant's  rights
    under the Community Treaties in respect of their entry to or  residence
    in the United Kingdom (emphasis added); see also s.109(3).   Where  the
    decision is a refusal to issue a  permanent  residence  card  that  may
    necessitate, in the event that refusal is  found  correct,  considering
    whether the appellant was entitled nonetheless to an extended right  of
    residence".


 5. Paragraph 61 of Amirteymour states:


    "That is not to say that section 85 (4) has no effect in an EEA appeal.
     It permits  the  tribunal  to  take  into  account  evidence  that  an
    appellant is entitled to a residence card on a basis other than that on
    which the application was made or another type of card."


 6. Ms. Savage, having had a chance to consider these,  accepted  that  she
    was "in some difficulty".


 7. I find that these cases show that the judge should have considered  the
    Appellant's circumstances under regulation 15A.   Evidence  was  before
    the Tribunal of the Appellant's son who has Portuguese nationality, and
    the judge had found that the father was not involved in his life.


 8. I announced that I found that the decision involved the  making  of  an
    error on a point of law,  and  that  I  would  proceed  to  remake  the
    decision.  I announced that I did not intend to set aside the  findings
    of the judge in relation to other issues on which permission to  appeal
    had not been granted, but that  the  error  of  law  consisted  in  the
    failure to  go  on  to  consider  the  Appellant's  circumstances  with
    reference to regulation 15A.





Remaking


 9. I heard brief  oral  evidence  from  the  Appellant,  who  adopted  the
    contents of her witness statements dated 8 October 2015 and 20 February
    2015.  Ms Savage  asked  her  a  few  questions.    There  was  no  re-
    examination.  I heard oral submissions from  both  representatives.   I
    have taken into account the Appellant's bundle provided for the  appeal
    (106 pages) and the skeleton argument.  At the end  of  the  hearing  I
    reserved my decision.


10. The burden of proof lies on the Appellant to show  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities that she meets the requirements of regulation  15A.   The
    Appellant's representative submitted that she met the  requirements  of
    regulation 15A(4)  with  reference  to  15A(3).   He  referred  to  the
    headnote in MBD, submitting that the Appellant satisfied this.


11. Regulation 15A(3) and (4) provide:


    (3)  P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if-

             (a) P is the child of an EEA national ("the EEA national
         parent");

             (b) P resided in the United Kingdom at a time when the EEA
             national parent was residing in the United Kingdom as a
             worker; and

             (c) P is in education in the United Kingdom and was in
             education there at a time when the EEA national parent was in
             the United Kingdom.

    (4) P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if-

             (a) P is the primary carer of a person meeting the criteria in
             paragraph (3) ("the relevant person"); and

             (b) the relevant person would be unable to continue to be
             educated in the United Kingdom if P were required to leave."



12. Paragraphs (i) to (iv) of the headnote to MDB state:


         "(i) In London Borough of Harrow v Ibrahim Case C-310/08 and  Maria
         Teixeira v London Borough of Lambeth  Case  C-480/08  the  European
         Court of Justice ECJ confirmed the  principle  established  in  the
         Baumbast Case C-413/99 [2002] ECR I-7091, namely that in  order  to
         confer on a child a right of residence  Article  12  of  Regulation
         1612/68 requires only that he has lived with his parents or  either
         one of them in a Member State while at least one  of  them  resided
         there as a worker.

         (ii) Although simply seeking employment may be sufficient  to  make
         an individual a worker in Union law for a limited period, it is not
         enough to engage Article 12, since this provision requires that the
         parent concerned is someone who is or  has  been  employed  in  the
         territory of another Member State.

         (iii) If there is a parent who meets the requirement of employment,
         then his child can acquire an Article 12 right  of  residence.  But
         under the Baumbast principle such a right of residence for a  child
         can only start to run from the date he or she begins in  education;
         it cannot commence from the child's date of birth.(The same is true
         in respect of the derived right of residence of a parent  carer  of
         such a child).

         (iv) On Baumbast principles, a child in education can  continue  to
         have an Article 12 right of residence even if the said parent later
         ceases to be a worker."


13. I find that the Appellant has two sons.  It is the eldest  son,  David,
    with whom I am concerned for the purposes of this application.   He  is
    Portuguese.  The Appellant's youngest son does not yet have a  passport
    as  the  Appellant  is  required  to  provide  her  passport  with  his
    application for a Portuguese passport, and the Respondent is  currently
    in possession of the Appellant's passport.


14. As found by the First-tier Tribunal, I find that the Appellant  is  the
    primary carer of her son who is a Portuguese national.   I  have  taken
    into account not only the Appellant's own  evidence  that  she  is  the
    primary carer, but also the evidence in the bundle (pages  35  to  54).
    In particular I have taken into account the letter from Heather  Scott,
    Occupational Therapist, dated 12 August 2015 which states "David  lives
    with his mother and younger sibling, his mother is his  primary  carer"
    (page 38).


15. I have also taken  into  account  the  letter  from  Dr.  John  Loftus,
    Consultant Community Paediatrician, dated 30 July 2015 which states:


    "I also confirm that Ms Mercy Stephens who is David's  mother,  is  his
    primary care giver based on the following:
     -she has brought him to multiple appointments at  Hackney  Ark  as  his
sole carer
    -she knows details about his health, development and past history that
    only a primary care giver can know
    -she has been observed to have a warm and loving relationship with
    David at all appointments and assessments."

16. I find that the Appellant's son satisfies the requirements  of  15A(3).
    I find that he is the son  of  an  EEA  National,  Mr.  Filipe  Ferrao-
    Tavares.  I find that the Appellant's son resided in the  UK  when  his
    father was here as a worker.   Evidence  of  the  Appellant's  father's
    employment was provided to the Respondent with the application (see A8,
    A14, A27 and A28-29).  I find that, by reference to  paragraph  (i)  of
    the headnote to MDB, he has therefore acquired a right of residence.


17. I find that the Appellant's son is in education in the United  Kingdom,
    and was in education when his father was in the United Kingdom.  I find
    that therefore the Appellant's son meets the requirements of  paragraph
    15A(3).  Following MDB, I find that a child in education  can  continue
    to have an Article 12 right of residence even if his parent has  ceased
    to be a worker (headnote paragraph (iv)).  I find that the  Appellant's
    son therefore has a right of residence.


18. Turning to regulation 15A(4), I find that the Appellant is the  primary
    carer of her son, who meets the criteria in regulation 15A(3).  I  find
    that, were the Appellant to leave the United Kingdom, her son would  be
    unable to continue to be educated here.  His  father  is  not  involved
    with his care.  If the Appellant, as his primary carer,  were  required
    to leave the United Kingdom, I find on  the  balance  of  probabilities
    that her son would also have to leave the  United  Kingdom,  preventing
    him from continuing his education here.


19. I therefore find, on the balance of probabilities, that  the  Appellant
    meets the requirements of regulation 15A(4) of the EEA Regulations such
    that she is entitled to a derivative residence card.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law as the judge failed to consider the Appellant's rights  to  a
derivative residence card under Regulation 15A.  The  decision  is  not  set
aside in relation to the findings on other matters, the error of law was  in
failing  to  consider  the  Appellant's  derived   rights.    The   decision
dismissing the appeal under the EEA Regulations is set aside.


I remake the decision allowing the appeal under the  EEA  Regulations.   The
Appellant is entitled to a derivative residence card.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date 20 November 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain


