
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/41114/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 16 October 2015                   |On 26 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SYMES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 SHAOHUI CAI
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Willocks-Briscoe (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)
For the Respondent:    No appearance (Chancery Legal Services are on the
record)


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                            ERROR OF LAW HEARING

    1. This is the appeal of the Secretary of State against the decision  of
       the First-tier Tribunal allowing the original appeal of Shaohui  Cai,
       a citizen of China born 7 April 1992, against the decision to  cancel
       his entry clearance of 16 February 2015.

    2. The application was refused because the Educational  Testing  Service
       Limited  (ETS)  had  provided  the  Secretary  of  State  with  their
       conclusion that "there was significant evidence to conclude that your
       certificate was fraudulently obtained." This was  considered  conduct
       which would have brought the general refusal reasons into play  as  a
       material misrepresentation had it been known to the Home Office  when
       granting the application originally, on 7 November 2013. Additionally
       he was found, when searched, to be in possession of  a  paper  headed
       "Preparation Questions on TOEIC investigation" (thus referencing  the
       Test of English for International  Communication  by  which  language
       proficiency is measured) containing 25 questions he was likely to  be
       asked, and a copy of the TOEIC Examinee Handbook, materials which  it
       was thought he had no  adequate  explanation  for  having  with  him.
       Nottingham Trent University had now withdrawn his sponsorship  on  26
       September 2014, which  was  additionally  a  circumstance  justifying
       cancellation of his leave, and so  that  was  duly  done  under  Rule
       321A(1) of the Immigration Rules:

           "Grounds on which leave to enter or remain which is in force is
           to be cancelled at port or while the holder is outside the
           United Kingdom

           321A. The following grounds for the cancellation of a person's
           leave to enter or remain which is in force on his arrival in, or
           whilst he is outside, the United Kingdom apply;

           (1) there has been such a change in the circumstances of that
           person's case since the leave was given, that it should be
           cancelled; or

           (2) false representations were made or false documents were
           submitted (whether or not material to the application, and
           whether or not to the holder's knowledge), or material facts
           were not disclosed, in relation to the application for leave; or
           in order to obtain documents from the Secretary of State or a
           third party required in support of the application ..."

    3. The First-tier Tribunal allowed the appeal, concluding that the  Home
       Office had provided no evidence to justify their  conclusion  that  a
       proxy  or  other  deception  had  been  used,  whereas  Mr  Cai   had
       established that he had strong English language skills  and  provided
       supporting documentation to such effect, having  studied  in  English
       and obtained a foundation course,  diploma  and  second  year  of  an
       honours  degree,  at  Nottingham  Trent  University.   There  was  no
       sinister  inference  properly  to  be  drawn  from  the   Appellant's
       possession of documents relating to the TOEIC process:  that  was  an
       understandable precaution for a person who had taken legal advice and
       who had prepared thoroughly for the relevant examination.

    4. The Secretary of State appealed on the  ground  that  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had failed to provide adequate reasons for  its  conclusion,
       and had overlooked  witness  statements  from  Peter  Millington  and
       Rebecca Collings, and an email from the ETS Taskforce of 10 September
       2014. First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchison granted permission to
       appeal on the basis that the  grounds  showed  an  arguable  material
       misdirection given the failure to make findings  on  the  spreadsheet
       provided.

    5.  Mr  Cai  did  not  attend  today's  hearing,  neither  he  nor   his
       representative providing any explanation for their absence. I  deemed
       it in the interests of justice to proceed.

       Findings and Reasons

    6. Contrary to the perception of the First-tier Tribunal, there  was  in
       fact evidence of the information upon which the  Secretary  of  State
       relied, by way of printouts titled "ETS Search" recording that Shaoui
       Cai, born 7 April 1992, had had two test results declared  "invalid".
       Rebecca  Collings'  statement  at  [28]  explains  that  "any   tests
       categorised as cancelled (which later became known  as  invalid)  had
       the same voice for multiple test takers".

    7. It seems to me that there was sufficient evidence  here  to  found  a
       prima facie case that, via reliance on systems believed to be  highly
       reliable if not infallible, serious issues had been raised as to  the
       validity of Mr Cai's English language tests.  These  might  well  not
       raise insuperable obstacles to his appeal succeeding  (the  President
       in Gazi (IJR) [2015] UKUT 327 (IAC)  remarks  upon  features  of  the
       generic evidence that potentially detracts  from  its  cogency),  but
       they do require assessment  against  the  positive  features  of  his
       evidence such as his English language proficiency and his account  of
       not having sought  to  cheat  the  system.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
       overlooked this evidence, which is unmentioned in its  decision,  and
       that was a material error  of  law  given  that  it  represented  the
       principal issue that demanded resolution on the appeal.

    8. As this conclusion means that  the  appeal  will  have  to  be  fully
       redetermined without any factual findings being preserved,  it  seems
       to me that it is appropriate for remittal for hearing  afresh  before
       the First-tier Tribunal.

       Decision:

       The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal was  flawed  by
       material error of law.

       The appeal is remitted for hearing afresh.



[pic]
Signed:     Date: 22 October 2015
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Symes

