
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/41321/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 25 February 2016                      |On 24 March 2016                  |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Imran Asheq
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms M Malhotra of Counsel (Direct Access)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Ghani promulgated on 7 September 2015 brought with  the  permission  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge N J Bennett granted on 31 December 2015.


2.   Although before me the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  is
    the appellant  and  Mr  Asheq  is  the  respondent,  for  the  sake  of
    consistency with the proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal I shall
    hereafter refer to Mr Asheq as the Appellant and the Secretary of State
    as the Respondent.


3.   This case came before the First-tier Tribunal  in  the  following  way.
    On 31 July 2014 the Appellant was served with a  number  of  documents.
    One of those was a letter explaining that it had come to the  attention
    of the Respondent from information provided by the Educational  Testing
    Service that an anomaly  with  his  speaking  test  had  indicated  the
    presence of a proxy test  taker.   In  consequence  the  Appellant  was
    served with an IS.151A 'Notice to a Person Liable to Removal'  pursuant
    to section 10 of the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  1999:  the  Notice
    specified amongst other things the  following:  "You  are  specifically
    considered a person who has  sought  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom by deception following information provided to us."


4.   The Appellant was also served on the same day with an IS.151A  Part  2,
    being a 'Notice of Immigration Decision'. The decision therein  was  to
    remove  the  Appellant  from  the  United  Kingdom.   The   Notice   of
    Immigration Decision included the following information in  respect  of
    the Appellant's right of appeal:  "You  are  entitled  to  appeal  this
    decision under section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002 after you have left the United Kingdom."


5.   The question of the Appellant's right of appeal was raised  in  grounds
    of appeal submitted with  his  Notice  of  Appeal  -  lodged  with  the
    Tribunal prior to the Appellant's departure from  the  United  Kingdom.
    It was argued in those grounds of  appeal  with  reference  to  section
    82(2)(c) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  that  the
    Appellant had an in-country right of appeal.


6.   The difficulty with those submissions is that the  decision  to  remove
    the Appellant was not taken pursuant to  section  82(2)(c)  but  was  a
    section 82(2)(g) decision. Ms  Malhotra  very  correctly  and  properly
    acknowledges that such a decision is a decision that  only  attracts  a
    right of appeal after departure from the United Kingdom.


7.   It is also acknowledged that the Appellant did not raise any issues  in
    respect of human rights prior to the Respondent's decision.   In  those
    circumstances the case of Nirula [2012] EWCA Civ 1436  is  germane  (as
    was identified in the grant of permission  to  appeal),  and  again  Ms
    Malhotra very properly acknowledges the implicit force in that decision
    that it is, as it were, too late to be raising  human  rights  for  the
    first time in the context of grounds of appeal before the  Tribunal  in
    order to secure an in-country right of appeal.


8.   In those circumstances it seems to  me  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge, who may very well not have been entirely alert to the issue, was
    quite simply in error in accepting jurisdiction in this appeal.   There
    is no express reference to the issue in the short decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge, notwithstanding that it was adverted  to  in  some
    detail in the grounds of appeal, and  also  of  course  notwithstanding
    that it was plainly a matter indicated on the face  of  the  Notice  of
    Immigration Decision which was purportedly the subject of the appeal.


9.   I find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge was in  error
    of law in that he enjoyed no jurisdiction to consider  the  Appellant's
    appeal.  It follows that I must set aside the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.


10.  Having done that, I conclude that there is  no  jurisdiction  for  this
    Tribunal to take any further action in the case of Mr Asheq.  There  is
    no valid appeal notwithstanding the lodging of a Notice of Appeal,  and
    accordingly there is nothing upon  which  the  Tribunal's  jurisdiction
    bites.


Notice of Decision

11.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law and is set aside.


12.  There is no in-country right of appeal in respect  of  the  immigration
    decision of 31 July 2014. There is no valid appeal; the Tribunal has no
    jurisdiction and takes no further action.


13.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.


The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:                                 Date: 7 March 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

