
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/41253/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 21st July 2014                               |On 24th July 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                              CATHERINE ASIHENE
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Jafar, Counsel instructed on behalf of Mayfair
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of Ghana born on 25th December  1979.   She
    appeals with permission against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    (Judge Andonian) who in a determination promulgated on 23rd March  2014
    dismissed her appeal against the decision of the Respondent  to  refuse
    her application as a dependent partner of a points-based system migrant
    under paragraph 319E of the Immigration Rules.

 2. The history can be briefly stated as follows.   The  Appellant  entered
    the United Kingdom as a visitor on 29th  June  2004  with  valid  leave
    until 8th December.  It is said that she later had entry clearance as a
    working holidaymaker which was valid until 23rd November 2007.  On 21st
    June 2008 she entered the United Kingdom as a  dependent  of  Mr  Louis
    Nana-Owusu who had leave to remain in the UK as a work permit  migrant.
    The immigration history of the Appellant sets out  that  her  leave  to
    remain was extended as a dependant inline with that  of  her  partner's
    leave to remain in the UK and her last grant of leave was under Tier  2
    (dependent) partner which was valid until 23rd April 2012.

 3. In an application made originally in July but then resubmitted  on  2nd
    August 2012 she applied for indefinite leave to remain on  form  SET(O)
    as a partner of a points-based system migrant.   That  application  was
    refused firstly under paragraph 319E and secondly under Appendix FM and
    paragraph 276ADE of the  Immigration  Rules.   It  is  plain  from  the
    refusal letter that the reasons given for refusing the application  was
    that the Appellant was required  to  demonstrate  that  she  was  in  a
    relationship  with  Mr  Nana-Owusu  and  that  the   relationship   was
    subsisting.  The reasons  for  refusal  letter  which  accompanied  the
    notice of immigration decision set out the reasons why.   Consideration
    was also given  to  her  application  on  Article  8  grounds  applying
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules and EX1 and also paragraph  276ADE
    with reference to her  private  life.   Consideration  was  also  given
    within the reasons for refusal letter to the child of the  parties  who
    had been born in the United Kingdom although was not a British citizen.



 4. The Appellant appealed that decision on the grounds that  the  decision
    was flawed,  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  not  considered  the
    supporting evidence correctly and had failed to consider Article  8  of
    the ECHR in reference to her circumstances.

 5. The hearing came before the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Andonian) on 5th
    March 2014 at Inner London Crown Court.  It is plain from  reading  the
    determination that there was no appearance by the Appellant or  on  her
    behalf.  As set out in paragraph 1 of the determination, a letter  from
    those instructed by the Appellant dated 5th March 2014 set out that the
    Appellant was not "feeling very well for the  past  few  days  and  was
    unable to attend court".  Thus the judge determined the appeal  on  the
    papers.

 6. The judge dismissed the appeal under the  Immigration  Rules  and  also
    under Article 8 of the ECHR.  The reasons given  in  the  determination
    relate to the Appellant not  providing  evidence  to  substantiate  her
    claim that the relationship was subsisting and secondly,  by  reference
    to Article 8 and in particular  Appendix  FM,  as  she  was  unable  to
    provide evidence that she was in a genuine and subsisting  relationship
    with her partner settled  in  the  UK,  and  she  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules and in respect of EX1 of Appendix
    FM, there were no insurmountable obstacles for family  life  continuing
    outside the UK.  Insofar as paragraph 276ADE was considered, the  judge
    noted that she was 33 years of age and had resided in the UK  for  five
    years and three months at the date of the application and that  it  was
    not considered that she had lived continuously in  the  UK  for  twenty
    years and therefore was likely to have ties with Ghana.  In relation to
    the child of the parties, consideration was given to Section 55 of  the
    2009 Act but that in the circumstances of the case the judge found that
    the need to maintain the integrity of the Immigration Rules  outweighed
    the effect on the Appellant and her child that may result from her  and
    the child having to re-establish family life outside the UK.

 7. Permission to appeal  that  decision  was  granted  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge White on 4th June  2014.   The  reasons  given  were  as
    follows:-

         "Having had regard to the grounds of permission to appeal  and  the
         determination, I am satisfied that in  reaching  his  decision  the
         judge arguably made an error of law for the following reasons:-

         (a)  At paragraph 5 and 7 of  the  determination  the  judge  makes
             reference to  paragraph  319E  of  the  Immigration  Rules  (a
             principal Rule under which  the  Appellant's  application  was
             refused by the Respondent).

         (b)  However, the  judge  makes  no  findings  as  to  whether  the
             Appellant meets paragraph  319E,  paragraphs  5  -  7  of  the
             determination appear and simply to be a recital/paraphrase  of
             parts of the Respondent's reasons for refusal letter.

         Accordingly I am  satisfied  that  the  grounds  and  determination
         disclose an arguable error of law."

 8. Thus the appeal came before the Upper Tribunal, Mr  Jafar  attended  on
    behalf of the Appellant and, Mr Walker, Senior  Presenting  Officer  on
    behalf of the Respondent.  Mr Jafar relied upon the written grounds for
    which permission was granted.  He submitted that the judge did not  set
    out adequate reasoning as to why  the  Appellant  could  not  meet  the
    relevant Immigration Rule namely 319E.  As the grant of permission sets
    out, what the judge effectively did was to  recite  or  paraphrase  the
    Respondent's reasons given in the reasons for  refusal  letter  without
    making any reference to findings made from the evidence as a whole.  Mr
    Jafar took the Tribunal through  the  determination  pointing  out  the
    paragraphs in which the information  was  simply  recited  rather  than
    giving reasons.  At paragraph 7 of the determination Mr Jafar submitted
    that the conclusion in that paragraph that she was "unable  to  provide
    evidence that this relationship is subsisting" was insufficient and did
    not consider the evidence that had  been  provided  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant.  In this regard he referred me  to  the  Appellant's  bundle
    sent from her solicitors including photographs of  the  parties,  birth
    certificate, copies of bank statements, payslips.   The  child  of  the
    relationship  had  been  born  in  2007  and  the   birth   certificate
    demonstrated that both father and mother were in a relationship at  the
    date of the birth and there were no reasons given as to why  the  judge
    found they were still not in a subsisting relationship.   He  submitted
    that the evidence that had been provided by the Appellant  should  have
    been considered and none of that  had  been  properly  looked  at.   In
    particular  at  paragraph  14  Mr  Jafar  submitted   that   that   was
    insufficient to discharge the  duty  to  consider  that  evidence.   In
    particular he said to the Tribunal that the sentence "There is  nothing
    novel in them that I have not already considered in the evidence in the
    round that could give rise to a successful appeal," suggested that  the
    judge had considered the evidence post fact rather than looking at  the
    evidence as a whole.  Similarly there were problems considering Article
    8 as the principal finding was that  she  was  not  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with her partner.

 9. Mr Walker, on behalf of the Secretary of State referred to the Rule  24
    response dated 16th June 2014  which  was  very  brief  and  only  made
    reference to paragraph 6 and 7.  He confirmed that the only finding  in
    the determination was that set out at paragraph 14 where the judge  did
    make reference having considered the witness statement but that was the
    evidence that was placed before the judge.

10. At the conclusion of the submissions I gave a brief  judgment  which  I
    indicated to the parties  that  I  had  reached  the  conclusion  after
    considering the papers and also hearing the submissions of the  parties
    that the determination did disclose  an  error  of  law  and  in  those
    circumstances the determination should be set aside.

11.   The reasons for reaching that decision can be briefly stated.  It  is
    plain from the issues in the case and in particular those  set  out  in
    the reasons for refusal letter that  the  principal  issue  related  to
    whether or not the Appellant and her partner  were  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting  relationship.   The  past  history  demonstrated   by   the
    Appellant's  immigration  status  and  the   last   grants   of   leave
    demonstrated that she had leave to remain which had been extended on  a
    number of occasions based on her relationship as  a  dependent  of  her
    partner.  The evidence also demonstrated that there was a child of  the
    relationship born in 2007.  The refusal letter made reference,  as  did
    the judge to a letter sent to the Appellant on 19th  July  2013  asking
    for documentary evidence to show that her and her partner were residing
    together.  It was as a result of this that the further application  was
    made on 2nd August 2012.  The refusal letter also later  set  out  that
    she had responded to the Secretary of State that she had not lived with
    her partner because they wanted to be married before they moved to live
    together  but  that  there  was  no  evidence  to  substantiate   those
    circumstances and that the evidence provided of greeting cards was  not
    considered to be sufficient evidence.

12.   Whilst the judge made reference to the refusal letter and  in  effect
    set out verbatim what was in that refusal letter,  the  judge  did  not
    assess the evidence that had been provided by the Appellant  concerning
    the issue of whether or  not  the  relationship  was  subsisting.   The
    Appellant had produced a further evidence including a witness statement
    setting out her history and that  of  the  partner  and  also  evidence
    concerning the subsistence of the relationship.  In addition there  was
    other evidence including Barclays bank statements in her  name  showing
    the address that she was living at and also there were other  documents
    including payslips for her partner which also gave  the  same  address.
    Thus there was evidence before the Tribunal,  and  also  in  accordance
    with the witness statement  that  gave  rise  to  evidence  capable  of
    supporting her account.

13.  That evidence is not referred to within the  determination  either  in
    reaching a conclusion on paragraph 319E of the Immigration Rules or  in
    relation to Article 8 and this was the principal issue in  relation  to
    both matters.  Whilst at paragraph 14 the judge sets out  that  he  has
    considered the papers and the skeleton argument but went on to state "I
    regret for the reasons stated in the determination these  do  not  take
    matters any further insofar as this  appeal  is  concerned.   There  is
    nothing novel in them  that  I  have  not  already  considered  in  the
    evidence in the round that can give rise to a successful appeal", there
    are no reasons given from that documentation to  reach  the  conclusion
    that the evidence that has been provided  was  either  not  acceptable,
    unreliable or did not seek to show  that  the  documents  purported  to
    show.

14.   In short, I consider the submission made by Mr Jafar  has  weight  in
    that it was necessary to  engage  with  those  documents  and  to  give
    reasons, if those documents were not  to  be  given  weight,  why  that
    should be so. The absence of the Appellant was unfortunate and this did
    not assist the judge.  Whilst the Appellant did not attend the hearing,
    the documents presented were still before the Tribunal.

15. For those reasons, I have reached the conclusion that the determination
    should be set aside and that there should be a fresh hearing before the
    First-tier Tribunal.    The advocates  have  invited  the  Tribunal  to
    determine the appeal with a fresh oral hearing by way  of  remittal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.  Mr Jafar indicated that  both  the  Appellant
    and her partner Mr Nana-Owusu  would  be  giving  evidence  before  the
    Tribunal  relating  to  the  genuineness   and   subsistence   of   the
    relationship. Due to the nature of the error of law, the Tribunal  will
    be required to hear the oral evidence of the Appellant and the findings
    of  fact  to  be  made  on  all  the  factual  issues  and  matters  of
    credibility.  In  that  context,  I  am  satisfied  that  that  is  the
    appropriate course for there to be an assessment of all  the  evidence.
    Whilst it is not the ordinary practice of the Tribunal to  remit  cases
    to the First-tier Tribunal, there are reasons why in this case  such  a
    course should  be  adopted,  having  given  particular  regard  to  the
    overriding objective of the efficient  disposal  of  appeals  and  that
    there are issues of fact that are central to the  appeal  that  require
    determination.

16.  Therefore the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set  aside;  none
    of the findings shall stand and the case is to be remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross for a hearing in accordance with  Section
    12(2)(b) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act and paragraph 7.2
    of the Practice Statements of 10th February 2010 as amended.






Signed                              Date 22/7/2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

