

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
IA/41389/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                |             Decision and Reasons        |
|                                    |Promulgated                              |
|On 5 November 2015                  |             On 12 November 2015         |
|                                    |                                         |

                                   Before

                             MR JUSTICE PHILLIPS
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                               SHERAYA SEERAUJ
                        (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Rene of counsel, instructed by Thoree & Co.
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Naith, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Mauritius  born  on  19  May  1984.  She
      arrived in this country in 2004 and remained as a student. She applied
      for indefinite leave to remain on 22 May 2014 on  the  basis  of  long
      residence.  On 23 September 2014 she was refused leave to remain under
      paragraph 276B of the immigration rules on the basis that she had  not
      established 10 years continuous lawful residence.

   2. She appealed the decision and her  appeal  came  before  a  First-tier
      Judge on 13 May 2015.  The difficulty in the way of the appellant  was
      that there appeared to be a 71 day gap in her residence  in  2007.  On
      her case she submitted a valid in-time application for an extension of
      stay as a student in April 2007. The application was rejected  in  May
      2007 on the basis that required documentary evidence was not included.
      The applicant re-submitted the application  in  June  2007  which  was
      again rejected but a third application in July  2007  was  successful.
      The First-tier Judge found that the applicant's period  of  continuous
      lawful  residence  was  broken  because  of  the  failure  to  provide
      documentary evidence in  the  initial  application  and  that  further
      documentary evidence had accompanied the  subsequent  application.  It
      was accepted that there had been difficulties because the  applicant's
      passport had been lost. The judge dismissed the appeal.

   3. The appellant applied for permission to appeal on grounds  settled  by
      Mr Rene, who did not appear below. In the grounds Mr Rene took a point
      under  The  Immigration  (Leave  to  Remain)  (Prescribed  Forms   and
      Procedures) Regulations 2005. Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by
      First-tier Judge Robertson as it appeared arguable that the respondent
      had requested information from the appellant which the  appellant  had
      then provided and the respondent had at no stage issued an  appealable
      decision.

   4. At the hearing before us counsel  took  an  additional  point  on  the
      respondent's own chronology which appeared to show that the  applicant
      had been given leave to remain following her application in July  2007
      from 20 April 2006 (which counsel submits was  a  mistake  and  should
      have been a reference to 20 April 2007) until 30 September 2008.  This
      would have covered the disputed period.

   5. Mr  Naith  said  he  had  gone  through  the  chronology  against  the
      requirements of regulation 17(1) (b)  of  the  Immigration  (Leave  to
      Remain)  (Prescribed  Forms  and  Procedures)  Regulations  2007   (SI
      2007/882) which came into force on 2nd April 2007 and would have  been
      applicable at the time the appellant made her application on the  26th
      of that month. The regulation  gave  an  appellant  28  days  (at  the
      latest) to comply with a requirement on notification by the  Secretary
      of State of a failure to meet the requirements of regulation 16  which
      prescribed the documents that were to accompany the application.

   6. Mr Naith said that was satisfied that the applicant complied with  the
      requirements of the regulations and accepted that the appeal should be
      allowed having had the opportunity to consider the chronology  of  the
      various applications.

   7. In the light of Mr Naith's acceptance  that  the  appellant  qualified
      under the 10 year rule it is not necessary for us  to  do  other  than
      allow the appeal.

   8. It is of course the case that the argument which persuaded Mr Naith to
      concede the case was  not  one  taken  before  the  First-tier  Judge.
      Nevertheless we are satisfied that her  determination  was  materially
      flawed in law and we re-make the decision accordingly.

      Appeal allowed

      Anonymity Order
      An Anonymity direction was not requested and is not made.

      Fee Award
      The First-tier Judge recorded that no fee was paid or payable  and  in
      the premises we make no fee award. We note  the  point  on  which  the
      applicant was successful was not argued before the First-tier Judge.


Signed

Upper Tribunal Judge Warr
            5 November 2015
