
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/41760/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 22 July 2014                               |On 29 August 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY

                                   Between

                              Mr Mahfuzal Alam
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Ali of The Law Advisers
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   I have carefully considered this matter and may I  say  at  the  outset
    that these are not easy cases to deal with.  There are a  large  number
    of them coming before the Tribunal at the  moment  and  obviously  each
    case turns on its own facts  but  the  important  points  to  make,  in
    summary form, are that the appellant (by which description I will refer
    to Mr Alam throughout this determination, who is in fact the respondent
    before this Tribunal) has been in the UK since the year 2000 but on the
    other hand a long period of his presence in the UK  has  been  for  the
    purposes of exercising his appeal rights and he has not been in the  UK
    for the whole of that period.  His original basis for coming  here  was
    as a visitor in 2000.  He was subsequently granted permission to remain
    in the UK for the purposes of private medical treatment  and  his  last
    basis for being here was that of a  student  visa  which,  it  appears,
    followed a period of six months in Bangladesh in 2008. He  returned  to
    the UK in October 2008 with entry clearance as a student. That  student
    visa was only valid until  30  September  2012.   Therefore,  since  30
    September 2012 there has been no basis for the appellant to be  in  the
    UK other than on the freestanding basis that he qualifies for a private
    or family life under Article 8. It was on that basis that he  succeeded
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

2.   The basis of the Article  8  claim  was  set  out  in  the  Immigration
    Judge's determination.  It is  right  to  say  that  she  rejected  the
    application for further leave to remain on the basis of Article 3 being
    satisfied but she was persuaded that the appellant should  be  entitled
    to ongoing treatment under the National Health Service which is  not  a
    basis for leave to remain in the UK under the Immigration  Rules.   The
    Immigration Judge was also persuaded, having  heard  evidence  from  Ms
    Hobbs, that the appellant had formed a relationship with that lady  and
    that it would be  unlawful  to  interfere  with  that  relationship  by
    returning the appellant to Bangladesh.  This  was  notwithstanding  the
    finding that she made that the appellant would be easily able to get  a
    job in Bangladesh and  the  fact  that  he  had  actually  returned  to
    Bangladesh as recently as 2008.

Discussion

3.   The starting position for these cases is to consider  the  requirements
    of the Immigration  Rules.   Ms  Ali,  who  has  ably  represented  the
    appellant today, I think accepts that the case of Gulshan  [2013]  UKUT
    00640 (IAC) essentially says, at least  as  it  is  summarised  in  the
    grounds of appeal, that there  must  be  compelling  circumstances  not
    recognised by the Immigration Rules  for  permitting  an  applicant  to
    remain in the UK beyond the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  The
    Immigration Rules clearly recognise the need to travel  to  the  UK  to
    take advantage of superior medical treatment because one  can  come  to
    the UK and one can remain in the UK for that  purpose  provided  it  is
    paid for privately.

4.   The Rules also recognise the need to remain in the UK for the  purposes
    of a private or family life but only if you have been in the UK  for  a
    greater number of years than this appellant has been in the UK for.

5.   Ms Ali, who represented the appellant at  the  First-tier  Tribunal  as
    well as before this Tribunal, accepted that this  appellant  would  not
    qualify under the private or  family  life  provisions  of  the  Rules,
    either as they stood before or after 9 July 2012.  Therefore, it  seems
    to be common ground between the appellant and the  respondent  but  for
    the human rights claim  the  appellant  would  not  qualify  under  the
    Immigration Rules on to remain on the basis of his  long  residence  in
    the UK, even though he had formed a private or family life here.

Conclusions

6.   Whilst I accept the findings of fact of the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
    case of Gulshan provides guidance on the correct application of Article
    8 to those facts. Before the First-tier Tribunal could embark on a free-
    standing  consideration  of  Article  8  there  had  to  be  compelling
    circumstances not recognised by the Immigration Rules. The  appellant's
    circumstances appear neither compelling nor are  they  unrecognised  by
    the Rules.

7.   The need for respect for one's private or family life formed in the  UK
    is recognised by the Rules but  not  in  the  circumstances  which  the
    appellant finds himself in. Since December 2012 the appellant has had a
    relationship with Ms Hobbs and they have subsequently moved in to  live
    with one another, but I take into account that  that  relationship  has
    developed at  a  time  when  both  parties  would  have  known  of  the
    appellant's precarious immigration status within the UK.  Indeed  if  I
    return to the history, the latest application for indefinite  leave  to
    remain was, in fact, submitted in July 2012 and the refusal was in July
    2013. Therefore the relationship with Ms Hobbs developed between  those
    dates.

8.   I do not consider the  relationship  with  Ms  Hobbs  qualifies  as  an
    exceptional or compelling circumstance justifying  departure  from  the
    requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules.    There   are   undoubtedly
    difficulties and hardships involved in the appellant having  to  return
    to his own country of Bangladesh and these are recognised in  paragraph
    23 of the determination. They particularly relate to  the  difficulties
    the appellant will experience  in  obtaining  the  quality  of  medical
    attention in Bangladesh which is available in the UK at no cost at  the
    point of delivery. However, the true purpose of Article 8 is to prevent
    the respondent acting in a  way  which  interferes  unlawfully  with  a
    person's private or family life not to enable an individual  to  choose
    which country to conduct his family or private life in  or  to  improve
    his life chances generally. I accept that in some cases the  respondent
    not only has a negative obligation not  to  unlawfully  interfere  with
    that private or family life  but  may  have  to  positively  facilitate
    private or family life which did not previously exist  within  the  UK.
    However, this does not appear to be such a case. I am satisfied,  based
    on the test laid down in the case of Gulshan, which  was  decided  last
    year by the Upper Tribunal, that there are no compelling  circumstances
    which would justify departure from the requirements of the  Immigration
    Rules here and for that reason the  Immigration  Judge's  analysis  and
    conclusions appear to amount to a material error of law.

9.   Given that there is no challenge to the fact-findings of the judge  and
    all those findings remain in place it nevertheless seems to follow from
    those  findings  that  the  appellant  does  not  satisfy  either   the
    requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  or  the  requirements  of  a
    freestanding Article 8 claim which must be advanced in the  exceptional
    circumstances not recognised by those Rules

Decision

10.  For these reasons the respondent's appeal against the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal is allowed. I find there to be a material error  of
    law in the decision of that Tribunal.  I  leave  the  fact-findings  in
    place but I substitute the decision of the Upper Tribunal which  is  to
    dismiss the appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary of
    State to refuse further leave to remain in the UK.






Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

