
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/41096/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 17 September 2014                            |On 17 October 2014         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                oo (NIGERIA)
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Holmes, Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    Ms V Akiatola, Legal Representative, Harrison Morgan
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State has successfully appealed from the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal allowing the claimant's  appeal  on  Article  8
    grounds against the decision by the Secretary of State on 18  September
    2013 to refuse his application for leave to remain as the parent  of  a
    British citizen child.  In her determination  promulgated  on  31  July
    2014 Deputy Upper Tribunal Frances gave her reasons  for  finding  that
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of law, such
    that it should be set aside and remade.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity order, and I consider that it
    is appropriate that such an order should continue for these proceedings
    in the Upper Tribunal, as the central issue in the appeal is  the  best
    interests of a minor child.  Accordingly, I direct that in  any  report
    of these proceedings the identity of the child D and her parents  shall
    not be revealed.

 3. I set out below Judge Frances's  Decision  and  Reasons  following  the
    error of law hearing at Field House on 16 July 2014.

         1.   I shall refer to the parties as in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
             The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria and  is  54  years  old.
             His appeal against the Respondent's decision of 18th September
             2013 refusing to vary leave to  remain  as  the  parent  of  a
             British citizen child under Appendix FM  was  allowed  by  the
             First-tier Tribunal on human rights grounds.  The Secretary of
             State appealed.

         2.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
             Heynes on  20th  May  2014  on  the  grounds  that  First-tier
             Tribunal Judge Troup erred in law in failing to make a finding
             on  whether  the  Appellant  had   instituted   family   court
             proceedings for the purpose of delaying or frustrating removal
             given his finding that the  Appellant's  explanation  for  the
             delay was not credible.

         3.   Mr Bramble relied on the grounds of appeal and submitted  that
             the Appellant had been granted further leave  to  remain,  for
             six months, outside the Immigration  Rules  on  14th  February
             2013, on the basis that he  was  to  show  that  family  court
             proceedings were in progress.  The Appellant failed to  supply
             such evidence and his application on  10th  August  2013,  for
             further leave to remain on a discretionary basis, was  refused
             on 18th September 2013.  Between the decision and the  hearing
             before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  2nd  April  2014,   the
             Appellant made an application for a contact order.

         4.   On 13th March 2014, Brentford County Court made an order for 6
             to 8 contact sessions for the purpose of  re-introduction  and
             re-establishment of the relationship between the Appellant and
             his child.  The Appellant was cross-examined  on  why  contact
             proceedings had not been instituted before  January  2014  and
             submissions were made on  RS  (immigration  and  family  court
             proceedings) India [2012] UKUT 00218 (IAC).  The Judge  failed
             to properly apply RS because  his  findings  at  paragraph  23
             could only lead to the conclusion that the delay was  intended
             to frustrate removal.  Further, the parties were  amicable  to
             contact and this undermined the Judge's finding  that  if  the
             Appellant  was  removed,  contact  would  be   severed.    The
             Appellant had not shown that  the  contact  proceedings  would
             lead to a relationship with his child or that  his  commitment
             to those proceedings necessitated discretionary leave.

         5.   There was currently no relationship between the Appellant  and
             his child and the Judge found that the Appellant's explanation
             for  the  delay  in  instituting  contact  proceedings  to  be
             "unsatisfactory, lame and less than credible."  The  Appellant
             had been given an opportunity to  pursue  contact  proceedings
             and had not done so.  The Judge  failed  to  explain  why  the
             Appellant  should  be  given  further  leave  given  his  past
             conduct.

         6.   Ms Akiatola submitted that the child's best interests  were  a
             primary consideration and would be affected by the outcome  of
             the  Appellant's  appeal.   The  Judge   found   that   family
             proceedings  had  been  initiated  and  it  was  in  the  best
             interests of the child that the Appellant be  granted  limited
             leave in UK to continue those proceedings.  The  only  way  to
             assess the genuineness of the Appellant's  intentions  was  to
             see through the outcome of the family court proceedings.   The
             Judge could not conclude if the Appellant was frustrating  his
             removal without allowing him  to  progress  with  his  contact
             application.  The Appellant would not be able  to  attend  the
             contact sessions if he was removed to Nigeria.  Limited  leave
             was a proportionate response in the circumstances.

         Discussion and conclusions

         7.   The Appellant married  a  British  citizen  and  they  have  a
             daughter who was born on 29th  April  2008.   She  is  also  a
             British citizen.  The Appellant separated  from  his  wife  in
             2009 and he last had contact with his daughter in about  April
             or May 2011.  The Appellant could not meet the requirements of
             the Immigration Rules.

         8.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge found  that  the  Appellant  was
             granted discretionary leave  to  remain  for  six  months,  in
             February 2012, in order to resolve contact  arrangements,  but
             he failed to issue contact proceedings during that period  let
             alone resolve them.   The  Appellant's  application  form  was
             misleading because he claimed that  contact  proceedings  were
             'in progress' when evidently they  were  not.   The  Appellant
             asserted in his witness statement that  'the  reason  for  the
             delay was due to court administrative proceedings'  when  that
             was clearly not the case because he did not issue  proceedings
             until January 2014.

         9.    The  Judge  found  the  Appellant   to   be   a   "thoroughly
             unsatisfactory witness" and his explanation for the  delay  in
             instituting family court proceedings was "unsatisfactory, lame
             and less than credible."  Despite this view, the  Judge  found
             that if the Appellant was  removed  to  Nigeria  it  would  be
             highly probable that any possibility of future contact between
             him and the child would be ended.  He allowed  the  appeal  to
             the limited extend under Article 8 and invited the  Respondent
             to grant discretionary leave  following  the  decision  of  MS
             (Ivory Coast) [2007] EWCA Civ 133.

         10.  I find  that  there  was  an  error  of  law  in  the  Judge's
             conclusion that the Appellant was not a credible witness.  The
             Judge rejected the Appellant's explanation for  the  delay  in
             instituting proceedings.  This finding was open to  the  Judge
             on the evidence before him and he gave cogent reasons for  his
             conclusion.

         11.  However, the Judge failed to make a  finding  on  whether  the
             family  proceedings   were   instituted   to   frustrate   the
             Appellant's removal and not to promote  the  child's  welfare.
             The Judge failed to properly direct himself following  RS  and
             address the questions at paragraph 43(iv).  The Appellant  had
             not had contact with his daughter for three years; he had been
             granted  discretionary  leave  to   institute   family   court
             proceedings,  but  failed  to  do  so;  he  had   not   issued
             proceedings until after his application was  refused  and  the
             proceedings were at a very early stage: the court ordered  six
             to eight contact sessions for the purpose of re-establishing a
             relationship.  Had the Judge considered these  issues  he  may
             well have come to a different decision.

         12.  I find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  disclosed
             an error on a point of law such that it is set aside and  will
             be  remade.   The  Judge's  findings  at  paragraph   23   are
             preserved.  His findings at paragraph 24 are set aside.

                                 DIRECTIONS

         1.   Adjourned to the first open date before me.  The Appellant  to
             notify the Upper Tribunal if an interpreter is required.

         2.   The Appellant to file  and  serve  evidence  relating  to  the
             progress of the family court proceedings including the outcome
             of the order made on 13th March 2014  and  any  further  court
             orders or reports to enable the Upper  Tribunal  to  determine
             where the best interests of the child lie.

         3.   Not later than 14 days before the  hearing  the  parties  must
             serve on  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  each  other  any  further
             documentary evidence upon which they intend  to  rely  at  the
             hearing.

         4.   Time estimate 2 hours.

The Continuation Hearing

 4. At the hearing before me, I asked whether  there  had  been  compliance
    with Judge Frances's second direction.  Ms Akiatola produced a copy  of
    a notice of a directions hearing on 9 September  2014  in  the  contact
    proceedings.  This referred back to an order made on 15 July  2014.   I
    asked about this order.   Ms  Akiatola  said  that  she  did  not  have
    permission to provide  it.   I  pointed  out  that  Judge  Frances  had
    directed the production of such material, and queried  whether  it  was
    open  to  the  appellant  not  to  disclose  it.   Ms   Akiatola   took
    instructions from the appellant, and he agreed to disclose the order.

 5. It was a child arrangements order under Section 8 of The  Children  Act
    1989.  The father OO was a litigant in person.  The child D was  living
    with her mother, VM.  The safeguarding checks by CAFCASS were complete.
    They showed that there were  safety  issues  in  that  the  father  was
    alleged to have used domestic  abuse  and  was  alleged  to  have  been
    convicted in the United States of drug related offences.

 6. The key issues which had been agreed and or which were to be determined
    were: (a) whether the father  is  engaged  in  domestic  violence;  (b)
    whether the father has convictions for/used drugs.

 7. The planned steps to resolve the issues  were:  (a)  the  father  shall
    attend a domestic violence perpetrator's programme; (b) the father will
    provide such information as to enable CAFCASS to make  enquiries  about
    his activities in the United States.

 8. There is a reference to a report of the family court adviser, which has
    not been disclosed in these proceedings.

 9. The court made the following order with regard to child arrangements:

         Until further order the children  shall  have  contact  with  their
         father as follows: he may  send  letters,  photographs,  cards  and
         gifts once per month and the respondent mother shall encourage D to
         reply as required and send photographs.

10. The court made an activity direction, whereby the father  was  directed
    to take part in a domestic violence perpetrator's  programme  on  dates
    and times as specified by the activity provider.

11. I invited the claimant to be tendered as a witness in order to  address
    the matters referred to in the court order.  He said that he  had  sent
    letters and photographs to his daughter in accordance  with  the  court
    order.  He produced a  letter  and  a  postal  receipt  evidencing  the
    sending of the letter dated 4 August 2014 to the mother's address.   He
    claimed that he had sent two  other  letters,  and  produced  a  postal
    receipt of 16 August 2014 but not a copy of what was sent.  He said  he
    had also  sent  photographs,  but  he  did  not  have  copies  of  such
    photographs.  D had not replied to any  of  the  letters,  and  he  had
    raised this at the directions hearing on 9 September, which his ex-wife
    had attended.

12. He had not seen D since she was 2 years old.  After  he  had  split  up
    with the mother, she used to bring D to meet him at a shopping mall  in
    Harrow.  He was asked to state the year and the month in which  contact
    between him and D ceased.  He said he thought she was five or six years
    old now.  It was maybe in 2011 that contact  ceased.   Her  mother  had
    stopped bringing D to the shopping mall, saying that she was too  busy.
    But he called the Child Support Agency and they said he should take her
    to court.  He had tried to speak to D on the telephone, but her  mother
    refused to put D onto the telephone.  He had not attempted to send  any
    letters or cards to D until now.

13. He confirmed that D's  mother  was  resisting  his  application  for  a
    contact order.  He had never lived in the USA, and she  had  fabricated
    the claim that he had a US drugs conviction.  It was also a fabrication
    on her part to accuse him of engaging in domestic violence.

14. In cross-examination, Ms Holmes asked the claimant to explain why, when
    she had contacted his solicitor yesterday to  find  out  whether  there
    were any documents which came within the scope of paragraph  2  of  the
    directions, she had been informed that there were none.  He said he did
    not know why, as he had given him copies.  It was put to him  that  the
    family proceedings had been initiated by him to delay or frustrate  his
    removal.  He answered that he had been trying  his  best  to  establish
    contact with his daughter.  It was put to him that he did not  seem  to
    know very much about his daughter,  including  how  old  she  was.   He
    answered he knew that she was born in 2008, and that they were together
    for two years.

15. In answer to questions for clarification purposes from me, the claimant
    said his wife worked as a nurse, and he thought  this  was  at  an  NHS
    hospital.

16. In her closing submissions on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State,  Ms
    Holmes relied on the Reasons for Refusal Letter, and invited me to find
    that  the  contact  proceedings  had  been  instituted  to  delay   the
    claimant's removal, not to promote D's welfare.

17. In reply, Ms Akiatola submitted that, irrespective  of  the  claimant's
    conduct, the decision appealed against involved a child, and  her  best
    interests were a primary consideration.  The contact  proceedings  were
    ongoing, and removing the claimant at this stage would bring them to an
    end or at least lead to a severe delay in them coming to a  conclusion.
    So, having regard to the best interests  of  the  child,  the  proposed
    removal of the claimant was disproportionate.

Discussion and Findings

18. The claimant entered the United Kingdom on 12 April 2008 with a spousal
    visa which was valid until 26 February 2010.  D was born in the  UK  on
    29 April 2008.  The claimant is not recorded as having applied  for  an
    extension of his spousal visa in 2010.  Moreover, he began paying child
    maintenance in respect of D from October 2009.   So  I  infer  that  he
    split up with D's mother and moved out of the  family  home  some  time
    before then.  The photographs in the claimant's bundle of the  claimant
    with D are likely to have been taken when D was between the ages  of  1
    and 2, and they are consistent with the claim that for a period of time
    after the split the mother brought D to a shopping mall in  Harrow  for
    contact with the claimant.  In so far as it is material, there  is  one
    photograph in which D appears to be older.

19. On 14 February 2012 the claimant was granted limited leave to remain in
    the United Kingdom until 14 August 2012 so as to provide the  Secretary
    of State with a court order granting him access rights to D.  It is not
    clear when the claimant made the application which led to this  limited
    leave to remain.

20. On 14 August  2012  the  claimant  applied  through  his  former  legal
    representatives for leave to remain on a discretionary basis.  This was
    so he could establish and further develop contact  with  his  daughter,
    thus enjoying family life with her; and to maintain and further develop
    contact with the de facto children of  his  former  relationship.   His
    solicitors  provided  a  number  of  documents  in   support   of   the
    application, but they did not  include  any  documents  evidencing  any
    contact with D, or evidencing any  attempt  to  obtain  a  court  order
    granting him access rights to D.  In his application form, the claimant
    represented that court proceedings were "in progress".

21. On 18 September 2013 the  Secretary  of  State  gave  her  reasons  for
    refusing to grant the claimant's application for leave to remain as the
    parent of a British citizen child.  On  22  August  2013  he  had  been
    requested to provide evidence of the court order granting him access to
    his rights of the child, or a letter  from  the  mother  of  the  child
    confirming his role in the child's life. This was because his  previous
    grant of leave outside the Rules had been granted on the basis  he  was
    in the process of obtaining this  order.   But  as  he  had  failed  to
    provide the specified information, and given it was now eighteen months
    since his leave outside the Rules was granted, he failed  to  meet  the
    suitability requirement of S-LTR.1.7 and there was no evidence to  hand
    to suggest that he had played a parental role in the life of his child.

22. The claimant finally initiated contact proceedings on 28 January  2014.
    On 3 March 2014 solicitors on behalf of VM wrote to the claimant to say
    that their  client  would  very  much  like  to  come  to  an  amicable
    arrangement concerning contact, and would  therefore  like  to  propose
    that they both attended mediation.  At the same time their client could
    confirm she would not object to contact between him and D, providing it
    took place at a contact centre to begin with.

23. The court order made  on  13  March  2014  was  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The mother and father attended in person, and the court also
    heard from Mr  Harmon  of  CAFCASS.   Upon  the  parties  in  principle
    agreeing contact, but it being agreed that it had to proceed  gradually
    and with care during the time since D had last  seen  her  father,  and
    upon CAFCASS agreeing to fund six to eight sessions at Stephen's Place,
    CAFCASS was directed to make a referral to Stephen's Place and to  fund
    six to eight contact sessions at that venue  for  the  purpose  of  re-
    introduction and  re-establishment  of  the  relationship  between  the
    applicant father and the child.  CAFCASS was also directed to provide a
    Section 7 report, which would consider how contact could progress after
    Stephen's Place.

24. It is clear from the order which I have seen today  that  matters  have
    not unfolded as was envisaged in the  order  of  March  2014.   Without
    sight of the Section 7 report, it is  not  clear  to  what  extent  the
    concerns raised about contact emanate from the  mother  as  opposed  to
    from CAFCASS.  But it is clear that the resumption  of  direct  contact
    between father and child is no longer on the cards for the time being.

25. The Court of Appeal in MS (Ivory Coast) [2007] EWCA Civ 133  considered
    that where family proceedings are  under  consideration,  a  period  of
    discretionary leave should be  granted  to  enable  the  person  facing
    removal  to  remain  lawfully  in  the  UK  to  participate  in   those
    proceedings.  But in DH (Jamaica) [2010] EWCA Civ  2007  the  Court  of
    Appeal clarified there was no universal obligation  that  a  period  of
    discretionary leave must be granted  where  family  proceedings  remain
    unresolved.  Sedley LJ said as follows:

         What MS (Ivory Coast) concerns is the unacceptability of keeping an
         individual in limbo rather than giving legal effect, by  the  grant
         of limited leave to  enter  outside  the  Rules,  to  her  accepted
         entitlement to remain here  for  a  specified  purpose.   What  the
         present case  concerns  is  whether  the  appellant  has  any  such
         entitlement.

26. In her error of law ruling, Judge Frances directed that the findings of
    fact in paragraph 23 of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  should
    be preserved.  Paragraph 23 reads as follows:

         Having heard the submissions and reviewed the evidence I found  the
         appellant to be a thoroughly unsatisfactory  witness.   He  entered
         the UK in April 2008 just days before his daughter was born and the
         marriage broke down soon afterwards in 2009.  He claims that  there
         was contact with the child until April/May 2011 which is  now  over
         three years ago.  Ten months later in February 2012 the  respondent
         granted the claimant leave to remain for a discretionary period  of
         six months in order to resolve contact arrangements, but he  failed
         to issue proceedings for  contact  during  that  period  let  alone
         resolving them.   Throughout  his  evidence  the  claimant  excused
         himself by blaming either his solicitors or  his  ex-wife  for  the
         delay  but  I  find  that  responsibility  falls  largely  at   the
         claimant's own door.   [The Presenting Officer] is right  to  point
         out that the FLR(O) application was entirely  misleading  when  the
         claimant claimed at 6.31 that contact proceedings were in  progress
         when evidently they were not.  Equally, I find that the  claimant's
         character is demonstrated by his assertion at paragraph  7  of  his
         witness statement "the reason  for  the  delay  was  due  to  court
         administrative proceedings".  Self evidently this was not the case.
          He did not issue proceedings of January 2014, and his  explanation
         for not doing so between April/May 2011 and the beginning  of  2014
         are unsatisfactory, lame and less than credible.

27. In RS, the Tribunal said at paragraph [43] that when a judge sitting in
    an immigration appeal has to consider whether a person with a  criminal
    record or adverse immigration history should  be  removed  or  deported
    when  there  are  family  proceedings  contemplated  the  judge  should
    consider the following questions:

         (i)  Is the outcome of the contemplated family  proceedings  likely
             to be material to the immigration decision?

         (ii) Are there compelling public interest reasons  to  exclude  the
             claimant from the United Kingdom irrespective of  the  outcome
             of the family proceedings or the best interests of the child?

         (iii)    In  the  case  of  contact  proceedings  initiated  by  an
             appellant in an immigration appeal, is  there  any  reason  to
             believe that the family proceedings have  been  instituted  to
             delay or frustrate removal and  not  to  promote  the  child's
             welfare?

28. In the light of the preserved finding, and also having  formed  my  own
    independent judgment on the totality of the evidence that is before me,
    I answer the third question  in  the  affirmative.   I  find  that  the
    claimant did not initiate the contact proceedings in  January  2014  to
    promote D's welfare, but to delay or  frustrate  his  removal.   It  is
    clear  from  the  chronology  that  the  claimant  did  not  grasp  the
    opportunity of initiating family proceedings when specifically  granted
    six months' leave to do so, but only initiated them in response to  the
    threat of removal.  Since ceasing to have contact with his daughter  in
    2010 or 2011, he has not done his best to re-establish contact.  On the
    contrary, there was a remarkable lack of activity on that  front  until
    January 2014.

29. RS was decided before the introduction of the new Rules, and  therefore
    the case does not address their potential impact  to  a  case  such  as
    this.  In my judgment, the necessary starting point in  the  Article  8
    assessment is to recognise that Appendix FM caters for applications for
    limited leave  to  remain  in  order  to  pursue  contact  proceedings.
    However, the claimant does not  meet  the  mandatory  requirements  for
    leave to remain on this basis under Appendix FM.  Not only does he fail
    to meet the suitability requirement identified in the  refusal  letter,
    but also he does not play a parental role in the life of his child.  He
    is D's biological father, but he has had no contact with her whatsoever
    from, at the latest, April/May 2011.

30. Because of the MS (Ivory Coast) line of authority,  I  am  prepared  to
    accept the claimant has an arguable Article 8 right claim  outside  the
    Rules to remain until the conclusion of the family proceedings such  as
    to require the application of the five point Razgar test.

31. I find that the claimant does not enjoy family life with D at the  date
    of the hearing, and therefore Article 8(1) is not engaged with  respect
    to the claimant's right to respect for family life.  On the one hand, I
    accept that Article 8(1)  is  engaged  in  respect  of  the  claimant's
    private life.  This will be seriously interfered  with  if  he  is  not
    allowed to remain until  the  conclusion  of  the  family  proceedings.
    Questions 3 and 4 of the Razgar test fall to be answered in  favour  of
    the Secretary  of  State,  and  so  the  crucial  question  is  whether
    requiring the claimant to leave now, before the family proceedings  are
    concluded, is proportionate.

32.  The  best  interests  of  D  are  a  primary  consideration   in   the
    proportionality assessment.  I accept that in general terms  it  is  in
    the best interests  of  a  child  to  have  contact  with  his  or  her
    biological father.  But on the evidence as it  stands,  the  claimant's
    removal will not impact at all on D's welfare and it will also have  no
    adverse impact on  her  emotional  wellbeing  and  development  in  the
    foreseeable future.  As previously noted, she has  had  no  contact  or
    relationship with her father for some years, and so, to put it bluntly,
    she is not going to miss him if he is outside  the  jurisdiction.   The
    only contact which the claimant is allowed to have with D  is  indirect
    contact once a month.  There is no reason why the  claimant  could  not
    maintain this level of contact from Nigeria.

33. The removal of the claimant is likely to delay the  conclusion  of  the
    family proceedings, but it will not prevent them from continuing.   The
    claimant can continue to participate in  the  family  proceedings  from
    Nigeria by modern forms of communication, "with visits on the  part  of
    the claimant where he is required to attend court": see  the  Secretary
    of State's grounds of appeal, paragraph (c).

34. In conclusion, I am not persuaded that  it  is  contrary  to  D's  best
    interests for the claimant to be removed at this stage.  But even if  I
    am wrong about that, it is only contrary to D's interests  to  a  small
    degree, and there are strong countervailing considerations which render
    the decision appealed against a proportionate one.

35. I repeat my earlier finding that the purpose of the contact proceedings
    initiated by the claimant has been to delay or frustrate  removal,  not
    to promote D's welfare.  In all the circumstances, this is not  a  case
    where the appeal should be allowed to a limited extent  and  a  further
    period of discretionary leave be granted to the claimant.   I  also  do
    not consider there should be an adjournment to enable a decision to  be
    made in  the  family  proceedings.   This  is  because  the  period  of
    adjournment is unlikely to be short.  Also, it is not  clear  that  the
    decision in the family proceedings will ultimately assist the  claimant
    with regard to his immigration status.  If  the  decision  is  indirect
    contact only, such indirect contact can be continued from Nigeria.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law,  and  so
the decision is set aside and the following decision  is  substituted:  this
appeal is dismissed on all grounds raised.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

