

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/41327/2014
      IA/41337/2014
      IA/41521/2014
      IA/41531/2014
      IA/41538/2014
      IA/41524/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued         |
|on 16 June 2015                               |On 24 June 2015              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                           A H H DARMISH & OTHERS
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr T Nazir, of Copland Immigration Services
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are father, mother and four children.  The oldest  child
    is an adult and the other three are minors.  They are all  citizens  of
    Libya.  On 29 July 2014 they sought leave to remain in the  UK  on  the
    basis of family and private  life.   The  respondent  refused  all  the
    applications for reasons which are principally explained in a letter to
    the first appellant dated 1 October 2014.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge P A Grant-Hutchison dismissed the appellant's
    appeal by determination promulgated on 20 February 2015.

 3. As the respondents' decisions contemplate all  the  appellants  leaving
    the UK together, there was never any prospect of success on  the  basis
    of interference with family life.

 4. As to private life, the Judge found that he had to consider in terms of
    Rule 276AD(iv) whether there would be "very significant  obstacles"  to
    integration into Libya.  Noting at  paragraph  11  that  the  situation
    there was "at the least unsettled" he did not find any reason why  they
    might not integrate.  He found no  good  arguable  case  or  compelling
    circumstances for the appeals to succeed outside the  Rules,  and  that
    any interference with Article 8 rights would be proportionate.

 5. The appellants argued that the cases of the minor  children  should  be
    considered under paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) on the basis  of  seven  years
    continuous residence in the UK and the reasonability of expecting  them
    to leave.  However, Judge Grant-Hutchison found that the relevant  date
    was the date of decision and  that  the  test  was  therefore  not  the
    reasonability of departure but very significant obstacles.

 6. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal  erroneously  again  insist
    that the relevant date was the date of the hearing.  That is incorrect.
     The Rules are explicit that the relevant date is that of application.

 7. The grounds complain that the question of a genuine subsisting parental
    relationship is not analysed in the determination.  However, there  has
    never been any dispute over  the  relationships  among  the  first  two
    appellants and their minor children.

 8. The grounds also complain that the best interests of the  children  are
    not mentioned, but that has to be taken into  account  in  the  context
    that they would be expected to leave the  UK  with  both  parents,  the
    family having come here on the basis of the first  appellant's  studies
    and not with a view to settlement.

 9. A First-tier Tribunal Judge granted permission to appeal to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on 22 April 2015.  The points on which permission was  granted
    were that it was arguable that the Judge might have  erred  in  finding
    that there would not be very significant obstacles to  resettlement  in
    Libya given the current crisis in that country, and given that they had
    been in the UK for seven years, and arguable failure  to  consider  the
    best interests of the children.

10. In a Rule 24 response the  respondent  argues  that  on  the  basis  of
    paragraphs 11 and 17 of the determination it is plain there could  have
    been no different  conclusion  on  the  question  of  very  significant
    obstacles to integration into Libya.  There was no  submission  raising
    issues about the children's private lives and  paragraph  9(d)  of  the
    determination records the submission for the appellants that there were
    no significant obstacles to integration.

11. In a letter dated 15 May 2015 the  appellants  seek  to  introduce  new
    evidence.  This goes mainly to the present state of affairs  in  Libya.
    The letter says that the first appellant "has come up with a new point"
    which he seeks to develop in a further statement: that he would  be  at
    risk of death, and his  family  at  risk  of  harm,  from  the  present
    government in Libya due to his part-time service in  the  reserve  army
    under Qaddafi.

12. I observed at the  outset  to  Mr  Nazir  that  the  appellants  appear
    throughout to have been attempting to bring claims which properly  fell
    under the Refugee Convention or in terms of humanitarian protection.

13. Mr Nazir acknowledged that the "very significant obstacles" relied upon
    by the appellants were based on events in the last few years  in  Libya
    during their absence.  Their case was that the turmoil in  the  country
    makes it too dangerous for them to return.   The  appellants  place  of
    origin is in "one of the most affected areas".  He submitted  that  the
    error in the First-tier Tribunal was a  failure  to  analyse  the  full
    country situation in Libya.  However, he also said that the  appellants
    sought to base their case on their family and  private  life  interests
    alone and any protection element was only "to strengthen the point".

14. I queried why this had not been pursued through  the  well  established
    channels as a protection claim.  Mr  Nazir  explained  that  the  first
    appellant was not interested in following that procedure because he did
    not wish to become dependent on the UK government or  to  give  up  the
    ability to work.  He argued that the case  should  be  allowed  on  the
    basis of the best interests of the children, the younger  two  of  whom
    were born and have been brought up entirely in the UK.

15. Mr Matthews submitted that the appellants specifically did not ask  for
    a grant of protection and it was not apt for them to pursue such issues
    by way of a family and private life claim.  The relevant Rules were not
    designed for that purpose.  In any event it was for the  appellants  to
    establish "very significant obstacles" which they failed to  do.   That
    presented them with the fairly high challenge of proof on  the  balance
    of probabilities, a point they failed  to  mention  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  In a properly taken protection claim they would have to show
    only real risk of persecution or of serious harm.  The  case  they  did
    put forward rightly failed both on family and  on  private  life  under
    paragraph 276ADE.  The appellants now have options of either  making  a
    protection claim or of applying again on the basis of private life, the
    children having reached the seven year milestone.  It was not of course
    guaranteed  that  they  would  succeed  on  either  basis  but  it  was
    misconceived  to  bring  protection  claims  in  the  course  of  these
    proceedings, to argue that the seven year criterion could be considered
    in these proceedings, and to attempt to enhance the protection claim by
    fresh assertions at this stage which had nothing to do with legal error
    in the First-tier Tribunal.

16. Mr Nazir in response repeated the points that the appellants' claims do
    amount to a need for  protection  but  should  be  allowed  within  the
    private life Rules, and that the claim should also succeed on the basis
    of the children's interests, they having now been here for seven years.

17. I indicated that there was no error of law in the determination.

18. The Judge rightly rejected the wholly  unlikely  proposition  that  the
    younger children have no knowledge of Arabic (paragraph 17).  There  is
    no error of law in his crucial conclusion that the appellants  had  not
    shown very significant obstacles to their integration in  Libya,  which
    is their country of origin.  The criteria for private and  family  life
    issues are not designed for deciding claims based either on  individual
    protection needs or on universally intolerable country conditions.

19. It may be understandable that the first appellant seeks to  retain  the
    opportunity of working in this country, but if there is a genuine  need
    for protection then the appellants can be expected to follow the course
    the UK prescribes for extending such protection to those in need of it.



20. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

21. No anonymity order has been requested or made.




            [pic]


            19 June 2015
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




