

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/41907/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                    |                       Decision and Reasons|
|                                    |Promulgated                                |
|on 20 November 2015                 |                       on 24 November 2015 |
|                                    |                                           |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                  P O EBEA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, born on  17  July  1986.   On  4
    August 2014 she sought leave to  remain  as  a  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)
    Migrant under the Points Based System (PBS).   The  respondent  refused
    that application on 10 October 2014, referring to  one  specific  point
    under paragraphs 41-SD and 46-SD  of  Appendix  A  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The advertising material which the appellant provided  did  not
    cover  a  continuous  period  commencing  before  11  July  2014.    An
    advertisement she provided was undated.  Evidence relating to a website
    was not acceptable because it had been registered only on 18 July 2014.

 2. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal, stating  2  grounds.
    The first referred to sub-paragraph (1)(iii) of (e) of paragraph  41-SD
    of Appendix A,  and  maintained  that  advertising  material  had  been
    provided which was published locally before 11 July 2014 and so met all
    the requirements of the Rules.

 3. The second ground was  that  discretion  should  have  been  "exercised
    differently".

 4. The appellant did not seek an oral hearing.  Her case came before First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Holt on  30  January  2015  for  decision  "on  the
    papers" and was dismissed by determination promulgated on  17  February
    2015.

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  the
    following grounds:

        1. The appellant's company was not trading online, so she  was  not
           required to register a domain.

        2. The evidence of online  advertising  did  not  contain  all  the
           specified information, but the minor omission should  have  been
           corrected in favour of the appellant.

        3.  The  judge  should  have  exercised  discretion,  fairness   or
           evidential flexibility in favour of the appellant.

        4. The judge erred in finding that the appellant  did  not  provide
           evidence of  continuous  registration  with  HMRC,  because  the
           appellant is a director of a limited liability company and not a
           self-employed person.

        5.  The  judge  did  not  have  jurisdiction  to  make  credibility
           findings,  because  the  respondent  had  explicitly  chosen  to
           reserve the right to assess whether the application was genuine.

        6. The judge erred in her assessment of Article 8.

        7. Inadequate reasons were given by the judge.

 6. On 22 April 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Osborne  granted  permission
    to appeal on the basis of ground 6, on the view that  it  was  arguable
    that the judge had not conducted an adequate Article 8 exercise.

 7. Notice of the hearing before us was issued on 30 October 2015, both  to
    the appellant and to her representative.  The address last on file  for
    the appellant with the Tribunal corresponds to that on record with  the
    Home Office.  There was no  appearance  by  or  representation  of  the
    appellant by 11.30 am, and no  communication  had  been  received.   In
    those circumstances, we considered it in the interests  of  justice  to
    proceed with the hearing under rule 38 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008.

 8. Mr Matthew submitted that although the shortcoming in  the  appellant's
    original application was a relatively small one, a gap of about a week,
    there had been no  requirement  on  the  respondent  to  give  her  the
    opportunity to produce further evidence.   There had  been  nothing  to
    suggest to the respondent that to give her a further opportunity  might
    result in her making good the deficiency.  In any event, the  appellant
    has not been able  to  produce  evidence  which  would  have  made  her
    application a good one.

 9. As to Article 8, the point on which permission was granted, Mr Matthews
    observed that the matter is dealt with in the determination; and in any
    event, it was not raised in the grounds of  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

10. We reserved our determination.

11. The appellant's application to the respondent was correctly refused for
    the reasons given in the decision dated 10 October 2014.  The appellant
    has not since identified any deficiency in that decision, nor  has  she
    been able to show that if given the opportunity  she  would  have  been
    able to provide the evidence which was lacking.

12. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  was  granted  only  on  the
    Article 8 point.  The other grounds, in any  event,  are  misconceived.
    They seek a breadth of discretion in favour of the appellant  which  is
    not available under the highly prescriptive requirements of the PBS, or
    under provisions relating to evidential flexibility.  The  respondent's
    procedural obligation to act fairly has not been breached.  There is no
    overarching doctrine  of  fairness  or  discretion  which  enables  the
    appellant to be excused from shortcomings in her application,  even  if
    they are relatively minor.

13. The  grounds  about  registration  with  HMRC  and  about  "credibility
    findings" go nowhere.   The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  observations
    are somewhat misleading, but the  respondent  was  satisfied  on  those
    points and they make no difference to the outcome, at any stage.

14. The judge who granted permission may have overlooked that Article 8  is
    dealt with at paragraph 17 of the determination.  The appellant had not
    raised any Article 8 ground of appeal;  had  not  sought  to  vary  her
    grounds; and had provided no information by which an Article  8  ground
    might have succeeded, even on the  most  benevolent  view.   The  judge
    needed to say no more.

15. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

16. No anonymity order has been requested or made.


            [pic]

            20 November 2015
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




