

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/41183/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 13 October 2015                            |On 14 October 2015           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          MR DEEPACK SHARMA GEWALI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:           Mr Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:          Ms Bond, Counsel

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I  find  that  no
particular issues arise on the facts of this case  that  give  rise  to  the
need for a direction. For this reason no anonymity direction is made.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

    1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State.  For ease of reference,
       we refer below to  the  parties  as  they  were  in  the  First-Tier
       Tribunal albeit that the  Secretary  of  State  is  technically  the
       Appellant in this particular appeal.


    2. The Appellant is  a  citizen  of  Nepal.   He  appeals  against  the
       decision of the Secretary of State dated 8 October 2014 refusing him
       further leave to remain as the dependent of his wife who  has  leave
       to remain as a Tier 4 student until 14 April 2017.     The  decision
       also gave notice of his removal to Nepal.

    3. The Appellant's appeal was  allowed  by  a  decision  of  First-Tier
       Tribunal Judge Rastogi promulgated on 18 May 2015 ("the  Decision").
       The Decision was on the basis that the Respondent's decision was not
       in accordance with the law because it failed to deal with Article  8
       ECHR and the best interests of the Appellant's child  who  had  been
       born in the UK after the Appellant's application to the Secretary of
       State and after the decision under appeal.

    4. There was no criticism of any failure of the Secretary of  State  to
       make a decision on the basis  of  Article  8  ECHR  or  to  consider
       section 55 of the UK Borders Act 2007.  The Appellant's  application
       was  a  points-based  system  one.   He  had  raised  his   personal
       circumstances in a witness statement submitted  shortly  before  the
       hearing of the  appeal  but  had  not  raised  those  circumstances,
       particularly the birth of his baby in the  statement  of  additional
       grounds filed with the notice of appeal (although he had raised  the
       issue of Article 6 ECHR and  Article  8  ECHR  with  no  particulars
       given).   However, for reasons set  out  at  [26]  to  [27]  of  the
       Decision, the Judge remitted the case to the Secretary of State  for
       a decision on those aspects.  I deal in more detail with this  below
       when giving reasons for my decision.

    5. The Appellant's and his wife's immigration background is briefly set
       out at [10] of the Decision and  I  do  not  need  to  repeat  that.
       Suffice it to say, the Appellant's  appeal  under  the  Rules  as  a
       dependent spouse of a Tier 4 student was  dismissed.   There  is  no
       challenge to that finding.

    6. The Respondent appealed on the grounds that the  Judge  should  have
       made a finding on Article 8 ECHR and section 55 and should not  have
       remitted to the Secretary of State.  The Respondent relies  in  this
       regard on MK (Section 55 - Tribunal  options)  Sierra  Leone  [2015]
       UKUT 00223 as authority for the  proposition  that  it  is  for  the
       Appellant to make out his case on the impact of his removal  on  his
       baby and there was no evidence in this regard.  The Respondent  also
       submitted that the  Judge  failed  to  consider  the  provisions  of
       section 117B when considering proportionality under Article 8 ECHR.


    7. Permission to appeal was granted  on  15  July  2015  by  First-Tier
       Tribunal Judge Baker on the basis that  it  was  arguable  that  the
       Judge erred in remitting the case to  the  Respondent  and  arguably
       erred in finding that the decision was not in  accordance  with  the
       law, particularly since the Respondent was unaware of the  birth  of
       the Appellant's baby until the hearing.  The matter comes before the
       Upper Tribunal to determine whether the First-tier Tribunal decision
       involved the making of an error of law. I indicated at  the  end  of
       the hearing that I found there to be  no  error  of  law  and  would
       provide reasons in writing which I now set out below.


      Decision and reasons


    8. I have no difficulty in rejecting the second of the Respondent's two
       grounds.  As Mr Melvin submitted, the Judge embarked on the  Article
       8 consideration at [24].  However, having directed  herself  on  the
       law in relation to Article 8 including in relation to  section  117B
       at [25] the Decision on this aspect comes to an abrupt end without a
       finding.  It cannot be said  that  there  is  an  error  of  law  in
       applying  section  117B  to  the  public  interest   question   when
       determining proportionality because the Judge simply has not reached
       that point and has stopped short of making  any  decision  on  human
       rights (other than  allowing  the  appeal  on  that  basis  for  the
       Respondent to consider it).


    9. The first ground presents more difficulty.  As I put to  Mr  Melvin,
       the issue is whether the Judge could lawfully do as she has done; if
       she could, there can be no error of law.  The fact  that  there  was
       little evidence before her as to the impact of removal on the  child
       may be relevant to this aspect although I noted that there  is  some
       limited evidence at [7] to [13] and [8] to [10] of  the  Appellant's
       and his wife's witness statements (as referred to  at  [24]  of  the
       Decision).   Mr Melvin submitted that there would be  no  impact  on
       the Appellant's child as his wife and child could  return  to  Nepal
       with him.  The Appellant's child is very  young  and  will  have  no
       private life apart from with his parents.  His  best  interests  lay
       with remaining with both parents and the family returning to  Nepal.
       I accept that this might be the position but note that the  position
       might be different since the  Appellant's  wife  has  the  right  to
       remain in the UK until April 2017 and may decide  that,  because  of
       the impact otherwise on her studies, she should stay in the  UK  (as
       indeed her witness statement appears to indicate she would do).   If
       that is the  position,  then  the  Secretary  of  State  and/or  the
       Tribunal is obliged to consider the best interests of the  child  on
       the analysis that the child will lose the care of one parent, albeit
       for a limited period. In any event, I repeat the error  must  be  in
       the Judge's procedural approach and not the substance of the Article
       8/section 55 claim as otherwise there is no error.


   10. I was assisted in resolving this issue by the Tribunal's decision in
       MK  (above)  although  not  by  the  passage  relied  upon  by   the
       Respondent.  The headnote includes the following passage:-
      "(iv)      Where the Tribunal finds that there has been a  breach  of
           either of the section 55 duties one of the options available  is
           remittal to the Secretary of State for reconsideration and fresh
           decision"
       That passage appears to find its genesis in  [38]  of  the  decision
       where the Tribunal says:-
           "We consider there can be no objection in principle to an  order
           of the Tribunal the effect whereof is to require  the  Secretary
           of State, rather than the Tribunal, to perform  the  two  duties
           imposed by section 55.  There is no jurisdictional bar of  which
           we are aware.  It has long  been  recognised  that  there  is  a
           category of cases in which it is open to both tiers to allow the
           appeal on the basis that the Secretary of State's  decision  was
           not in accordance with the law without  further  order,  thereby
           obliging the Secretary of State, as primary decision  maker,  to
           re-make the decision, giving effect to and educated  and  guided
           by such correction and guidance  as  may  be  contained  in  the
           Tribunal's determination.  This is not contested  on  behalf  of
           the Secretary of State...."


   11. Although there is  no  reference  to  the  decision  of  MK  in  the
       Decision, and whilst the Decision is not well expressed in terms  of
       the reasons why the case was remitted to the Secretary of State, the
       Judge clearly did have in mind that the best interests of the  child
       needed to be considered at [27] and [28] of the Decision.


   12. As I note above, the issue for me is whether the Decision contains a
       material error of law.  Based on the above  analysis,  I  find  that
       there is no material error of law.  I  emphasise  however,  firstly,
       that there can be no criticism of  the  Respondent  for  failing  to
       consider the best interests of the Appellant's child  prior  to  the
       date of the hearing; it was incumbent on the Appellant to raise this
       issue with the Respondent in order for the  Respondent  to  consider
       it.  Secondly, I emphasise that it would obviously have been open to
       the Judge to consider the Article 8 claim and the best interests  of
       the child on the basis of the material before her and it might  have
       been preferable in the interests of avoiding delay  and  expense  to
       the parties had she done so.  For the reasons I have given, however,
       I consider it was open to the Judge to proceed as she did and I find
       that there is no material error of law in the Decision and I  uphold
       it.   The Appellant and Respondent will note what  is  said  in  the
       Decision about the requirement on the Appellant  to  submit  further
       material to the Respondent if he wishes her to consider it when  re-
       making the decision and the Respondent will note what is said  about
       the timing of such decision.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point of law.
I do not set aside the decision


Signed      [pic]Date  14 October 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
