






Upper Tribunal
(Immigration And Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/41238/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House (Taylor House)    |       Decision and Reasons        |
|on 14 October 2015                      |Promulgated                        |
|                                        |On 2 November 2015                 |
|                                        |                                   |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         Mr Cyrus Bauan Macata ngay
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Z Nasim, counsel (instructed by Chris Raja
Solicitors)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. I shall refer to the appellant as "the secretary of state" and to  the
      respondent as "the claimant."


   2. The secretary of state appeals with permission against the decision of
      the First-tier Tribunal Judge, who allowed the claimant's appeal in  a
      decision promulgated on 8 May 2015.


   3. The claimant is a national of the Philippines,  born  on  15  February
      1987. On 27 October 2014, the secretary of state cancelled  his  leave
      to remain in the UK under paragraph 321A (2) of the Immigration Rules.




   4. The claimant had been granted leave to remain in the UK on 8 September
      2014 until 27 July 2017 as  the  dependant  of  his  wife,  a  Tier  2
      (General) Migrant. It was contended that  false  representations  were
      employed and material facts were not  disclosed  for  the  purpose  of
      obtaining that leave.


   5. The claimant had originally applied for  leave  in  January  2012  for
      leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student. It is contended that he
      submitted a fraudulently obtained document, namely a TOEIC certificate
      as part of that application, which certificate had  been  fraudulently
      obtained.


   6. On 30 October 2013, he was granted leave to remain as the dependant of
      his wife  and  had  submitted  the  same  TOEIC.  It  was  accordingly
      contended that on 6 August 2014, he withheld  material  facts  by  not
      disclosing his previous deception when applying for his current  leave
      to remain.


   7. The First-tier Tribunal Judge allowed the appeal under the Immigration
      Rules on the basis that the secretary of state had erroneously  relied
      upon paragraph 321A(2) in making the  decision.  She  found  that  the
      secretary of state had not shown that false representations  or  false
      documents were submitted with his latest application.  The  claimant's
      evidence adduced (page 64) revealed that there was no reference to the
      disputed test document. Neither was there any reference to it  or  any
      statements made in connection with that application in the body of the
      letter. [20]


   8. On 8 July 2015, First-tier Tribunal Judge P J M  Hollingworth  granted
      the secretary of state permission to  appeal  on  the  basis  that  an
      arguable error of law had  arisen  in  relation  to  the  construction
      placed upon and  weight  attached  to  the  evidence  adduced  by  the
      secretary of state.


   9. Mr Kandola relied on the grounds seeking  permission.  The  Judge  had
      failed to provide adequate reasons for finding that the  secretary  of
      state erroneously relied on paragraph 321A(2) in making the  decision.
      Reference was made to  the  evidence  produced  that  there  had  been
      evidence of  proxy  test  taking  or  impersonation.  Accordingly  the
      paragraph that the secretary of  state  relied  upon  in  the  refusal
      notice was correct.


  10.  He  also  contended  that  the  relevance  of  paragraph  21  of  the
      determination is not clear. There the Judge found that it could not be
      said that material facts were not disclosed. It is not  a  requirement
      for a dependant spouse to show an English  language  proficiency.  The
      requirement "for the same is upon the applicant spouse." She fulfilled
      that requirement and the secretary of state did not dispute "the same"
      [21].


  11. The secretary of state contended that the  claimant  was  required  to
      prove his English language proficiency in the application he  made  on
      30 January 2012. Whether or  not  he  was  required  to  show  English
      proficiency for his PBS dependant application, he had still previously
      practised deception.


  12. Mr Kandola  set  out  the  immigration  history  submitting  that  the
      evidence of deception constituted a proper basis  for  cancelling  the
      claimant's current leave.


  13. On behalf of the claimant, Mr Nasim contended that the Judge  directed
      herself properly with regard to the rules and correctly found that the
      secretary of state had failed to show that the claimant had made false
      representations or  submitted  false  documents  in  the  most  recent
      application [20]. She found that paragraph 321A(2) related to the most
      recent application and her reasoning at [20] is correct as  the  words
      in paragraph 321A state "in relation to the application."


  14. There was no need for the  Judge  to  consider  the  evidence  as  the
      secretary  of  state's  decision  was  not  in  accordance  with   the
      immigration rules. The immigration officer could only cancel leave  if
      the  claimant  had   submitted   false   documents   or   made   false
      representations in "the most recent application." However,  the  Judge
      found that he had not submitted the certificate. Accordingly there was
      no deception.






      Assessment


  15. The facts are not in dispute. I have had regard to the decision of the
      Upper Tribunal in Khaliq (Entry  clearance:  paragraph  321)  Pakistan
      [2011] UKUT 00350 (IAC).


  16. The Tribunal held that a person who has entry  clearance  that,  under
      the provisions of the Immigration (Leave to Enter  and  Remain)  Order
      2000, takes effect as leave to enter, does not on arrival  in  the  UK
      "seek" leave to enter and paragraph 321 therefore does  not  apply  to
      him. Paragraph 321A does, but only if the  circumstances  set  out  in
      that paragraph can be shown  to  exist  in  this  case.  The  Tribunal
      referred to paragraph 321A of the rules which set out grounds on which
      leave to enter or remain which is in force is to be cancelled at port.
      That includes the position where:


     "2. False representations were made or false documents were  submitted
      (whether or not material to the application, and whether or not to the
      holder's knowledge), or material facts were not disclosed, in relation
      to the application for leave."


  17. At [20] the Tribunal held that if the appellant could be shown to have
      produced to the entry clearance officer a false document in connection
      with his application for entry clearance, there might be little  doubt
      that paragraph 321A applied.


  18. In the circumstances, it was not possible to say that the appellant in
      that case made a false representation or submitted a false document in
      relation to his application for leave.


  19. I also note that the claimant in  the  present  appeal  has  not  been
      judicially assessed as having been untruthful or deceitful.


  20. I have also had regard to the Upper Tribunal decision in Amanov v SSHD
      (appeal number IA/31526/2014, where the Upper Tribunal, presided  over
      by Mr Justice Green, construed paragraph 321A of the  rules.  In  that
      case, the appellant had  entered  the  UK  as  a  Tier  4  student  to
      undertake an English language course. It was alleged however that  the
      TOIEC test that he claimed to have taken in February 2012 was in  fact
      taken by a proxy. He therefore obtained that particular  qualification
      by deception.


  21. The facts in Amanaov bear a resemblance to the claimant's position. In
      Amanaov, the appellant had been granted further extensions of leave as
      a student and in September 2013, applied for leave to remain to attend
      an honours course at a university. That was granted in  October  2013,
      valid until September 2016 as a Tier 4 student. In 2014, he  left  the
      UK and returned on 6 August 2014 but was refused entry upon arrival on
      the basis that it had been  found  that  the  educational  institution
      conducting the TOEIC course had been engaged in fraudulent procurement
      of certificates.


  22. The question posed by the Tribunal at [5] was whether, for the purpose
      of paragraph 321A(2), leave to enter  is  to  be  cancelled  if  false
      documents were submitted in relation to any application for leave,  or
      only if those circumstances were submitted in  relation  to  the  last
      application for leave to remain?


  23. The Tribunal had regard to the judgement  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
      Khaliq, supra. There had to be causality between  the  false  document
      and the application for entry clearance.


  24. The Tribunal contrasted paragraph 321A(2) with  paragraph  320(11)  of
      the Immigration Rules which refer to an applicant who  had  previously
      contrived in a significant way to  frustrate  the  intentions  of  the
      rules by using deception in an application for entry  clearance.  That
      was construed to be a reference to an application wherever made.  That
      is  significant  because  it  demonstrates  that  the  word  "the"  in
      paragraph 321A of the rules  is  deliberate  and  is  intended  to  be
      different to "an" because in the latter it is  intended  to  refer  to
      "an" application whenever made, and in the former to  the  application
      which led to "the" leave in issue [11].


  25.  In  applying  these  Upper  Tribunal   decisions   to   the   similar
      circumstances prevailing in the claimant's case, I find that the First-
      tier Tribunal properly construed the relevant Rule  and  the  decision
      did not involve the making of any error of law.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
      any error of law. It shall accordingly stand.


      No anonymity direction is made.










      Signed                             Date: 28 October 2015


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer





