
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/41487/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 8 October 2015                    |On 9 October 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                           MOHAMMAD TOUHID HOSSAIN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     no appearance
For the Respondent:    Mrs N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a national of Bangladesh,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the decision of the respondent of 21 October  2014  to
    refuse his application for leave to remain as a Tier 4 General  Student
    and for a biometric residence permit. First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  J  S
    Pacey dismissed the appeal.  The appellant appeals with  permission  to
    this Tribunal.

 2. The appellant notified the Upper Tribunal by letter dated 28  September
    2015 that he wished to have his appeal considered on the papers. He did
    not therefore attend the hearing on 8 October 2015. I heard submissions
    from Mrs Willocks-Briscoe and I reserved my decision to  be  determined
    on the papers.

 3. The background to this appeal is that the  appellant  was  issued  with
    entry clearance valid from 28 May 2009 and entered the UK as a  Tier  4
    student. It is unclear from the papers before me whether  or  when  the
    first period was  renewed  but  the  appellant  made  his  most  recent
    application for leave to remain on 28 June 2014. That  application  was
    to study for an ATHE Level 7 Diploma in healthcare management from June
    2014 until June 2015.

 4. The respondent refused that application for two reasons,  firstly  that
    the Brac bank statement submitted with the application  was  false  and
    secondly that the appellant had previously been granted leave to  study
    courses at degree level or above for  four  years  and  one  month  and
    therefore a grant of leave to study the  ATHE  Level  7  Diploma  would
    result in him having spent more than 5 years in the  UK  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student studying courses that consist of degree  level  study
    or above contrary to paragraph 245ZX  (ha).  The  reasons  for  refusal
    letter states that the appellant had no right  of  appeal  against  the
    decision.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge firstly  determined  that  the  appellant
    does have a right of appeal. That decision has not been challenged. The
    First-tier Tribunal Judge found that the respondent had not  discharged
    the burden  upon  her  in  relation  to  the  alleged  fraudulent  bank
    statements. That decision has not been challenged either.

 6. However the Judge did note that the appellant  had  not  addressed  the
    remaining issue in his appeal, that is whether the grant  of  leave  to
    study would result in his spending more than 5 years  in  degree  level
    studies. The Judge found that the appellant first came to the UK with a
    Tier 4 visa valid from 28 May 2009 and that the current application  is
    over five years from the date of the issue of the  original  visa.  The
    Judge therefore dismissed the appeal on the basis  that  the  appellant
    had not discharged the burden of proof upon him to  establish  that  he
    met the requirements of paragraph 245ZX (ha).

 7. The appellant submitted a CAS with his appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    which he says relates  to  his  initial  studies  for  a  HND  Business
    Management course at NQF level 5. The appellant says in his grounds  of
    appeal that this CAS was not available to him at the time of the First-
    tier Tribunal appeal. He says therefore that  whilst  he  was  on  this
    course during the period from 28 May 2009 until 28 October  2010  (when
    he went to LSC London to study a  BA  (Hons)  course)  does  not  count
    towards degree level studies.

 8. However the appellant was aware from the  reasons  for  refusal  letter
    that the level of his  studies  was  in  issue  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and he has not explained why he did no submit the  CAS  before
    the First-tier Tribunal dealt with his appeal.

 9. The appellant says in his grounds that the onus was on  the  respondent
    to show that he met the requirements of paragraph  245ZX  (ha)  as  the
    respondent had the relevant records.  However  it  is  clear  from  the
    reasons for refusal letter that the respondent did not accept that  the
    appellant met the requirements of paragraph 245ZX (ha) and  the  burden
    of proof was on the appellant in relation to this matter.

10. Further, the CAS he submits now  does  not  confirm  that  he  actually
    undertook the course for which the CAS was issued. In any event  it  is
    not in dispute  that  this  document  was  not  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge. Accordingly she could not have taken it into account in
    reaching her decision. The Judge cannot have erred in  her  calculation
    of his studies at level 5 if she had no evidence before her as to these
    studies.

11. In these circumstances I find that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did
    not make an error of law.

Conclusion:

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.


Signed      Date: 8 October 2015

A Grimes

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

