
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/41788/2014
     IA/42161/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 August 2016                    |On 19 August 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

                               MUHAMMAD JAVID
                                 TAHIR AZIZ
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr D Balroof, Universal Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs A Vijialade, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants are citizens of Pakistan born on 1 January 1984  and  25
    December 1985.  They made a combined application for leave to remain in
    the United Kingdom as Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrants under the  points-
    based system and for biometric  residence  permits.   The  applications
    were refused by the respondent  on  7  October  2014  as  she  was  not
    satisfied that the appellants could be awarded a minimum of  75  points
    under paragraph 245DD(b) and Appendix A of  the  Immigration  Rules  as
    they had failed to submit evidence specified in paragraph  41-SD(e)  of
    Appendix A of the Rules.

2.   Initially Judge Shaffer refused permission to  appeal  on  14  December
    2015 but it was subsequently granted by Judge Ockelton, Vice  President
    of the Upper Tribunal, stating that permission is granted in  light  of
    the decision of the High Court in this  case.   It  was  accepted  that
    there had been an error of law and the matter was submitted back to the
    Upper Tribunal.

3.   At the hearing it was agreed between the parties  that  the  matter  be
    sent back  to  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  application  to  be
    considered again with all the documents  that  the  appellants  claimed
    that they sent to the respondent before the date of decision.

 4. It is clear from the decision and it is not disputed that the documents
    were sent by the appellant after the application and before the date of
    decision.  The Secretary of State's position is that the are  not  sure
    what documents have been sent and therefore the only way to resolve the
    issue is for the Secretary of State to reconsider all the document in a
    fresh decsion.

Notice of Decision

5.   I allow the appeal as not being in accordance with the  law  and  remit
    it to the Secretary of State awaiting their lawful decision.

    No anonymity direction is made.

    No fee award is made.


Signed Mrs S Chana                               Date 18 August 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana

