

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/41127/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 5th June 2014                              |On 6th June 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                               MD ASLAM SARKAR

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     no appearance either in person or by legal
representative
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
   1. The appellant appeals a decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which
      dismissed his appeal against a decision by the respondent to refuse to
      vary his leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General student) migrant and  to
      remove him in accordance with s47 Immigration Asylum  and  Nationality
      Act 2006. It was acknowledged and agreed by  the  parties  before  the
      First-tier Tribunal that the appellant did not meet  the  requirements
      of the Rules and thus the appeal was dismissed under the Rules.
   2. The appellant however seeks to appeal that  decision  on  the  grounds
      that the First-tier Tribunal judge failed to deal with all the grounds
      before him, in particular that the decision  to  refuse  to  vary  his
      leave was a breach of Article 8. Permission to appeal  was  granted  n
      the grounds that it was clear in the grounds submitted in  support  of
      the appeal at first instance that the appellant relied upon Article 8.


   3. It is plain that the First-tier Tribunal judge has not considered  and
      determined the appeal on human rights grounds and  there  is  thus  an
      error of law. The issue however is whether such error is  such  as  to
      set aside the determination for it to be remade on that ground.

   4. The appellant was legally represented before the First-tier  Tribunal.
      The arguments submitted in his notice of appeal  was  that  the  "SSHD
      must exercise her discretion in favour of the appellant  as  the  only
      ground of refusal is that the bank statements are not  from  a  listed
      bank ....the appellant is a genuine  student  with  real  ambition  to
      complete his degree." The appellant also stated that he was not  aware
      of the existence of an approved list of banks but, as  is  clear  from
      the Rules there is and the appellant did not meet those requirements.

   5. No skeleton argument was submitted by the appellant and there  was  no
      witness statement or other documentary evidence  submitted.  There  is
      nothing on the face of the documentary evidence  before  me  that  the
      appellant raised any matters other than were set out in the grounds of
      appeal.

   6. The appellant whose date of birth is 1st January 1993, appears to have
      arrived in the UK on around  14th  May  2011  pursuant  to  a  Tier  4
      (general student) migrant entry clearance issued on  27th  April  2011
      which operated as leave to enter until 24th August 2013. He sought  to
      vary his leave to remain to undertake a further course  commencing  on
      2nd September 2013 and expiring on 6th September 2014.

   7. There was nothing in the papers before the First-tier  Tribunal  judge
      and the appellant did not seek to rely  on  anything  other  than  was
      submitted with his application for  a  variation.  There  was  nothing
      before the judge that would remotely indicate that the  appellant  had
      any basis on which to stay in the UK other than a desire to remain and
      complete his education. The provisions for enabling such is set out in
      the Immigration Rules. The failure to comply with  the  Rules  for  no
      expressed good reason combined with a desire to continue with  studies
      and having come relatively recently to the UK on a temporary visa  for
      such study purposes does  not  even  begin  to  approach  reasons  for
      considering that the refusal to vary leave to  remain  and  subsequent
      removal is disproportionate.

   8. Although the judge erred in failing to specifically consider Article 8
      and reach a decision, the evidence before him could only have resulted
      in one outcome namely that removal was  not  disproportionate  to  the
      legitimate aim of the respondent; there was no breach of Article 8.

     9. There is no error of law such that the decision is to be set  aside
        to be remade. The appeal is dismissed.



 Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  is  to
    be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision

     The appeal is dismissed.



                                    Date 5th June 2014.
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Coker
