

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/41447/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 16 December 2015                           |On 4 January 2016            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN



                                   Between

                         MADHAM MOHAM SOMA SUNDARAM
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K. Mowla of Victory Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N. Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.    The appellant entered the UK on 25 December 2010 with entry  clearance
    as Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant that was valid until 31  May  2012.
    On  31  May  2012  he  applied  for  further  leave  to  remain  on   a
    discretionary basis in order to allow time  for  him  to  complete  his
    dissertation. The respondent refused the application on  31  May  2012.
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Powell  allowed  the  appeal  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 30 January 2014. The judge allowed the  appeal  only  to
    the limited extent that the decision was not  in  accordance  with  the
    law, the effect of which was to return the matter to the respondent for
    a further decision to be made.

2.    On 30 May 2014 the respondent made a further decision  refusing  leave
    to remain. The respondent concluded that the appellant did not meet the
    requirements of the family life provisions contained in Appendix FM  of
    the immigration rules because he was not married to a  British  citizen
    and had no children in the UK.  The  respondent  went  on  to  consider
    whether the appellant met the private life  requirements  contained  in
    paragraph 276ADE of  the  immigration  rules  but  concluded  that  the
    appellant did not meet the 20 year long residence requirement contained
    in paragraph  276ADE(1)(iii).  Nor  did  he  meet  the  requirement  of
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) because he could not show that he had lost  all
    ties to his home country. The respondent considered that there were  no
    exceptional circumstances in this  case  that  would  justify  granting
    leave to remain outside the immigration rules.

3.    The appellant appealed the  decision.  By  the  date  of  the  hearing
    before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Saunders  he  claimed   that   his
    circumstances had changed and he was now married to  an  EEA  national.
    The appellant said that he married a  Danish  citizen  in  a  religious
    ceremony on 30 March 2015. At the hearing the appellant  said  that  he
    only sought a short period of leave in order to allow time for  him  to
    submit an application for an EEA residence card. He said that his  wife
    was not currently in the UK because she was looking after her mother in
    Denmark. First-tier Tribunal Judge Saunders allowed the appeal on  this
    limited basis. Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton set aside her decision on
    06 November 2015 because  there  was  insufficient  assessment  of  the
    public  interest  considerations  under  Article  8  of  the   European
    Convention.

4.    The appeal was listed for a resumed hearing in  order  to  remake  the
    decision. At the resumed  hearing  I  was  told  that  the  appellant's
    circumstances had changed  once  again  and  he  was  no  longer  in  a
    subsisting relationship with his wife. The appellant had prepared an up
    to date statement outlining the circumstances.  He  said  that  he  was
    upset by the fact that his wife had abandoned him.  He  said  that  his
    family and friends got to know of the breakdown of his marriage and  he
    had been ridiculed in the community. He said that  he  was  finding  it
    difficult to deal with the situation and needed more time to regain his
    self-respect before returning home. If he  was  allowed  to  remain  he
    wouldn't cause any harm or disturbance to  the  public  or  society  at
    large.

Decision and reasons

5.    The appellant is a 28 year old man who has lived in the UK for  nearly
    six years. He spent the first 23 years of  his  life  living  with  his
    family in India. He says that he was studying before he came to the UK.
    The appellant entered the UK with limited leave to remain as a student,
    which is a short-term category that provides  no  expectation  of  long
    term settlement. The appellant wanted to complete an MSc in  Automotive
    Engineering. Although he was not awarded the full qualification because
    he failed his dissertation he was awarded a  Post-graduate  Diploma  in
    Automotive Engineering in 2012. No doubt during this time the appellant
    made friends in the UK and has established some ties. He says that  his
    sister also lives in the UK but little information has been provided as
    to her circumstances. His relationship with his sister was  not  relied
    on as one that might engage the operation of the right to  family  life
    Article 8 of the European Convention of Human Rights. There  is  little
    evidence to show that the appellant  has  established  any  significant
    ties to the UK during his relatively short period of residence.

6.    The basis of the appellant's claim to remain on EEA  law  grounds  has
    now fallen away. Even taken at its highest there is no evidence to show
    that his wife has ever lived in the UK or exercised her rights of  free
    movement here. The appellant says that the relationship broke  down  in
    August 2015 and it is understandable that he will  feel  upset  by  the
    situation  given  that  it  was  his  wife's  decision   to   end   the
    relationship.

7.    It is accepted that the appellant does not meet the family or  private
    life requirements of the immigration rules. The appellant's  length  of
    residence falls far short of  the  20  year  requirement  contained  in
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) of the immigration rules. At the date  of  the
    decision paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) required an applicant to show that  he
    had "no ties (including social, cultural or family) with the country to
    which he would have to go if required to leave the UK".  The  appellant
    could not meet the requirement because he has spent the majority of his
    life living in India and continues to have close  relatives  there.  At
    the date of this hearing the test has been changed to whether there are
    "very significant obstacles" to the appellant  reintegrating  in  India
    but apart from his reluctance to return because of a certain  level  of
    embarrassment about his current situation there is no evidence to  show
    that he would face the kind of  significant  obstacles  that  would  be
    needed to satisfy the fairly stringent test set out in  either  version
    of the immigration rules.

8.    The immigration rules are said to reflect  the  respondent's  view  of
    where a fair balance should be struck between the right to respect  for
    private and family life and public interest considerations relating  to
    the  maintenance  of  an  effective  system  of   immigration   control
    (paragraph GEN.1.1 Appendix FM).  The rules should be  read  in  a  way
    that reflects a proper interpretation of  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention. However, there may  some  cases  where  the  rules  do  not
    address relevant Article 8 issues. In such cases it may be necessary to
    consider whether there are compelling circumstances to justify granting
    leave to remain outside the immigration rules: SSHD v SS (Congo) [2015]
    EWCA Civ 387.  This should be assessed by reference to the  five  stage
    test outlined by the House of Lords in R v SSHD ex parte Razgar  [2004]
    3 WLR 58.

9.    No doubt the appellant has made some friends and  connections  to  the
    UK in the last six years but there is little evidence to show  that  he
    has established a private life  of  the  kind  that  might  engage  the
    operation of Article 8 of the European Convention. However, I  bear  in
    mind that following the decisions in AG (Eritrea) v  SSHD  [2007]  INLR
    407 and VW (Uganda) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 5  that  the  threshold  for
    showing an interference with an appellant's rights under Article  8  is
    not particularly high. For this reason I find that it  is  likely  that
    the appellant has established some form of private life in the  UK  and
    that in all the circumstances of this case removal would interfere with
    that life in a sufficiently grave way as to  engage  the  operation  of
    Article 8 (points (i) & (ii) of Lord Bingham's five stage  approach  in
    Razgar v SSHD [2004] INLR 349).

10.   Article 8 of the European Convention protects the right to family  and
    private life.  However,  it  is  not  an  absolute  right  and  can  be
    interfered with by the state in certain circumstances. It is trite  law
    that the state has a  right  to  control  immigration  and  that  rules
    governing the entry and residence of people into the  country  are  "in
    accordance with the law" for the purpose of Article 8. Any interference
    with the right to private or family  life  must  be  for  a  legitimate
    reason and should be reasonable and proportionate.

11.   In assessing whether removal in consequence of the decision  would  be
    a proportionate response I am required to take into account the  public
    interest considerations set out in section  117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("NIAA 2002"). I take into account that
    it is in the  public  interest  to  maintain  an  effective  system  of
    immigration control (s.117B(1)). While the appellant speaks English and
    is therefore better able to integrate this is  a  neutral  factor  that
    does not add to his case (s.117B(2)). It is merely a factor  that  does
    not lend additional weight to the public interest  considerations:  see
    AM (S.117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT  260.  There  is  no  evidence  to  show
    whether the appellant is or has financially independent (s.117B(3)). In
    any event, it would also be a neutral factor.

12.   The appellant has applied for further leave to remain in time and  his
    leave has been extended by virtue of section 3C of the Immigration  Act
    1971. However, his initial period of leave expired in 31 May  2012  and
    the rest of the time he has spent in the UK has been  consumed  by  the
    appeals process. It seems that  the  initial  application  for  further
    leave to remain was made with a request to be  allowed  to  finish  his
    dissertation, which he did not  complete  successfully.  The  appellant
    continued the appeals process despite the fact that  he  had  no  other
    basis on which to remain  in  the  UK.  While  the  marriage  may  have
    initially created the possibility of a right of residence under EU  law
    it was brief lived. The appellant can have had no expectation  of  long
    term settlement in the UK when he arrived to study and it can  properly
    be said that his leave has been precarious throughout his time  in  the
    UK. Section 117B(5) states that little weight  should  be  given  to  a
    private life that has been established in the  UK  at  a  time  when  a
    person's immigration status is precarious.

13.   The public interest considerations outlined in section 117B  are  only
    one part of the proportionality assessment and may still be  outweighed
    if the appellant  can  show  that  there  are  particularly  compelling
    circumstances that might justify granting leave to remain  even  though
    he doesn't meet the requirements of the immigration  rules.  While  the
    appellant is going through an emotionally difficult time at the moment,
    and does not wish to leave the UK, I find that there is nothing in  the
    circumstances of this case that could properly be described as  raising
    any such compelling circumstances. The appellant has lived  in  the  UK
    for a  relatively  short  period  of  time,  there  are  no  compelling
    compassionate circumstances, he would be able to return to  his  family
    in India, and even if there is some tension with them, there is nothing
    to suggest that he would not be able to  live  and  work  elsewhere  in
    India. Unfortunately, the appellant's understandable desire  to  remain
    in the UK does not equate to a right to do so under the law.

14.   For the reasons given above I find that removal in consequence of  the
    decision  would  amount  to  a  proportionate  interference  with   the
    appellant's right to private life  under  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention (points (iv) & (v) of Lord Bingham's five stage approach  in
    Razgar).


DECISION

I re-make the decision and DISMISS the appeal


Signed   [pic]   Date 17 December 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan








