
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/41348/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 28th July 2014                               |On 9th September 2014      |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                         mr Peter Ehidiamen Francios
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Charles
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by Mr Peter Ehidiamen Francios a citizen  of  Nigeria
    born on 12th August 1976.  The Appellant applied for a  residence  card
    on 31st October 2008.  He was refused.  He reapplied  on  15th  January
    2010 and was again refused.  In January 2013  he  sought  a  derivative
    residence card.  That application was refused by the Secretary of State
    on 22nd August 2013.  His application was sought as confirmation  of  a
    right of residence as the primary carer of an EEA national minor who is
    a qualified self-sufficient person but  the  Appellant  had  failed  to
    produce evidence that  his  EEA  national  is  a  qualified  person  as
    claimed.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Immigration Judge Law
    sitting  at  Manchester  on  10th  April  2014.   In  a   determination
    promulgated on 24th April 2014 the Appellant's appeal was dismissed.

 3. On 1st May 2014 Grounds of Appeal were submitted to the Upper Tribunal.
     Those grounds contended so far as the claim pursuant to Article 8  was
    concerned the judge  had  failed  to  consider  the  case  outside  the
    Immigration Rules and to consider the family and private  life  of  the
    minor D in accordance with Article 8.  The grounds  contended  that  at
    paragraph 23 Judge Law had stated that the Appellant was  not  entitled
    to a derivative residence card as the primary carer or carer at all  of
    an EEA minor within the provisions of Chen.  The grounds submitted that
    the Appellant is a carer for the child as he  has  more  responsibility
    than the father, he resides with the mother and has been  part  of  the
    child's life since the child was born.  The grounds submitted  that  if
    the Appellant were removed from the United  Kingdom  it  would  have  a
    detrimental and negative effect on the minor which the judge had failed
    to consider.

 4. On 13th May  2014  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Froom  granted
    permission to appeal.  In granting permission Judge Froom found to  the
    extent that  the  grounds  seek  to  reargue  the  case  regarding  the
    Appellant  being  a  primary  carer  they  amount  to  no   more   than
    disagreement.  However permission to appeal was granted on all  grounds
    because the judge arguably erred by failing to consider the  Article  8
    Grounds of Appeal.  Judge Froom considered that Judge Law had  declined
    to do so because no application had been made under the Rules but  that
    he was entitled to appeal on human rights grounds and  having  done  so
    was arguably required to determine it.

 5. On 17th June 2014 the Secretary of State responded to  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal under Rule 24.  The Rule 24 response submitted that the  grounds
    advanced raised no material arguable errors of law capable of having  a
    material impact upon the outcome of the appeal  and  that  the  grounds
    advanced were mere  disagreement  with  the  negative  outcome  of  the
    appeal.   Based  upon  the  negative  credibility  findings  that  were
    reasonable and  open  to  the  judge  on  the  basis  of  the  evidence
    concerning the nature and extent of the care provided by the  Appellant
    to his sister's child it was  reasonable  and  open  to  the  judge  to
    conclude that there was no arguable family or  private  life  claim  in
    respect of the Appellant and his sister's family within the meaning  of
    Article 8 of the European Convention of Human Rights.

 6. It is on this basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error  of  law.   The  Appellant  is
    represented by his instructed solicitor Mr Charles.  The  Secretary  of
    State is represented by her Home Office Presenting Officer Mr  Diwnycz.



Submissions/Discussions

 7. Mr Charles accepts the sole Ground of Appeal  is  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge has not considered the position pursuant to Article 8 of
    the European Convention of Human Rights.  He takes me to  paragraph  22
    of the determination and  acknowledges  the  Appellant  cannot  succeed
    under the 2006 EEA Regulations.  He asked me to find that  there  is  a
    material error of law to that extent.

 8. I am considerably assisted by Mr Diwnycz in  this  matter  in  that  he
    accepts the judge should have gone on to have considered the  issue  of
    the Appellant's appeal pursuant to Article 8  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.  He invites me to set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and the parties invite me to  give  directions  remitting  the
    matter to Judge Law so that he can consider the outstanding issues.

The Law

 9.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account   immaterial   consideration,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

10. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

11. The Secretary of State acknowledges there  was  a  requirement  on  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge to give due consideration to the  Appellant's
    appeal pursuant to Article 8 to give due consideration to  that  appeal
    outside the Immigration Rules.  He further accepts,  and  acknowledges,
    and agree with him that the judge has not addressed those  issues.   He
    has at paragraph 22 of his determination indicated that he did not find
    an arguable family life had been maintained with D nor that there was a
    private life with the child but went on to say  "However  determination
    of those aspects is a matter  for  another  day".   I  agree  with  the
    representative's contention that in fact that was not the case and that
    they should have been addressed.  On that basis, and that basis  alone,
    I find that there is a material error of law in  the  determination  of
    the First-tier Tribunal and I set  aside  the  decision  reserving  the
    findings of facts, remitting  the  matter  to  be  heard,  reserved  to
    Immigration Judge Law in accordance with the directions set out  below.



Decision and Directions

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains a material error
    of law insofar as it relates to the failure of the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  to  consider  the  Appellant's  Article  8  claim  outside   the
    Immigration Rules.  On that basis directions are given as follows:

      1) That the appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal reserved  to
         Immigration Judge Law, to be  heard  at  Manchester  on  the  first
         available date, 42 days hence, with an ELH of two hours the  appeal
         to be restricted to the issue of the Appellant's  Article  8  claim
         outside the Immigration Rules.

      2) That the findings of fact  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  be
         preserved.

      3) That there  be  leave  to  either  party  to  file  and  serve  any
         additional evidence upon which they seek to rely within 21 days  of
         receipt of these directions.

      4) Any skeleton arguments and/or  bundle  of  authorities  upon  which
         either party intends to rely be provided within 21 days of  service
         of this determination.

      5) No interpreter required.

13. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005.   No
    application is made to vary that order and none is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


