
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/41451/2014
                                                               IA/41454/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 8 December 2015                   |On 19 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between

                                     CJO
                                     NDO
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Benfield counsel instructed by Fursdon Knapper
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. An order was  previously  made  and  as  the  case
    relates to the rights and interests of children I am satisfied that  it
    should continue.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Monaghan promulgated on 8 May  2015  which  allowed  the
    Appellants appeal against a refusal of a variation of leave  to  remain
    on the basis of the Appellants family and private life  and  to  remove
    them from the UK.

Background

 3. The Appellants are a mother and her son born on 13  July  1973  and  22
    March 2008 respectively who are nationals of Nigeria.

 4. The first Appellant entered the UK in 2004 with entry  clearance  as  a
    student from 22.9.2004 until 31.1.2006. That leave  as  a  student  was
    extended on a number of occasions and was due to  expire  on  9  August
    2014.

 5. The second Appellant was born 22 March 2008 in the UK.

 6. On 2 August 2014 they applied for a variation of their leave to  remain
    on the basis of family and private life.

 7. On 1 October 2014 the Secretary of State refused the  applications:  in
    relation to the first  Appellant  by  reference  to  Appendix  FM  with
    reference to the parent route and EX.1 and paragraph  276  ADE  and  no
    exceptional circumstances to warrant a grant of leave outside the Rules
    and in respect of the second Appellant he could not meet Appendix FM by
    reference to the child route and he did not meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276 ADE at the date of application.

The Judge's Decision

 8. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Monaghan  ("the  Judge")  allowed   the   appeal   against   the
    Respondent's decision in respect of the first Appellant under Article 8
    and in respect of the second Appellant  under  the  Rules  specifically
    under paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv). The Judge found :

      a) She should first  consider  the  position  of  the  second  (child)
         Appellant.

      b) She found  that  the  second  Appellant  met  the  requirements  of
         paragraph 276ADE(1) (iv) as he had lived continuously in the UK for
         7 years and the only issue for her to determine was whether it  was
         reasonable to expect the second Appellant to leave the UK with  his
         mother.

      c) She found that it would not be reasonable for the second  Appellant
         to leave the UK with his mother. She found that the Appellants  had
         no contact with the childs father and  there  was  no  evidence  of
         contact with maternal relatives. She found that the child was  well
         settled and integrated in the UK. She found that removal would lead
         to inappropriate disruption of social cultural and educational ties
         he had formed in the UK.

      d) The Judge found  that  the  first  Appellant  could  not  meet  the
         requirements of the Rules.

      e) She found that removal would interfere with the  first  Appellant's
         family and private life.

      f) She answered the remaining questions in  Razgar  affirmatively  and
         said the issue was one of proportionality.

      g) The Judge considered s117B  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
         Asylum Act 2002 and found that there  was  no  public  interest  in
         removing the Appellant. The Judge found that  the  first  Appellant
         spoke English and was financially independent. The Judge found that
         her private life had not been established when she was  in  the  UK
         unlawfully. She found that s117(6) applied in  that  the  Appellant
         was  in  a  relationship  with  a  qualifying  child  and  it   was
         unreasonable to expect the second Appellant to leave the UK.

      h) The Judge found the decision was therefore disproportionate.

 9. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing that :

      a) The Judge erred in his application of the facts  to  the  Rules  in
         that he applied the facts of the second  Appellant's  case  at  the
         date of hearing to paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) when the Rule  in  issue
         opens by stating the requirements are to be met  'at  the  date  of
         application'

      b) The Judge also failed to properly assess whether it was  reasonable
         to expect the child Appellant to leave the UK with his  mother.  He
         looked only at the circumstances of the child and  not  whether  it
         was reasonable taking into account all of the facts  including  the
         first Appellant's circumstances.

      c)  As  a  result  of  this  error  the  consideration  of  the  first
         Appellant's case under Article  8  was  purely  procedural  and  he
         treated the outcome as inevitable.

10. On 7 July 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Frankish  gave  permission  to
    appeal on all grounds.

Preliminary Issue

11. Ms Benfield on behalf  of  the  Appellant's  drew  my  attention  to  a
    document headed 'Rule 24 Response on behalf of the  Appellants  Grounds
    of Cross Appeal.'

12. I enquired of Ms Benfield as to what authority either case law,  statue
    or the Rules allowed me to consider a Cross Appeal.  Mr  Melvin's  view
    was that there had been no application for permission to appeal and  he
    noted that the cross appeal had been advanced 6 months after  the  case
    had been promulgated with no application to extend time.

13. Ms Benfield was not immediately  able  to  assist  me  with  any  legal
    principles and I retired to allow her the opportunity to  consider  the
    point.

14. On her return Ms Benfield was only able to refer to Rule 24(3)  of  the
    the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

15. I indicated that my preliminary view was that that even  if  the  power
    were available the application was made well outside  the  time  limits
    and I could find no good reason for that delay.  I  indicated  I  would
    consider the matter further when I reserved my  decision  and  I  would
    give full reasons.

16. Having considered the matter and looked at the case of EG  and  NG  (UT
    rule 17: withdrawal; rule 24: scope) Ethiopia [2013] UKUT 00143(IAC)  I
    am satisfied that the Upper Tribunal cannot  entertain  an  application
    purporting to be made under rule 24 for permission to appeal until  the
    First-tier Tribunal has been asked in writing for permission to  appeal
    and has either refused it or declined to admit the application. No such
    application was made in this case and therefore I am satisfied  that  I
    need make no findings in respect of the Appellant's 'cross appeal.'

Submissions

17. At the hearing I heard submissions from Mr  Melvin  on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent that :

      a) Ms Benfield conceded that the Judge had erred in his application of
         the Rules as the operative date was the date of application.

      b) He submitted that the only issue was whether both Appellants  could
         succeed under Article 8 and the starting point of that would be the
         mother's application:  the  Judge  had  wrongly  used  the  child's
         success under the Rules as the starting point.

      c) He suggested that there were no compelling  circumstances  in  this
         case.

      d) The Appellants status was precarious in that they were  here  as  a
         student and dependent.

      e) The Judge's assessment of the public interest factors  under  s117B
         was inadequate and therefore the Judge had failed to  consider  the
         public interest.

      f) The Judge did not carry out a balancing exercise but simply focused
         on the circumstances of the child  and  the  fact  that  the  Judge
         believed she met the requirements of the Rules.

18. On behalf of the Appellants Ms Benfield submitted that :

      a) She conceded that the Judge had made an error in her application of
         the Rules to the second Appellant.

      b) She did not accept that this error was material  or  permeated  all
         the findings made.

      c) The second Appellant had been living in the UK for seven  years  at
         the date of hearing and therefore the error fell away.

      d) In relation to the mother's case she had been in  the  UK  lawfully
         for over 10 years.

      e) The best interests of the child were still a primary consideration.

      f) The analysis at paragraph 23 of the decision was well reasoned  and
         thorough and was not impugned by  the  error  in  relation  to  the
         Rules.

      g) In relation to the criticism of the  finding  that  the  Judge  had
         allowed the first Appellant to  piggyback  on  the  result  of  the
         second Appellant's appeal this overlooked a numbers of facts in the
         first Appellant's case: that she had lived in the UK  lawfully  for
         over 10 years, had been in employment, attending  the  same  Church
         since 2007 but had limited contacts in Nigeria.

      h) She suggested that the Judge had  taken  into  account  the  public
         interest in paragraph 28.

19. In reply Mr Melvin on behalf of the Respondent submitted:

      a) There was no identification of compelling circumstances to  warrant
         a grant of leave outside the Rules.

      b)  The  Judge's  analysis  of  Azimi-Moayed  and  others   (decisions
         affecting children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 197(IAC) was flawed
         in respect of the age and length of residence in the UK.

      c) There were no findings in respect of Nigeria and what was available
         for the child in respect of education and language.

      d) The Article 8 analysis was flawed.

Finding on Material Error

20. Having heard those submissions,  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made material errors of law.

21. I am satisfied that the Judge made an error of law in how  she  applied
    the facts of the case to the Rules in respect of the second Appellant's
    case and Ms Benfield quite properly conceded this.

22. The operative date for the determination of whether an applicant  meets
    the  requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  is  the  date  of  the
    application and this is stated in the Rule. The  second  Appellant  was
    born in the  UK  on  22  March  2008  and  therefore  at  the  date  of
    application, 29 July 2014, he had been in the UK for 6  years  and  did
    not meet the requirements of the Rule and the Judge  was  in  error  in
    allowing his case under that Rule.

23. I am satisfied  that  this  erroneous  approach  infected  the  Judge's
    findings thereafter. The Judge treated the best interests of the  child
    Appellant and his success under  the  Rules  as  determinative  of  the
    appeal of the first Appellant  under  Article  8  .The  assessment  was
    largely an enumeration of those factors in the Appellants side  of  the
    scales with no adequate and reasoned analysis of  the  public  interest
    factors identified in s  117B;no  recognition  of  the  fact  that  the
    Appellants did not meet the requirements of the Rules which underpinned
    immigration control; no recognition of the fact  that  the  Appellants'
    private life, which largely made up the findings at paragraph  24,  was
    established at a time when the  status  was  precarious  and  therefore
    should be accorded little weight . In accepting that  s117B(6)  applied
    and finding it was not reasonable for the second Appellant to leave the
    UK there was no engagement with the fact that the mother had  no  right
    to remain. There was no identification of any compelling  circumstances
    that warranted a grant of leave  outside  the  Rules.  These  errors  I
    consider to be material since had the Tribunal conducted this  exercise
    the outcome could have been different. That in my view is  the  correct
    test to apply.

24. I therefore found that errors of law have been established and that the
    Judge's decision in allowing the first Appellant's appeal under Article
    8 and the second Appellant's appeal under the Rules should be set aside
    to be  remade  on  the  basis  that  neither  Appellant  can  meet  the
    requirements of the Rules and the decision is remade only  in  relation
    to Article 8 for both of the Appellants.



Remaking the Decision

25. The first Appellant arrived in the UK as an adult aged 31 as a student.
    She therefore had no  legitimate  expectation  to  be  able  to  remain
    thereafter other than by complying with the requirements of the  Rules.
    The second Appellant was born on 22 March 2008 and therefore  turned  7
    on 22 March 2015.

26. In making my assessment in this case I have reminded myself of what was
    said in the Court of  Appeal  in  SS  Congo  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387  in
    paragraph 33:

         "In our judgment, even though a test  of  exceptionality  does  not
         apply in every case falling within the scope of Appendix FM, it  is
         accurate to say that the general  position  outside  the  sorts  of
         special contexts referred to above is that compelling circumstances
         would need to be identified to support a claim  for  grant  of  LTR
         outside the new Rules in Appendix  FM.  In  our  view,  that  is  a
         formulation which is not as strict as a test of exceptionality or a
         requirement of "very compelling reasons"  (as  referred  to  in  MF
         (Nigeria) in  the  context  of  the  Rules  applicable  to  foreign
         criminals), but which  gives  appropriate  weight  to  the  focused
         consideration of public interest factors as finds expression in the
         Secretary of State's formulation of the new Rules in  Appendix  FM.
         It also reflects the formulation in Nagre at para. [29], which  has
         been tested and has survived scrutiny in  this  court:  see,  e.g.,
         Haleemudeen at [44], per Beatson LJ. "

27. In determining whether there are compelling  circumstances  that  would
    warrant a grant of leave outside the Rules I have determined the  issue
    on the basis of the questions posed by Lord Bingham  in  Razgar  [2004]
    UKHL 27.

Will the proposed removal be an interference by a public authority with  the
exercise of the applicant's right to respect for  his  private  (or  as  the
case may be) family life?

28. I accept that the Appellants have a family  and  private  life  in  the
    United  Kingdom.  However  I  am  also  satisfied  that  this  case  is
    principally a private life appeal as the Appellants would  be  returned
    to Nigeria together and given that there is no family life beyond their
    relationship in the UK there will be no interference.

If  so,  will  such  interference  have  consequences  of  such  gravity  as
potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?

29. I am satisfied that removal would have consequences of such gravity  as
    potentially to engage the operation of Article 8.

If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

30. I am satisfied that there is in place the legislative framework for the
    decision giving rise to the interference with Article 8 rights which is
    precise and accessible enough for  the  Appellants  to  regulate  their
    conduct by reference to it.

If so, is such  interference  necessary  in  a  democratic  society  in  the
interests of national security, public safety or the economic well-being  of
the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection  of
health or morals, or for  the  protection  of  the  rights  and  freedom  of
others?

31. The interference does have legitimate aims since it is  in  pursuit  of
    one of the legitimate aims set  out  in  Article  8  (2)  necessary  in
    pursuit  of  the  economic  well  being  of  the  country  through  the
    maintenance of the requirements of a policy of immigration control. The
    state has the right to control the entry  of  non  nationals  into  its
    territory and Article 8 does not mean that  an  individual  can  choose
    where she wishes to enjoy their private and family life.

If so, is such interference  proportionate  to  the  legitimate  public  end
sought to be achieved?

32. I have considered the  best  interests  of  the  second  Appellant  but
    reminded myself that while they are a primary  consideration  they  are
    not determinative of the appeal and may be outweighed by other factors.

33. In making the assessment I have also taken into account  ZH  (Tanzania)
    (FC)  (Appellant)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home   Department
    (Respondent) [2011] UKSC 4 where Lady Hale noted Article  3(1)  of  the
    UNCRC which states that "in all actions  concerning  children,  whether
    undertaken  by  ...  courts  of  law,  administrative  authorities   or
    legislative bodies, the best interests of the child shall be a  primary
    consideration."

34. Article 3 is now reflected in section 55 of  the  Borders,  Citizenship
    and Immigration Act 2009 which provides that, in relation, among  other
    things, to immigration, asylum or nationality, the Secretary  of  State
    must  make  arrangements  for  ensuring  that  those   functions   "are
    discharged having regard to the  need  to  safeguard  and  promote  the
    welfare of children who are in the United Kingdom".  Lady  Hale  stated
    that "any decision which is taken without having regard to the need  to
    safeguard and promote the welfare of any children involved will not  be
    "in accordance  with  the  law"  for  the  purpose  of  article  8(2)".
    Although she noted that national authorities were expected to treat the
    best interests of a child as "a primary consideration", she  added  "Of
    course, despite the looseness with  which  these  terms  are  sometimes
    used, "a primary  consideration"  is  not  the  same  as  "the  primary
    consideration", still less as "the paramount consideration".

35. As a starting point it is in the best interests of children to be  with
    both their parents and if the parents are being removed from the United
    Kingdom then the starting  point  suggests  that  so  should  dependent
    children who form part of their household unless there are  reasons  to
    the contrary. In this case  the  second  Appellant's  mother  is  being
    removed as the father,  who  is  estranged,  has  already  returned  to
    Nigeria . The second Appellant is 7 years old (8 in March) and  entered
    Primary School on 11 September 2013 when he was 5. I remind  myself  of
    what was said in Azimi-Moayed and others (decisions affecting children;
    onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 197(IAC) that seven years from age four  is
    likely to be more significant to a child that the first seven years  of
    life. Very young children are focussed on  their  parents  rather  than
    their peers and are adaptable. Thus in this case it is only in the last
    two years that the second Appellants focus will have moved  beyond  his
    mother into the wider community. I have no doubt  he  has  friends  and
    enjoys primary school but he has not been there  in  reality  for  very
    long and there is nothing to suggest that he is anything other  than  a
    normal child who could attend school and make friends in Nigeria  given
    the support of his mother. There is certainly  nothing  in  the  bundle
    before me to suggest that he would not have access  to  free  education
    and indeed health care in Nigeria. There  is  no  evidence  that  there
    would be language difficulties. There  is  no  evidence  before  me  to
    suggest that the second Appellant is at a key stage in  his  education,
    SATS and GCSEs are for him a number of years away. I remind  myself  of
    what was said in paragraph 39 of AM (s117B)  Malawi  [2015]  UKUT  0260
    (IAC) that the difficulties of  moving  a  child  from  one  school  to
    another particularly at such an early stage of  school  should  not  be
    exaggerated.

36. I now turn to the wider proportionality assessment. Section 117A (2) of
    the 2002 Act provides that where a Tribunal is  required  to  determine
    whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts  would  be  unlawful
    under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 it  must,  in  considering
    'the public interest  question',  have  regard  in  all  cases  to  the
    considerations listed in section117B of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended by the Immigration Act  2014).  Section
    117 (3) provides that the 'public interest question' means the question
    of whether an interference with a person's right to respect for private
    and family life is justified under Article 8(2).

37. I therefore find that the maintenance of immigration control is in  the
    public interest. I accept that the first Appellant has been in  the  UK
    at all times  lawfully.  However  I  also  note  that  neither  of  the
    Appellants met the requirements of the  Rules  at  the  time  of  their
    application for leave to remain on the  basis  of  family  and  private
    life. I take into account that at the  time  of  the  applications  the
    First Appellant had been in the UK for nearly 10 years and had  a  full
    10 years been completed she could have applied under paragraph 276B and
    that the second Appellant had been in the UK for nearly 7 years.  I  am
    satisfied however that this amounts to  no  more  than  a  'near  miss'
    argument. In SS(Congo) and Others [2015] EWCA Civ 387 it was held  that
    the fact that a case was a 'near miss' in relation  to  satisfying  the
    requirements of the  rules  would  not  show  that  compelling  reasons
    existed requiring the grant of the LTE outside the rules. If a claimant
    could show however  that  there  were  individual  interests  at  stake
    covered by Article 8, which  gave  rise  to  a  claim  that  compelling
    circumstances existed to justify the grant of leave outside the  rules,
    the  fact  that  the  case  was  a  'near-miss'  might  be  a  relevant
    consideration, which tipped the balance in his or her favour.  No  such
    individual interests or compelling circumstances were identified to me.

38. I accept that the Appellants speak English and that the first Appellant
    has worked in the UK.

39. I am satisfied that at all  times  while  they  have  been  in  the  UK
    lawfully the Appellants immigration status has been precarious,  always
    dependent on a further grant of leave. I therefore  find  that  llittle
    weight  should  be  given  to  the  private  life  established  by  the
    Appellants whether that be work, education or church contacts as  their
    immigration status was precarious.

40. I accept that the second  Appellant  now  meets  the  definition  of  a
    qualifying child for the purpose of paragraph 117B(6) given the  length
    of time he has lived in the UK but the law is  clear  that  passage  of
    time alone is not determinative of the issue.  In  determining  whether
    the public interest requires the Appellants removal  I  have  therefore
    considered  whether  it  would  be  reasonable  to  expect  the  second
    Appellant to leave the UK.

41. I take into account in relation to that my finding  that  there  is  no
    evidence before me that the second Appellant would suffer any  hardship
    or ill effect from moving to Nigeria with his mother.  Neither  of  the
    Appellants  are  British  citizens,  they  are  Nigerian  citizens  and
    entitled to all the benefits that their nationality brings and they are
    not entitled as of right to the benefits of being educated  or  working
    in the UK with all of the expense that this  imposes  on  the  UK.  The
    first Appellant was 31 when she came to the UK to  study.  She  is  now
    very well educated and there was no evidence before me to suggest  that
    the nature of her qualifications in health and social  care  were  such
    that she would be unable to find work in Nigeria. Given  her  age  when
    she came to the UK and the  fact  that  she  could  not  have  had  any
    legitimate expectation of being permitted to remain I do  not  find  it
    credible that she would have lost all ties to her home country.  Indeed
    she gave evidence before the First-tier that she was not  in  'regular'
    contact with family members: if it  has  been  sporadic  then  this  is
    something that could be resumed and provide her with  some  support  on
    her return. I note that her attendance at Church  was  advanced  as  an
    argument in her favour but there is nothing to suggest that  she  could
    not continue to attend Church on her return. Taking all of my  findings
    into account there was no evidence before me that it  was  unreasonable
    to expect the second Appellant to return to Nigeria, the country of his
    nationality with his mother.

42. I am also satisfied that no compelling  circumstances  were  identified
    why the Rules should not be applied in this case in the usual  way.  In
    determining  whether  the  removal  would  be  proportionate   to   the
    legitimate aim of immigration control I find that  none  of  the  facts
    underpinning the Appellants life in the United  Kingdom  including  the
    best interests of  the  child  Appellant  taken  either  singularly  or
    cumulatively outweigh the legitimate purpose of the Appellants removal.



Decision

43. The making of the decision of the First-tier tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law as regards the  Immigration  Rules
    in respect of the second Appellant and the first Appellant  in  respect
    of Article 8.

44. I set aside the decision. I substitute the following decision:

45. The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration Rules.

46. This appeal is also dismissed on human rights grounds (Article 8)

47. Under Rule 14(1) the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) rules 2008 9as
    amended) the  Appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. An
    order for anonymity was made in the First-tier and shall continue.


Signed      Date 17.1.2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
