
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  IA/41382/2014
                                                             & IA/41395/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


| Heard at Field House                           |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 11th January 2016                            |On 6th May 2016            |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

                                  SP & SAT
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Claimants


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Claimants:     Mr Davis of Counsel instructed by Hafiz & Hague
solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The claimants are citizens of Pakistan.  These proceedings concern  the
    status and interests of at least one child. In  order  to  protect  the
    interest of the child I make an anonymity direction.

 2. By decision on an error of law after a hearing on the 19th October 2015
    I ruled that there  was  a  material  error  of  law  in  the  original
    decisions in respect of the claimants and directed that the appeals  be
    listed further before me to re-decide the cases. My  original  decision
    is appended to this decision.

 3. This case appears in the Upper Tribunal as an appeal by  the  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [SSHD] against the decision by a First
    Tier Tribunal Judge. For the purposes  of  the  present  proceedings  I
    shall refer to the SSHD as such and the original applicants  for  leave
    to remain as the first claimant and second claimant.

 4. On 4 August 2014 the claimants applied  for  leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom. By decisions made on or about 4 October 2014  both  the
    claimants were refused  to  further  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom. In respect of the first claimant there is also a  decision  to
    remove her from the United Kingdom included in the decision letter. The
    claimants are appealing against those decisions.

Background facts

 5. The claimants are part of a family consisting of MAH, the father of the
    family, SP, the mother of the family/first claimant, and two  children,
    one of whom is SAT, the second claimant. MAH, SP and SAT are  and  were
    at all material times citizens of Bangladesh.  As  set  out  below  the
    child, DMA the second child of the family, whilst originally a  citizen
    of Bangladesh was registered as a  British  citizen  at  some  time  in
    December 2014.

 6. The family had originally lived in Bangladesh. MAH,  SP  and  SAT  were
    born in Bangladesh.

 7. The father of the family came to the United Kingdom as a student on  11
    June 2004. He thereafter has remained in the  United  Kingdom  and  has
    maintained lawful leave throughout. By  reason  of  the  fact  that  he
    completed 12 years lawful leave, on the 12 June  2014  he  applied  for
    indefinite leave to remain/settlement under the immigration rules.  The
    application by the father was granted by the  respondent  in  September
    2014.

 8. The second child of the family having been born in the  United  Kingdom
    on 7 February 2014, on MAH obtaining settled status, was entitled to be
    registered as a British citizen in accordance with section 1(3) of  the
    British Nationality Act 1981. Application was made  on  behalf  of  the
    second child and she was registered as a British citizen  in  or  about
    December 2014. The second child is now therefore a British citizen.

 9. The claimants came to the United Kingdom on  the  21st  February  2008.
    They had been given leave to enter the United Kingdom as the dependants
    of MAH. The claimants were given further  leave  at  various  times  as
    dependants. Ultimately their leave was due to expire  in  August  2014.
    The claimants made in-time applications for further leave.

10. Clearly the fact that MAH, the father of the family, had an outstanding
    application for indefinite leave to remain, which had not been  granted
    at the time of the application was material. The claimants did  however
    as is evident from the letters of refusal apply for  further  leave  to
    remain.

11. With MAH being granted indefinite leave in September 2014  and,  as  is
    evident from the refusal letters, the SSHD being aware of that  at  the
    time of considering the applications, the applications were  considered
    under Appendix FM and Appendix FM -- SE of the  Immigration  Rules  and
    under article 8 of the ECHR.

Facts as found by the First -tier Judge

12. In paragraphs 12 to 20 of the original decision  the  First-tier  Judge
    has made a number of findings of fact, which have not been affected  by
    the decision on the error of law issue. I have to protect the anonymity
    of the child amended the contents of  the  decision  to  reflect  that.
    Those findings are:-

         "12  The first claimant came to the United Kingdom on  21  February
         2008 having been granted leave to enter the United Kingdom  as  the
         dependent spouse of her husband MAH, who was then a Tier 4  Student
         Migrant in the United Kingdom.

         13   The second claimant is the dependent child of SP and  MAH.  On
         21 February 2008 the second claimant  entered  the  United  Kingdom
         with added leave to enter and remain as the dependent child of MAH.

         14   MAH is the father of the second claimant and  the  husband  of
         first claimant. On 12 June 2014 he applied for settlement in the UK
         following the completion  of  10  years  residence  in  the  United
         Kingdom and his application for indefinite leave to remain  in  the
         United Kingdom was allowed in September 2014.

         15   On 7 February 2014 and their daughter, DMA, was born.  She  is
         the daughter of the first claimant and MAH and  that  is  also  the
         sister of the second claimant. She is a British citizen and a  copy
         of her passport has been produced at  page  10  of  the  claimants'
         bundle of documents.

         16   The four lived together and continue to do so as a  family  at
         the family home in Grange Road, E13. The first  claimant  has  been
         employed continuously by London Borough of Newham Council for  five
         years. MAH works as an accounting clerk.

         17    The  second  claimant  has  lived  in  the   United   Kingdom
         continuously since he arrived here at the age of two. He has  lived
         here continuously for over seven years. He attends  Curwen  Primary
         school, where he has attended since 2008.  His  first  language  is
         English. He understands Bengali but he does not speak it.

         18   He has had considerable success at school having undertaken an
         exhibition in art.

         19   The second claimant is fully integrated  into  United  Kingdom
         Society.

         20   The family will stay together as  they  have  done  throughout
         their existence in the United Kingdom."

13. In coming to a decision I take account of those findings of fact.



The Second Claimant- Grounds of Refusal-Findings

14. The refusal letter in respect of  the  second  claimant  considers  his
    application both under Appendix FM and on the  basis  of  private  life
    under paragraph 276 ADE and on the basis of  family  and  private  life
    under Article 8 of the ECHR.

15. In considering  the application under Appendix FM the only ground given
    in the refusal letter for refusing his application is :-

         In view of the fact that your parents' applications under  Appendix
         FM have been refused the Secretary of State is not  satisfied  that
         you are able to meet E-LTRC.1.6

16. As pointed out in the error of law decision that seems  to  ignore  the
    fact  that  the  application  of  the  second  claimant's  father   for
    indefinite leave to remain had been granted at that time. That grant of
    indefinite leave had been acknowledged in the refusal  letter  for  the
    first claimant. It could therefore not be  argued  that  the  SSHD  was
    unaware of the fact that the father had been granted indefinite leave.

17. In the hearing it was conceded by the representative for the SSHD  that
    the second claimant succeeded under the rules because  the  father  was
    settled at the time that the decision was made.

18. Accordingly the appeal of the second  claimant  is  allowed  under  the
    Immigration Rules.

The First Claimant

19.  The  first  claimant,  in  order  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules  Appendix  FM,  required  an  English  Language  Test
    certificate from an Approved Provider. The first claimant had  produced
    an English Language Certificate from Learning  Resource  Network  (LRN)
    Entry  Level  Certificate  in  ESOL  Skills  for  Life  (Speaking   and
    Listening) (Entry 3).

20. It was accepted that the first claimant met all the other  requirements
    of the rules.

21. By the letter of refusal dated 3 October 2014 it was pointed  out  that
    the first claimant had to meet the requirements of paragraph E-LTRP.4.1
    which was the requirement to produce an approved English language  test
    certificate from an approved provider. The letter  then  sets  out  the
    test certificate produced from LRN is  not  from  an  approved  English
    Language Test Certificate Provider. The list of approved  providers  is
    set out in Appendix O to the rules. By reason of the first claimant not
    having a valid English language test certificate the claimant  did  not
    meet the requirements of E-LTRP.4.1 and as a result did  not  meet  the
    requirements of R-LTRP.1.1.c) for leave.

22. Appendix FM with regard to English Language provides as follows:-

         English Language Requirement

         E-LTRP.4.1 If the applicant has not  met  the  requirement  in  the
         previous application to leave as a partner or parent the  applicant
         must provide specified evidence that they

             a)   are a national of the majority English  speaking  country
             listed in paragraph GEN.1.6.;

             b)   have passed an  English  language  testing  speaking  and
             listening at a minimal level A1 of the, and European Framework
             of Reference for Languages with a  provider  approved  by  the
             Secretary of State;

             c)   have an academic qualification recognised by UK NARIC  to
             be equivalent to the standard  of  a  Bachelor's  or  Master's
             degree or PhD in the UK, which was taught in English; or

             d)   are exempt from the English  language  requirement  under
             paragraph E-LTRP.4.2.;

         unless paragraph EX.1.applies

23. There is a saving  at  the  end  of  the  provisions,  which  means  an
    individual who falls within EX.1. is not required to  have  an  English
    Language test certificate.

24. The letter of refusal goes on to consider the provisions  of  paragraph
    EX.1 of Appendix FM. The relevant provision of the rules are:-

         EX.1. This paragraph applies if

         a)...     i)    the  applicant  has  a   genuine   and   subsisting
             relationship with a child who-

             aa)  is under the age of 18 years or is under the  age  of  18
             years when the applicant was first granted leave on the  basis
             that this paragraph applied;

             bb)  is in the UK;

             cc)  is a British citizen or has lived in the UK  continuously
             for at least seven years immediately preceding the date of the
             application; and

             ii)  it would not be reasonable to expect a child to leave the
             UK;

         b)   the applicant has a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with
         the partner who is in the UK and is .... settled in the UK..... and
         there are insurmountable obstacles to family life with that partner
         continuing outside the UK.

25. Whilst neither child had been in the UK  for  the  period  of  7  years
    preceding the date of the application and decision,  the  second  child
    was a British citizen at the time of the hearing. EX.1. (cc) imposes no
    requirement that the child, who is a British Citizen, must be a British
    citizen at the time of the application.

26. If EX.1 is engaged the issue is whether it is reasonable to expect  the
    British Citizen  child  to  relocate  to  Bangladesh.   If  it  is  not
    reasonable to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom and relocate
    to Bangladesh, then the first claimant may be excused from the  English
    Language requirements in any event.

27. In assessing whether or not it is reasonable the SSHD's own  policy  as
    set out in the Immigration Directorate Instructions on Family Migration
    -- Appendix FM Section 1.0b: Family Life ...  and  Private  Life  notes
    that Paragraph EX.1. reflects the duty under section 55 of the 2009 Act
    to have regard to the need to safeguard and  promote  the  welfare  and
    best interests of children, who are in  the  United  Kingdom,  and  the
    requirements of  Article  8  of  the  ECHR  to  treat  children's  best
    interests  as  a  primary  consideration  within  the   proportionality
    exercise. The policy also notes at paragraph 11.2.3, except in the case
    of criminality, that :-

         Where a decision to refuse the application would require  a  parent
         or primary carer to return to a country outside the  EU,  the  case
         must always be assessed on  the  basis  that  it  would  always  be
         unreasonable to expect a British citizen child to leave the EU with
         that parent or primary carer. In such  cases  it  will  usually  be
         appropriate to grant leave to the parent or primary carer to enable
         them to  remain  in  the  UK  with  the  child  provided  there  is
         satisfactory  evidence  of  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
         relationship.

28. In considering the reasonableness of removing a child it has also to be
    noted that Ruiz Zambrano [2011] ECR 1-000  as  applied   by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in the of  Sanade  &  Ors  (British  children-Zambrano-Dereci)
    India] [2012] UKUT 00048 (IAC) provides further guidance in respect  of
    EU citizens and their families. I draw attention to paragraph 6 of  the
    headnote:-

         "6   Where in the context of Article 8 one parent  ("the  remaining
         parent") of a British citizen child is also a British  citizen  (or
         cannot be removed as a family member or in their  own  right),  the
         removal of the other parent does not mean that either the child  or
         the remaining parent will be required to leave, thereby  infringing
         the Zambrano principle, see C-256/11  Murat  Dereci.  The  critical
         question is whether the child is  dependent  on  the  parent  being
         removed for the exercise  of  his  Union  right  of  residence  and
         whether removal of that  parent  will  deprive  the  child  of  the
         effective exercise of residence in the United Kingdom or  elsewhere
         in the Union."

29. The principle identified may be relevant in assessing whether or not it
    would be reasonable to expect an EU child, including a British child to
    leave the United Kingdom. Given the circumstances it  may  be  arguable
    that such may be for a short period of time whilst the  first  claimant
    makes an application to re-enter once she has obtained the necessary at
    Language certificate. At the time of  the  decision  4th  October  2014
    neither child had spent 7 years in the  UK  nor  was  there  a  British
    citizen child. By the time of  the  hearing  the  second  child  was  a
    British Citizen child.

30. In the Reasons for Refusal letter in respect of EX.1.(b) it appears  to
    have been accepted that the spouse of the claimant was settled  in  the
    United Kingdom, it was concluded however that the  first  claimant  had
    not shown that there  were  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life
    continuing outside the United Kingdom.

31. In the Refusal letter consideration was given to  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276 ADE(1) private life.  It was found at  the  time  of  the
    application that the appellant had not lived in the United Kingdom  for
    at least 20 years or half her lifetime or otherwise in accordance  with
    subparagraph (vi) it had not been demonstrated  that  there  were  very
    significant obstacles to the  first  claimant's  integration  into  her
    country of origin.

32. The first claimant having spent the majority of her life in their  home
    country and there being no evidence of  any  significant  obstacles  to
    integration it was concluded that the first claimant did not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 276 ADE.

33. Consideration thereafter was given to private and  family  life  rights
    under Article 8 of the ECHR outside the rules. In concluding that there
    would be no breach of any article 8 rights it was noted that the  first
    claimant had only been in the United Kingdom six  years  and  that  her
    family were from Bangladesh. She had other family members there. It was
    noted that  the  partner  had  been  granted  indefinite  leave  on  24
    September 2014 but that he was also a Bangladeshi national and that the
    first child was also a Bangladeshi national born in Bangladesh. In  the
    circumstances it was considered that it was  proportionately  justified
    to expect the  claimant  to  return  with  her  partner  and  child  to
    Bangladesh.

34. It is unclear but there appears to be no reference to the second  child
    in the decision letter. Whether that would have made  a  difference  at
    the time may be a moot point, in light of the fact that the  child  did
    not have nationality at the time and would have been only 6  months  or
    so old. However by the time  of  the  hearing  the  child  had  British
    citizenship.

Consideration of the first claimant's case

35. In considering this matter I am mindful throughout of the provisions of
    section 55 of the 2009 Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act to take
    account of the best interests of any child.

36. I am also mindful of the provisions of section 117 of the 2002  Act  as
    amended. With regard to Section 117B I specifically take account of the
    importance of ensuring that individuals speak the English language  and
    of a person not being a burden upon the taxpayer as  being  aspects  of
    public interest.

37. I specifically take account of 117B (6) which provides:-

         '(6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             a)    the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
             relationship with the qualifying child, and

             b)   it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom.'

38. In assessing the claimant's case  consideration  has  to  be  given  to
    Appendix FM and article 8 of the ECHR. A qualifying  child  includes  a
    child that is a British citizen, section 117D (1). I have been provided
    with a copy of the case of AM (S117B) Malawi  [2015]  UKUT  260,  which
    gives guidance as to the approach to followed in respect of S117B.

39. I have also been provided with a copy of the case of  SS  (Congo)  2015
    EWCA Civ 387. During the course of legal argument I was referred to the
    case of Chen 2015 UKUT 189.

40. Within the skeleton argument provided reference has also been  made  to
    the Immigration Direction Instructions on Family Migration: Appendix FM
    Section 1.0b and the cases of;_

      a) Zambrano 2011 ECR 1-000 Case -34/09 [which is reflected in the IDI]



      b) Sanade 2012 UKUT 00048

      c) ZH (Tanzania) 2011 UKSC 4

41. I bear in mind the findings of fact and  all  the  evidence  submitted.
    With regard to the first claimant clearly the first claimant is seeking
    to pursue her application under the Immigration Rules and Article 8  of
    the ECHR.

42. In respect of Appendix FM as the partner of a person settled in the UK,
    the  basis  upon  which  the  SSHD  considered  the  application,   the
    requirement under E-LTRP.4.1(b) was that the appellant  has  passed  an
    English-language test  certificate  in  speaking  and  listening  at  a
    minimum level  A1 of the Common European  Framework  of  Reference  for
    Languages with a provider approved by the SSHD.

43. The principal ground for refusal under the Immigration  Rules  was  the
    fact that Learning Resource Network, LRN, the provider of  the  English
    Test Certificate, was not from an approved provider. Approved providers
    are set out in Appendix O of the Rules.

44. The qualification submitted by the first claimant is in the bundle.  As
    set out in the error of law decision at paragraph 20 having checked the
    Government website of Ofqual the citation  under  qualification  number
    600/4279/5  gave  every  impression   that   the   list   of   approved
    qualifications and providers referred  to  the  qualification  of  ESOL
    Skills for Life (Speaking and Listening) (Entry 3) B1 from LRN as being
    an approved qualification with a start date of 1 January  2012  and  no
    operational end date. There is a copy of the Ofqual Website document in
    the papers. It is not clear whether LRN were removed from the  list  of
    approved providers in Appendix O or were never on the list of  approved
    providers. However it is easy to understand  in  light  of  the  Ofqual
    website how and individual may be misled into believing that  LRN  were
    an approved provider.

45. However as set out in Appendix O, see page 1260 of  Phelan  Immigration
    Law Handbook, LRN were  not  an  approved  provider.  In  the  skeleton
    argument paragraphs 7-9 it is conceded that LRN was not  listed  as  an
    approved  provider.  Therefore  the  first  claimant  cannot  meet  the
    requirements under Appendix FM with regard to the English Language test
    certificate. The skeleton argument on behalf of the claimant thereafter
    seeks to rely upon Appendix FM- paragraph Ex.1. to excuse the need  for
    an English Language test Certificate.

46. With regard to Ex.1(b) and the relationship of  the  appellant  to  her
    partner it was for the claimant to produce evidence  of  insurmountable
    obstacles.  There was no evidence with regard to potential difficulties
    that the family would face on return to Bangladesh.  In  assessing  the
    relationship between the claimant and her spouse  and  what  constitute
    insurmountable obstacles there is no requirement that the assessment be
    conducted on the basis of the circumstances  as  at  the  date  of  the
    application.

47. There would be issues with regard to the youngest child being a British
    citizen; the second child having now been in the UK  for  seven  years;
    the integration of the eldest child into school the  fact  that  he  is
    doing well in school; the fact that MAH  has  employment  that  he  has
    maintained for a significant period of time in the United Kingdom;  the
    fact that  the  first  claimant  also  has  employment  which  she  has
    maintained for at least five years; the fact that  the  first  claimant
    only fails to meet the requirements of  the  rules  by  reason  of  the
    English-language test certificate; and the settled lifestyle that  they
    have established in the United Kingdom.

48. It was submitted that none of  those  would  constitute  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life continuing  outside  the  United  Kingdom  but
    rather were the benefits or circumstances that  the  claimant  and  her
    family had in the UK.

49. As pointed out by the  representative  for  SSHD  at  the  hearing  the
    claimant could return to Bangladesh and make application to  enter  the
    United  Kingdom  and  that  could  be   considered   on   its   merits.
    Consideration could  then  be  given  as  to  whether  or  not  it  was
    proportionate for a degree of separation between the claimant  and  the
    other members of her family while she returned to  Bangladesh  to  make
    the application. There may be the prospect of  a  temporary  separation
    but that of itself would not in the circumstances be an  insurmountable
    obstacle or unreasonable or  exceptional.  [In  that  respect  specific
    reference was made to paragraph 42 of Chen, case cited above].

50. I have also to consider whether or not the claimant is excused from the
    requirements of the English language test certificate  under  EX.1.  by
    reason of her relationship with a British citizen child. In  accordance
    with Section 85 of the 2002 Act I consider the circumstances as at  the
    date of the hearing.

51. It is clear that she has a genuine and real relationship with a British
    citizen child. The issue would thereafter be whether or not it would be
    reasonable to expect the child  to  go  back  to  Bangladesh  with  the
    claimant, even if that be only to make an application.

52. The child and the family as a whole have settled in the UK. I note  the
    age of the British citizen child. I note the circumstances and the fact
    that given its age it is appropriate for that child to be looked  after
    by her mother/ the first claimant.

53. I note the  fact  that  the  parents  have  always  complied  with  the
    requirements of the law. I take account of  the  IDIs  as  referred  to
    above.

54. Taking account of the child's age, taking account of the  circumstances
    of family I do not find that it would be reasonable to expect the child
    to return to Bangladesh with the first claimant.

55. In the light of that  I  find  that  EX.1  applies  to  the  claimant's
    application. I find that the claimant because  of  the  application  of
    EX.1 does not require the English language  test  certificate.  I  find
    therefore consistent with the concessions made that the first  claimant
    meets  all  the  other  requirements  of  the  rules  with  regard   to
    eligibility,  suitability,  relationship  and  financial  requirements.
    Accordingly I allow the appeal under Appendix FM.

56. If it were necessary to do so I would also consider  the  matter  under
    article 8. In respect of article 8 I follow the guidance given  in  the
    case of Razgar 2004 UKHL27. In light of the  evidence  I  am  satisfied
    that there is a  genuine  family  life  and  that  the  decision  would
    significantly interfere with that family life. Whether the decision  is
    in accordance with the law may be arguable in light of the findings set
    out above but even  if  it  is  it  is  clearly  for  the  purposes  of
    maintaining immigration control as an aspect of the economic well-being
    of the country.

57. The final question in respect of article 8 would be whether or not  the
    decision was proportionately justified. Looking at the circumstances of
    the whole of the family and all the rights engaged the  fact  that  the
    family have always sought to comply with the law and the  circumstances
    in which they are living in the United Kingdom I am satisfied that  the
    decision  would  not  in  any  event  be   proportionately   justified.
    Accordingly I would have allowed this appeal under article 8 have  been
    necessary to do so.

Decision

58. There was an error of law in the original decision and I substitute the
    following decisions :-

      a) The appeals are allowed under the Immigration Rules

      b) The appeal of the first claimant is allowed on article 8 grounds



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure







Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  claimants  are
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify the claimants or any member of  the  claimants'  family.
This direction applies both to  the  claimants  and  the  SSHD.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings



Signed                              dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure



                                    [pic]
IAC-PE-SW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/41382/2014
                                                               IA/41395/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19th October 2015                          |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            S P (FIRST CLAIMANT)
                           S A T (SECOND CLAIMANT)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Claimants


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Sreeraman, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Claimants:     Mr Dale-Harris, Counsel instructed by Hafiz Haque
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Claimants are citizens of  Bangladesh  and  are  mother  and  minor
    child.  As these proceedings concern the  status  and  interests  of  a
    child I consider it appropriate to make an anonymity direction.

 2. The Appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department, who is appealing against the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  By a decision promulgated on 13th May  2015  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge R Cassel allowed the appeals of  the  Claimants  against
    decisions of the Respondent to refuse them further leave to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom and thereupon to remove them from the United Kingdom
    under Section 47 of the 2006 Act.  By a decision made on 15th July 2015
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted.

 3. Thus the matter appears before me to determine in  the  first  instance
    whether or not there was a  material  error  of  law  in  the  original
    decision.

 4. The Claimants are mother and minor child.  There is also as part of the
    family unit a father and another child.  The second child was  born  in
    the United Kingdom in February 2014.

 5. The father of the family came to the United Kingdom  as  a  student  on
    11th June 2004.  He has maintained lawful leave since  that  date.   By
    reason of the fact that he has had at least ten years' lawful leave  he
    applied on 12th June 2014 for  indefinite  leave  to  remain/settlement
    following completion of ten years' lawful residence.  It  appears  that
    the father's application was allowed by  the  Respondent  in  September
    2014.

 6. The minor child born in February 2014 as a result of his  father  being
    granted  indefinite  leave/settled  status  made  application   to   be
    registered as a British citizen and was so registered in December  2014
    in accordance with Section 1(3) of the British Nationality Act 1981.

 7. As stated the father of the family having come to the United Kingdom in
    2004, he was joined by his wife  and  child,  the  Claimants,  on  21st
    February 2008.  They had been granted leave to enter as  the  dependent
    spouses of a Tier 4 Student Migrant.

 8. The father of the family had applied for settlement in June  2014.   He
    had by that stage the required  ten  years.   However  the  leave  with
    regard to the Claimants  was  due  to  expire  in  August  2014.   They
    therefore made their application for further  leave  to  remain.   That
    application was refused by letter on 3rd October 2014.  The  letter  of
    refusal in assessing the Claimants' situation  acknowledges  that  they
    are applying as the partner and child of a person present  and  settled
    here.

 9. With regard to the First Claimant the letter of refusal identifies that
    the First Claimant had not obtained the required English language  test
    certificate.  That was a requirement that was set out in  paragraph  E-
    LTRP.4.1 of Appendix FM.

10. In order to substantiate that she had the required level of English the
    First Claimant had submitted a  Learning  Resource  Network  LRN  Entry
    Level Certificate in ESOL Skills  for  Life  (Speaking  and  Listening)
    (Entry 3).  The refusal alleges that LRN  (Learning  Resource  Network)
    are not on the list of providers approved by the Secretary of State and
    that therefore the certificate was not acceptable.  That was  the  only
    ground for refusing the application in respect of  the  First  Claimant
    under the Immigration Rules.

11. In respect of the Second Claimant, the minor  child,  the  Grounds  for
    Refusal set out the following:-

         "In view of the fact that your parents' applications under Appendix
         FM have been refused the Secretary of State is not  satisfied  that
         you are able to meet E-LTRC1.6."

12. With respect at the time of the decision that seems to ignore the  fact
    that the application by the father of  the  Second  Claimant  had  been
    granted indefinite leave to remain/settlement in the United Kingdom and
    was therefore a qualifying parent.

13. In that regard I draw  attention  specifically  to  the  provisions  of
    Appendix FM paragraph ELTRC.1.6 which provides:-

         "One of the applicant's parents (referred to in this Section as the
         'applicant's parent') must be in the UK and have leave to enter  or
         remain or indefinite leave to remain, or is at the same time  being
         granted leave to remain or indefinite leave to remain,  under  this
         Appendix (except as an adult dependent relative), and

         (a)  the applicant's parent's partner under Appendix FM is  also  a
             parent of the applicant; or

         (b)  the applicant's parent has had  and  continues  to  have  sole
             responsibility for the child's  upbringing  or  the  applicant
             normally lives with this parent and not their other parent; or



         (c)   there  are   serious   and   compelling   family   or   other
             considerations which make exclusion of the  child  undesirable
             and suitable arrangements  have  been  made  for  the  child's
             care."

14. Given that the father of the family had been granted settled status  in
    September 2014 by the time of the decision by the Respondent the Second
    Claimant met the requirements of E-LTRC.1.6 because his father  was  in
    the United Kingdom with indefinite leave to remain.  Whilst the refusal
    letter seems to deal with the First Claimant and  her  relationship  to
    the Second Claimant it seems wholly  to  ignore  the  position  of  the
    father of the family who had been given settled status.

15. For that if for no other reason the Second Claimant should  succeed  on
    the basis of the Rules.  It may be that that grant of indefinite  leave
    was not brought to the attention of the Respondent at the time that the
    decision was taken.  However it cannot be said that it was not  brought
    to the attention of the Respondent later.  There are letters  from  the
    Claimants' solicitors which point out as of 8th January 2015  that  not
    only has the father of the family been granted settled  status  in  the
    United Kingdom  but  the  daughter  of  the  family  had  been  granted
    citizenship.

16. Accordingly at first blush there is an argument  for  saying  that  the
    Second Claimant meets the requirements of the Rules in any event.

17.  The  Respondent  had  therefore  been  notified  of  the   change   of
    circumstances of the father of the family and of the second child.   It
    was suggested that a reconsideration be given of the issues in the case
    by a letter dated 30th January 2015.  However it was noted by the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge that there was no response to this request for  the
    matter to be reconsidered.

18. On 21st February  2015  the  Second  Claimant  completed  seven  years'
    residence in the United Kingdom.

19. The first issue that was argued before Judge Cassel was  that  Learning
    Resource Network was an approved provider.  The Ofqual Register clearly
    establishes that Learning Resource Network was listed  as  an  awarding
    organisation for the qualification of the English  language  test  ESOL
    (Entry 3) qualification.  Judge Cassel seems to take it that that is an
    academic issue.  With respect I am not certain  that  it  is.   If  the
    qualification produced by the First Claimant was a satisfactory English
    language  test  certificate  then  the  First  Claimant  also  met  the
    requirements of the Rules.

20. No-one seems to  have  checked  the  details  with  regard  to  Ofqual.
    According to the government website in respect of Ofqual  the  citation
    under qualification number 600/4279/5 appears in the list  of  approved
    qualifications as English for  speakers  of  other  languages  Learning
    Resource Network is an approved provider of entry level certificate  in
    ESOL Skills for  Life  (Speaking  and  Listening)  (Entry  3)  and  the
    operational start date is 1st January 2012 and there  is  no  operation
    end date or certification end date which seems  to  indicate  that  the
    certificates are still  valid.   The  qualification  submitted  by  the
    Claimants appears at Annex 3(i) in the bundle of documents submitted by
    the Claimants' representative for  the  purposes  of  the  hearing.  It
    appears that the First Claimant has a valid qualification.

21. There is no other  ground  given  for  refusing  the  First  Claimant's
    application under the Rules.

22. In considering these appeals the judge  commenced  by  considering  the
    position of the Second Claimant under Rule 276ADE(iv).   The  provision
    provides:-

         "Requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain on  the
         grounds of private life

         276ADE (1)    The requirements to be met by an applicant for  leave
                    to remain on the grounds of private life in  the  United
                    Kingdom  are  that  at  the  date  of  application,  the
                    applicant:

                    (i)    does not  fall  for  refusal  under  any  of  the
                        grounds in Section S-LTR.1.2 to  S-LTR.2.3  and  S-
                        LTR.3.1 in Appendix FM; and

                    (ii)   has made a valid application for leave to  remain
                        on the grounds of private life in the UK; and

                    ...

                    (iv)   is under the  age  of  18  years  and  has  lived
                        continuously in the UK for  at  least  seven  years
                        (discounting any period  of  imprisonment)  and  it
                        would not be reasonable to expect the applicant  to
                        leave the UK;

                    ..."

23. There is therefore an issue as to whether or not it was  reasonable  to
    expect the Second Claimant to leave  the  United  Kingdom.   The  first
    problem with regard to that appears  to  be  that  sub-paragraph  1  of
    276ADE makes the point that consideration has to be  given  as  to  the
    circumstances at the date of the application.  It is clear and  evident
    from paragraph 22 that the judge is considering the matter on the basis
    that the Second Claimant has since the refusal letter  completed  seven
    years' continuous residence in the United Kingdom.   The  problem  with
    that is that it seems to ignore  paragraph  276ADE(1).   Therefore  the
    statement under paragraph 23 of the decision that the  Second  Claimant
    meets the requirement for private life under Rule 276ADE(iv) is clearly
    wrong.

24. The judge thereafter commences to consider the position  of  the  First
    Claimant.  Seeking to deal with the First Claimant on the basis of  the
    principles set out in the case of Ruiz Zambrano [2011] ECR 1-000  Case-
    34/09.  The judge also makes reference to the  case  of  Sanade  [2012]
    UKUT 00048.  The judge correctly identifies that where there is  an  EU
    citizen child, that would include a British citizen child,  it  is  not
    possible to require the family unit to relocate  outside  the  European
    Union and so depriving the union citizen of the child of  the  benefits
    of their citizenship.  However as identified in the case law where  the
    other parent would be remaining within the  United  Kingdom  the  issue
    would be whether or not the removal of one parent requires  either  the
    child  or  the  remaining  parent  to  follow  thereby  infringing  the
    principle within Zambrano.  As  identified  in  sub-paragraph  2  cited
    within the decision of Judge Cassel the  crucial  question  is  whether
    removal of a parent will deprive the child of the effective exercise of
    residence in the United Kingdom or whether the other  parent  would  be
    able to cope or manage in the absence of the parent until such time  as
    that parent makes an application to enter.

25.  The  judge  then  makes  reference  to  the  Respondent's  Immigration
    Directorate Instructions family migration guidance,  paragraph  11.2.3.
    That guidance is supposed to mirror the provisions set out  within  the
    case law. The guidance provides amongst other things:-

         "Where a decision to refuse the application would require a  parent
         or primary carer to return to a country outside the  EU,  the  case
         must always be assessed  on  the  basis  that  it  will  always  be
         unreasonable to expect a British citizen child to leave the EU with
         that parent or primary carer.  In such cases  it  will  usually  be
         appropriate to grant leave to the parent or primary carer to enable
         them to remain in the UK with the  child  provided  that  there  is
         satisfactory  evidence  of  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
         relationship."

26. On the basis of that guidance the judge has found that there is both  a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship and indeed that  there  is
    an appropriate family relating to all the members referred to.  However
    what the judge seems to have ignored is that the issue was  whether  or
    not it would require the child to leave the  United  Kingdom.   It  was
    necessary for the judge to make a finding with  regard  to  that.   The
    judge has made a finding that it would not be reasonable to expect  the
    child to leave the United Kingdom.  What she has not done is  determine
    whether or not the child would have to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  or
    whether or not the other parent could look after the child.

27. I have to say with regard to the final paragraph of the decision by the
    judge, the  judge  seems  to  be  using  EX.1  in  a  manner  which  is
    inconsistent with the case of Sarkar [2014] EWCA Civ 195.   It  appears
    that the judge is using EX.1.(a) as if it were  a  right  to  leave  to
    remain which was freestanding.  That clearly  is  not  the  purpose  of
    paragraph EX.1.(a).

28. For the reasons set out I find that there are material errors of law in
    the decision by the First-tier Tribunal.  I have  considered  how  best
    this matter should proceed further.  In  light  of  the  comments  made
    above with regard to meeting the requirements of the Rules otherwise  I
    think it  appropriate  that  whilst  the  decision  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal be set aside this matter should be reconsidered in the  Upper-
    tier Tribunal.  I consider that the  appropriate  course  is  for  this
    matter to be listed before me for a continuation hearing  on  a  future
    date.

Notice of Decision

I set aside the original decision by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  direct
that the matter be listed for  a  further  hearing  in  the  Upper  Tribunal
before me.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Claimants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Claimants and to the Appellant.  Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure
