
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/41725/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 31st March 2014                              |On 7th April 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               MUHAMMAD HANIF

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz
For the Respondent:    In person


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Mensah made following a hearing at Bradford on 22nd January 2014.



Background

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Pakistan.  He applied for leave to  remain
    indefinitely in the UK on the basis of his family and private  life  in
    the UK.  He had entered the UK as a spouse on 20th June  2006  and  was
    subsequently granted two periods of leave outside  the  Rules  for  the
    purpose of exercising access rights to  a  child,  the  last  of  which
    expired on 1st March 2012.

 3. He was refused on the grounds that at the time of  his  application  he
    had a criminal conviction for driving a vehicle  with  excess  alcohol,
    driving otherwise than in accordance with a licence and using a vehicle
    whilst uninsured which he did not  declare  on  his  application  form.
    Furthermore he had not provided evidence that he and his  partner  were
    legally married, nor that they had been cohabiting  for  at  least  two
    years prior to the date of the application.

 4. The judge accepted that the appellant was lawfully married and that  he
    was cohabiting with his wife and that he had a genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with a child in the UK.

 5. With respect to the lack of disclosure the judge wrote as follows:-

         "The first issue that arose was  in  relation  to  the  application
         form.  The appellant accepts  he  had  a  criminal  conviction  for
         driving a vehicle with excess alcohol, driving  otherwise  than  in
         accordance with a licence and using a vehicle whilst uninsured.  He
         accepts he failed to declare this  conviction  on  his  application
         form.  As such the Secretary of State refused his application under
         Section S-LTR.2.2.(b), and also under S-LTR.1.6., for  his  use  of
         deception in the application  process.   The  appellant  was  asked
         about this and told me that his solicitor completed the application
         form and failed to mention his conviction despite the fact that the
         appellant told the solicitor about  it.   During  cross-examination
         the appellant gave vague and then inconsistent evidence about  this
         when he first told me that he had  told  his  solicitor  about  the
         conviction two years earlier and then when asked about that he said
         he had told his solicitor at the time of the application.   I  note
         that the appellant has not filed a  formal  complaint  against  the
         solicitor and no evidence has been produced before me  showing  the
         solicitor   was   given   a   chance   to    respond    to    these
         allegations/complaints.  Taking those matters  together  I  do  not
         accept the appellant's evidence about this.  I find he  has  failed
         to show that he told his solicitor about  his  conviction  when  he
         completed the form and I find he must take personal  responsibility
         for signing a form when the content was inaccurate.  However on the
         evidence I am not satisfied it has been shown even on balance  that
         the appellant intended to deceive and therefore  I  do  not  accept
         that the deception has in fact been made out."





The Grounds of Application

 6. The Secretary of State sought permission to  appeal  on  the  following
    grounds:-

         "The reasons for refusal considered both the  appellant's  position
         pursuant to limited leave to remain as a partner and a parent.  The
         application was refused partly on the basis that the appellant  did
         not meet the suitability requirements of Appendix FM,  specifically
         S-LTR1.6 and 2.2(b), the specific issue being the non-disclosure of
         a previous criminal conviction.

         The IJ accepted this aspect of the respondent's refusal  (paragraph
         8).

         The IJ has however failed to consider the mandatory requirements of
         Rule R-LTRP1.1(c)(ii) and  (d)(i)  (partner  route)  and  Rules  R-
         LTRPT1.1(c)(i) and (d)(i).  Namely, that if an applicant falls  for
         refusal on suitability grounds (under either route) the application
         must fail.

         On the basis the IJ  accepted  the  suitability  requirement  issue
         raised by the respondent, the appeal should have been refused.   It
         is submitted this is a material error in law."

The Hearing

 7. I asked Mr Dinovych to clarify his grounds and to take me  through  the
    relevant paragraphs of Appendix FM upon which he sought  to  rely.   He
    said that he was only relying on the failure to disclose.

 8. I pointed out to Mr Dinovych that the  judge,  although  she  had  made
    critical comments  about  the  claimant's  evidence,  had  nevertheless
    concluded that she was not satisfied that there  was  an  intention  to
    deceive.  I asked Mr Dinovych if he wished to take instructions  as  to
    whether he wanted to apply to vary  his  grounds  to,  for  example,  a
    reasons challenge.

 9. Mr Dinovych sought a short adjournment and after  his  return  told  me
    that he was not seeking to vary his grounds and he accepted  that  they
    were misdirected.

Findings and Conclusions

10. The author of the grounds appears to believe that the judge had made  a
    finding that the appeal ought to be dismissed on  suitability  grounds.
    However this is plainly not the case.  She said in terms that  she  was
    not satisfied that there was an intention to deceive.  It may  well  be
    that the reasons for her  conclusion  are  somewhat  opaque  since  her
    assessment of the claimant's evidence would have it is thought led  her
    to the opposite conclusion.  However, Mr Dinovych was not instructed to
    make a reasons challenge and on the basis of the grounds  as  they  are
    drafted I can find no successful challenge to the determination of  the
    judge.  She concluded that, contrary to the statement in  the  grounds,
    that the refusal on suitability grounds was not sustainable.





Decision

11. The grounds disclose no  arguable  error.   The  Secretary  of  State's
    appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor


