
[pic]
IAC-PE-AW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/42737/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27th August 2014                  |On 12th October 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                     mr Arnaud Joel Jionang Nguemetsing
                          (ANONYMITY not retained)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Suri
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 9th April 1986 is a citizen of the Cameroon.  The
    Appellant who was present was represented by Miss Suri.  The Respondent
    was represented by Mr Tarlow a Presenting Officer.



Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant had entered the United Kingdom on a  student  visa  valid
    from 22nd September 2011 until 1st June 2013.  On 20th August  2013  he
    had sought a residence card as the spouse of  an  EEA  national.   That
    application was refused on  23rd  November  2013  and  his  appeal  was
    dismissed on 27th March 2014.

 3. On 23rd July 2014  the  Appellant  made  a  second  application  for  a
    residence card as being the unmarried partner of Miss Kesztyus  an  EEA
    national.  This application  was  refused  by  the  Respondent  on  9th
    October 2014 and the Appellant appealed that decision.  His appeal  was
    heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Ross on 15th April 2015  sitting  at
    Richmond.  The judge had dismissed the Appellant's appeal under the EEA
    Regulations and also on human rights grounds.

 4. Application for permission to appeal was made and granted by First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Hollingworth on 8th July 2015.  It was said  there  were
    arguable errors of law  in  relation  to  the  extent  of  the  judge's
    reasoning on the durability of the relationship and arguably that  full
    factors had not been considered in relation to Article  8.   Directions
    were issued, the Upper Tribunal firstly to decide whether an  error  of
    law had been made in this case  and  the  matter  comes  before  me  in
    accordance with those directions.

Submissions on Behalf of the Appellant

 5. It was submitted by Miss Suri that the judge had  not  dealt  with  the
    best interests of the child and whilst the judge  had  said  the  child
    could move to Hungary had provided no reason for that.  It was  further
    said there was insufficient reasons given for the judge not  to  accept
    the durability of the relationship particularly  given  that  witnesses
    had provided evidence in this case.

Submissions on Behalf of the Respondent

 6. It was submitted by Mr Tarlow that the findings made by the judge  were
    entirely open to him when the determination was read as a whole.

 7. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision to consider the
    documents and submissions raised.  I now provide that decision with  my
    reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 8. The judge has set out the history of this case.  The Appellant had come
    to the UK on a student  visa  valid  for  two  years.   Postdating  the
    conclusion of that visa  and  potentially  therefore  when  in  the  UK
    unlawfully the Appellant had made application to remain as  the  spouse
    of an EEA national, Miss Dago.  That application had  been  refused  on
    23rd November 2013  but  pursued  on  appeal  by  the  Appellant  until
    dismissed in March 2014.

 9. However the relationship with Miss  Dago  broke  down  within  a  short
    period of time.  Although it is said he was  married  on  20th  October
    2011 to Miss Dago and had submitted an application  to  remain  as  her
    spouse in August 2013 contemporaneously he had  begun  an  affair  with
    Miss Kesztyus in July 2013, she becoming pregnant  with  his  child  in
    September 2013 and not unnaturally therefore his marriage breaking down
    at that time with him moving out of the matrimonial home in April 2014.

10. The judge had concluded the Appellant was not in a durable relationship
    with Miss Kesztyus and dismissed the appeal under the EEA Regulations.

11. The judge  had  clearly  considered  all  the  evidence  in  this  case
    including evidence from witnesses, a summary of  their  evidence  being
    provided within the decision.

12. The judge essentially found that the Appellant had pursued  his  appeal
    to remain in the UK as the spouse of Miss Dago  at  a  time  when  that
    relationship had broken down and he was already in a relationship  with
    another and she was pregnant.  He also concluded that the Appellant had
    transferred his affections with a swiftness that  did  not  assist  the
    concept of durability and in any event had only been  co-habiting  with
    Miss Kesztyus for twelve months at the date of hearing.  That was  half
    the two year period that is  often  used  as  a  useful  guideline  for
    durability in  such  cases.   The  judge  was  entitled  to  reach  the
    conclusions he did based upon those factors and nothing suggests he had
    not considered all the evidence.  He also had the advantage  of  seeing
    and hearing the witnesses who gave evidence.

13. In terms of Article 8 of the ECHR the judge had specifically stated  at
    paragraph 16 "In relation to Article 8 no removal directions have  been
    made and I consider therefore that since the Appellant  is  not  to  be
    removed Article 8 does not arise at this stage".   This  is  a  subject
    matter not without countervailing views but the judge  was  correct  in
    taking that approach.  Article 8 of the ECHR only applies if there is a
    prospective interference  with  any  alleged  family  or  private  life
    claimed.  The Respondent had issued no removal  directions  and  indeed
    within the refusal letter had specifically stated their decision not to
    issue a residence card did not require the Appellant to  leave  the  UK
    and indeed invited him to make an  application  under  any  appropriate
    Immigration Rule if he believed he had a right to remain  and  at  that
    stage Article 8 of the ECHR would be considered.

14. Accordingly it is plain there was no imminent removal  anticipated  and
    therefore no potential interference with either family or private  life
    claimed.  Further given the Respondent had made no decision at  all  on
    Article 8 of the ECHR the First-tier Tribunal in considering Article  8
    would essentially be acting as a first instance decision  maker  rather
    than in an Appellate capacity.  Thirdly if the Home Office  decided  to
    seek to remove the Appellant at some  later  stage  either  because  he
    failed to make any further application or an  application  was  refused
    then Article 8 of the ECHR would be considered  at  that  stage,  where
    circumstances  may  be  somewhat  or  entirely   different.    If   the
    application was refused (and it would be speculative to assume that  it
    would) then at that stage the Appellant would have a  right  of  appeal
    and all the current circumstances at that  time  would  be  considered.
    Therefore it would render entirely  academic  any  decision  made  now.
    Given all of those circumstances the judge was entirely right to  state
    there was no need to deal with Article 8 of the ECHR and any  questions
    therefore of the child's interests were wholly irrelevant.

15. The judge had in paragraph 16 gone  on  to  say  "Even  if  I  were  to
    consider the matter under Article 8 ...".  That was perhaps unnecessary
    but understandable given the  somewhat  uncertain  legal  position  and
    potentially submissions that may have been raised  on  the  Appellant's
    behalf under Article 8 of the ECHR.  The  judge  had  looked  correctly
    through the prism of the Immigration Rules noting  that  the  Appellant
    did not succeed under Appendix FM or EX.1 for the reasons  given.   The
    assessment thereafter at paragraph 19 is less than clear.  It may  well
    be that the test for consideration of a case outside of  the  Rules  in
    these circumstances was compelling rather than "exceptional" as  stated
    by the judge.  Further if the judge had decided, which  is  not  clear,
    that this case needed to  be  looked  at  outside  of  the  Rules  then
    additional to consideration of the child's interests under  Section  55
    of the Borders Act it would have been necessary for the judge  to  have
    considered all the  ingredients  of  Section  117B  of  the  2002  Act.
    However, as indicated above, any potential error of law that  may  have
    arisen in his examination of  the  case  at  this  late  stage  of  the
    determination was not material as he had already  correctly  identified
    that Article 8 of the ECHR did not need to be considered as there  were
    no proposed interferences with any claimed family or  private  life  by
    the Respondent at that stage; and in  any  event  not  before  a  fresh
    decision and potentially therefore a fresh right of appeal.

Decision

16. There was no error of law made by  the  judge  in  this  case  and  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

17. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever
