
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/42717/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 August 2015                    |On 18 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  TAHA ALAM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Heybroek, Counsel, instructed by Paramount
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant in this case is the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department and the respondent is Mr Taha Alam. I  shall  refer  to  the
    appellant as he was before the First-tier Tribunal. The appellant is  a
    citizen of Pakistan and his date of  birth  is  24  October  1989.  The
    appellant was granted leave as a student from 17 May 2013 which was due
    to expire on 8 November 2014.

2.   On 13 October 2014 the Secretary of  State  cancelled  the  appellant's
    leave pursuant to paragraph 321A of the Immigration Rules ("the rules")
    on the basis that he had exercised deception. The decision was made  on
    the basis of  information  provided  to  the  Secretary  of  State,  by
    Educational Testing Service (ETS) as a result of a  Panorama  programme
    claiming that applicants had sat English tests by proxy at ETS  centres
    and thus English language certificates have been fraudulently obtained.
    As a result of the programme an investigation was conducted and it  was
    decided by the Secretary of State that the appellant was one  of  those
    who had sat the test by proxy and his certificate had been fraudulently
    obtained.

3.   The appellant  appealed  against  that  decision  and  his  appeal  was
    allowed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Asjad in  a  decision  that
    was promulgated on 22 January 2015 following a hearing  on  20  January
    2015. The appellant attended the hearing and he  gave  evidence  before
    Judge Asjad.

4.   It is  necessary  for  me  to  quote  the  findings  of  the  judge  at
    paragraphs 5 and 6 of the determination:

         "5.   It  is  for  the  respondent  to  establish  that  the  TOEIC
             qualification obtained from Educational Testing Service  (ETS)
             was obtained by deception and on the evidence before me  I  am
             not satisfied that the respondent has discharged its burden of
             proof.  The evidence supplied in this case consists of generic
             statements prepared by two witnesses that are not specific  to
             this appellant. Reference is  made  at  paragraph  22  of  the
             decision  of  the  Immigration  Officer  examining   'relevant
             sources of evidence, including the ETS Lookup  tool  and  Home
             Office Records' - neither of these pieces of evidence has been
             disclosed to  the  appellant.   The  spreadsheet  printout  is
             simply that - a print out  of  the  appellant's  name  against
             various other entries - purportedly  proving  the  appellant's
             'guilt'.  Yet, there  is  no  statement  of  truth  about  its
             accuracy, no information about who has introduced it,  and  no
             date for when the test was invalidated and by whom.

         6.   The appellant was interviewed twice by  officers  at  Heathrow
             Airport and I cannot ignore the following statements  made  by
             the interviewer:

             .    He answered the questions in Basic English

             .    He answered in a fluent manner, suggestive  of  the  fact
                  that he had not been coached in providing specific answers
                  by rote

             .     He  understood  the  questions  well  and   demonstrated
                  sufficient comprehension  to  make  me  believe  he  could
                  attend classes and complete reports

             .    He conversed well and could read relevant documentation

             .    He did not lack credibility on any points in interview

             .    He was credible

             It  is  clear  from  these  statements  that  so  far  as  the
             interviewer was concerned, he was satisfied that the appellant
             had proven his English speaking and reading ability."

5.   The judge also took  into  account  that  the  appellant  had  provided
    evidence in the form essays that he had completed as part of his course
    and in her view this  demonstrated  his  English  ability.   The  judge
    concluded that the Secretary of State had not established deception and
    went on to allow the appeal.

6.   The Secretary of State was granted permission in a decision of 9  March
    2015.  In my view  the  grounds  amount  to  a  disagreement  with  the
    findings of the First-tier  Tribunal  and  an  attempt  to  reopen  the
    factual findings.  The findings of Judge Asjad must  be  considered  in
    the light of the case of the Crown as in R (on the application of Gazi)
    and Secretary of State for the Home  Department  (ETS-judicial  review)
    IJR [2005] UKUT 00327. This case was relied upon by Miss  Heybroek  and
    she made specific reference to paragraphs 12, 14 and 15. I  take  those
    paragraphs into account.

7.   The evidence before Judge Asjad was  witness  statements  from  Rebecca
    Collins and Peter Millington, both of which the judge considered and it
    was entirely open to her to  conclude  that  this  evidence  was  of  a
    generic nature and that it made no specific reference to the appellant.



8.   The judge may have assumed that the spreadsheet printout  and  the  ETS
    Lookup tool and Home Office records were separate documents when it  is
    clear that in fact the spreadsheet printout was the only other document
    on which the Secretary of State relied and that it is also referred  to
    as the ETS Lookup Tool and Home Office  records.   In  any  event,  the
    judge in my view made clear findings in relation to the print  out.  If
    indeed there is any confusion,  it  had  not  material  impact  on  the
    outcome of this case.

9.   It was not just as a result of the quality of the Secretary of  State's
    evidence in relation to deception that the judge had  to  consider,  it
    was also incumbent on her to consider the appellant's evidence and  the
    evidence of interviews.  Interviews conducted by officers  at  Heathrow
    Airport with the appellant were produced and the judge also took  these
    into account.  The judge preferred the evidence  of  the  appellant  to
    that  of  the  Secretary  of  State  and  gave  detailed  and   legally
    sustainable reasons for this.

10.  There is no merit in the assertion that the judge  did  not  take  into
    account material evidence in this case or that she  took  into  account
    irrelevant considerations. The weight to be attached to evidence  is  a
    matter for the judge subject to the giving of clear reasons.  There  is
    no error of law.

Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's application is dismissed and the decision to  allow
the appeal is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam  Date 14 August 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
