
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: Ia/42518/2014
                                                               IA/42371/2014
                                                               IA/42394/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th November 2015                |On 18th December 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                            (1) MISS AMINA AShRAF
                           (2) Mr Muhammad Sohail
                            (3) Mrs REENA KHALID
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr R Sharma (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Miss A Everett (HOPO)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge N J Osborne, promulgated on 3rd June 2015, following a hearing at
    Columbus House, Newport, on 29th May 2015.  In the  determination,  the
    judge allowed the appeals of Miss Amina Ashraf, Mr Muhammad Sohail, and
    Mrs Reena Khalid.  The  Respondent  Secretary  of  State,  subsequently
    applied, and was granted, permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,
    and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellants

 2. The Appellants are all citizen of Pakistan, being born respectively  on
    3rd November 1985, 29th June 1984, and 14th October 1985.   The  Second
    Appellant  and  the  Third  Appellant  are  both   husband   and   wife
    respectively.  The application with respect to  the  First  and  Second
    Appellants is for leave to remain as  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)  Migrants
    under paragraph 245DD of HC 395.  The Third Appellant is a dependant of
    a Tier 1 Migrant under the points-based system.

The Appellants' Claim

 3. The Appellants' claim is in relation to evidence with respect to  third
    party funding which was necessary  for  their  application  to  succeed
    before the Secretary  of  State.   Their  case  is  that  they  are  an
    entrepreneur team.  They prepared their  applications  together.   They
    confirm that they are 100% sure that all  third  party  documents  were
    collated  in  accordance  with   the   Home   Office   guidelines   for
    entrepreneurs.  When all the documentary evidence  had  been  collated,
    all three applications were  sent  to  the  Home  Office  in  the  same
    envelope (see paragraph 12(iv)).

 4. The case on behalf of the Appellants is that they had studied in the UK
    and had successfully  completed  masters  degree  qualifications.   The
    Second Appellant has an  MBA  in  International  Business  from  Anglia
    Ruskin University.  The First Appellant, Miss  Ashraf,  has  an  MA  in
    Marketing and Innovation from  Anglia  Ruskin  University.   They  both
    researched what was needed and complied with  the  requirements.   They
    compiled the evidence together and submitted it together.

The Judge's Findings

 5. The judge heard submissions that,  in  the  circumstances  whereby  the
    Respondent Secretary of State maintained that no  documentary  evidence
    had been properly submitted, that the evidence of  the  Appellants  was
    that, "the First and Second Appellants agreed that having submitted the
    applications it seems to be the case that the  Respondent  mislaid  the
    original evidence that was submitted to comply with the requirements in
    respect of third party documents" (see paragraph 12(iv)).

 6. The judge went on to conclude that, "having been referred  to  all  the
    documents in the Appellants' bundle I find that this  is  a  relatively
    thoroughly prepared appeal.  The decision I make is (as it must be)  on
    the basis of the evidence" (see paragraph 12(vi)).

 7. The judge went on to note that the Appellants are the  directors  of  a
    lawful company registered in the name  of  Multas  Limited.   They  are
    engaged in business as directors of that company (see paragraph 16).

 8. The judge allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules (see paragraph
    13) and also allowed the appeal  under  Article  8  of  the  ECHR  (see
    paragraph 17).

Grounds of Application

 9. The grounds of application  state  that  the  judge  was  in  error  in
    considering the oral evidence and witness statements under the PBS  and
    that such evidence was  specifically  excluded  except  under  specific
    circumstances as set  out  in  Section  85(a)(4)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  Reliance was placed upon the case  of
    Ahmed [2014] UKUT 365.

10. On 12th August 2015, permission to appeal was granted.

11. On  1st  September  2015,  a  Rule  24  response  was  entered  by  the
    Appellants' Counsel, Mr R  Sharma.   He  submitted  that  there  was  a
    conflict of evidence before the judge,  namely,  as  to  whether  third
    party documentary evidence had been properly submitted.  It was for the
    judge to resolve that conflict.  The judge did so on the basis  of  the
    evidence that he specifically referred to.  He had referred to the case
    as having been thoroughly well  prepared.   Second,  the  reference  to
    Section 85A of the 2002 was a misreading of that provision.

Submissions

12. At the hearing before me on 17th November 2015, Miss Everett, appearing
    on behalf of the Respondent Secretary of State, relied upon her grounds
    of application.  She submitted that the judge was not entitled to  take
    into account oral evidence,  in  circumstances  where  the  documentary
    evidence had not been properly filed.  She also  stated  that  she  had
    herself gone through the Home Office bundle  and  could  not  find  the
    documents that the judge appears to have relied upon.   The  judge  was
    wrong to find the Appellants' claim to be credible when the documentary
    evidence was missing.  She relied upon the case of  Ahmed  [2014]  UKUT
    00365.  She asked me to find there to be an error of law,  and  to  re-
    make the decision, by dismissing the appeal.

13. For his part, Mr Sharma submitted that he would draw attention  to  his
    Rule 24 response and simply repeat that the analysis by the  judge  was
    focused upon whether or not the documentary evidence had been  properly
    submitted in relation to third party support.  The judge had  concluded
    that it had been and had gone on to say that  this  was  "a  relatively
    thoroughly prepared appeal" (see paragraph 12(vi)).  He had even stated
    that the "Respondent mislaid  the  original  evidence"  (see  paragraph
    12(iv)).  The reference to Ahmed was entirely misconceived because that
    was a case where the judge was not entitled to hear the  oral  evidence
    which she did hear.  Since that oral evidence could not be  heard,  the
    absence of documentary evidence was clearly telling (see paragraph  9).
    This was not the position here.





No Error of Law

14. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA [2007]) such that I should set aside the decision.  My reasons are
    as follows.  This is  a  case  where  the  essential  question  was  in
    relation to the production of  third  party  support.   The  judge  had
    evidence before him that the applications had been properly compiled by
    all three Appellants who are acting in consort as entrepreneurs.   They
    had properly put in the evidence in relation  to  third  party  support
    themselves.

15. Second, the judge had gone on to say that his inspection  of  the  file
    before him showed this evidence to be in existence and that this was  a
    "thoroughly well-prepared appeal."

16. Third, he also  adverted  to  the  possibility  that,  insofar  as  the
    evidence was missing on the part of the Respondent Secretary of  State,
    the possibility was that this must have been mislaid.

17. Finally, the judge considered the position in  relation  to  Article  8
    rights and concluded that the appeal could  also  succeed  under  human
    rights grounds.  In the case of  Shahzad  [2013]  UKUT  00005,  it  was
    determined that, "the UT would not normally set aside a decision unless
    the conclusions  the  judge  draws  from  the  primary  data  were  not
    reasonably open to him or her."  Plainly these conclusions were open to
    the judge.  It was for the judge to make findings of fact.   The  judge
    did do so.  The decision is entirely sound.  There is no error of law.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

No anonymity order is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    8th December 2015
