
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/42055/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Sheldon Court, Birmingham            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 December 2014                           |On 15 January 2015            |
|Given 22 December 2014                        |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MISS DINGQIN ZHENG
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Vokes, Lin & Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In this determination the Appellant is referred to as the Secretary  of
    State and the Respondent is referred as the claimant.

2.   The claimant, a national of the People's Republic  of  China,  date  of
    birth 23 January 1992, appealed against the Respondent's decision dated
    30 September 2013 to refuse to  vary  leave  to  remain,  based  on  an
    application on 28 September 2012, and to make removal directions  under
    Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act  2006.   That
    appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge D Birrell who, on 10  June
    2014, promulgated a decision, having heard the matter at Stoke,  on  29
    May 2014. Permission was given to the Secretary of State to  appeal  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane on 24 July 2014.

3.   Without doing disservice to either side's arguments, it  seemed  to  me
    the thrust of the Secretary of State's challenge was that there was  no
    proper basis for the judge's conclusions that Article 8 in  respect  of
    the Claimant were engaged.  The gravamen of the  submission  was  that,
    the Claimant having entered the United Kingdom as a student  and  being
    married to Mr Chen, from 2007 Mr Chen had started  to  develop  serious
    health problems with his lungs leading to major surgery  and  that  the
    consequences of that left him so debilitated he could not  be  expected
    to return to the PRC with the Claimant.

4.   Those matters were summed up by reference to three  points.  First,  Mr
    Chen now had only either  part  or  none  of  his  left  lung  working.
    Secondly, he had sustained through the  operation  process  some  brain
    damage, potentially associated with hypoxia, and that it had  left  him
    with physical difficulties including tremors, on the left side  of  his
    body.

5.   Thirdly, it was said that taking him away from the United  Kingdom  and
    in particular him returning to China, where urban areas  air  pollution
    was a significant problem, presented  a  real  risk  to  his  continued
    survival and the possibility of having a life in an urban area  in  the
    PRC.  It was, it seems, considered that life in a rural area  would  be
    undesirable for different reasons, not least the income he  could  earn
    and the availability of the appropriate quality of hospital care.   The
    judge, it is fair to say, was persuaded on these latter two issues  and
    concluded that it was not proportionate  for  him  to  be  required  to
    return with the Claimant and their young child aged about  2  years  at
    the material time.

6.   The difficulty Mr Volkes faces is that before the judge there was  some
    evidence of the past issue of Mr Chen's ill health,  identification  of
    much of the consequences back in 2009 arising from  the  operation  and
    his recovery, but there the evidence stopped.  It  was  therefore  just
    short of five years from that information when the matter  came  before
    the judge in May 2014.

7.   In the circumstances there was no updating  medical  evidence  although
    it seems it was contemplated some would be provided at the hearing  and
    the position was that there was no prognosis on Mr Chen's health, there
    was no information about current treatment, medication  or  review.  In
    the circumstances the impact of return upon the Mr Chen health appeared
    to be a completely speculative exercise by the judge doing the best she
    could in the circumstances that arose.

8.   As at today, again that position  remains  that  there  is  nothing  to
    confirm the 2009 circumstances were continuing in 2014 or  to  date  or
    that such was the residual value of Mr Chen's right  lung  as  to  give
    rise to a real concern that air pollution and life in China would  give
    rise to the serious risk to his health.

9.   Of itself, the fact that there is significant  environmental  pollution
    in the PRC takes the matter of Mr Chen's health little further. But  it
    is the association with the  Mr  Chen's  lung  condition  that  is  the
    crucial issue determining the judge's finding.  I appreciate the  judge
    took into account many other factors which  were  entirely  matters  of
    weight for the judge and upon which it would  be  wholly  inappropriate
    to interfere.  Nevertheless, I find unfortunately that the evidence was
    not sufficiently up-to-date to entitle the judge  to  rationally  reach
    the decision she did.

10.  The case law on this matter has been  entirely  clear  since  R  (Iran)
    [2005] EWCA Civ 982 and in the normal course of events despite a  judge
    feeling that a different decision should have been reached, that is not
    a proper basis to overturn a decision. However in this case it seems to
    me that there was no evidential basis for the reasoning that the  judge
    gave as to present risk in relation to  the  adverse  effects  upon  Mr
    Chen's medical condition. In those circumstances  that  being  the  key
    issue in connection with their return as a family, it seems to me  that
    that was a material error of law.

11.  It may be it is unnecessary for these purposes to  resolve  the  matter
    if there is an outstanding legacy case that will be a  matter  for  the
    parties to resolve.  It is  unfortunate  that  a  further  and  resumed
    hearing is going to be needed but  plainly  it  is  critical  that  the
    medical evidence is brought up-to-date and also evidence is provided as
    to the  likely  impact  upon  Mr  Chen's  health  associated  with  air
    pollution and the extent to which it gives rise  to  risks  to  him  in
    particular.

12.  The original Tribunal's decision can  not  stand.   The  decision  will
    have to be remade on Article 8 ECHR issues in the Upper Tribunal.

Directions.
     List before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey.
     Hearing - 2 hours
     Mandarin interpreter required unless the Claimant  notifies  the  Upper
    Tribunal to the contrary.
     Documents - any additional bundles of documents relating to  Article  8
    as an issue to be submitted by  not  later  than  14  days  before  the
    further hearing.
    Case to be relisted with reference to Mr Stephen Vokes' availability.



Signed        Date 8 January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

