
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: IA/42299/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |     Decision & Reasons           |
|                                          |Promulgated                       |
|On 10 February 2016                       |     On 29 February 2016          |
|                                             |                               |



                                   Before


                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between


               the Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                       ms Maria Isabel Queiros Ribeiro
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:

For the Appellant:              Ms Fijiwala, Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent/Claimant:    Ms K McCarthy, Counsel instructed by M
Reale Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Page  sitting  at  Columbus  House,
    Newport on 2 April 2015) allowing the  claimant's  appeal  against  the
    decision by the Secretary of State  to  refuse  to  issue  her  with  a
    permanent residence card as confirmation that she met the  requirements
    of Regulations 15(1)(b) of the  EEA  Regulations  2006  as  the  family
    member of an EEA national who has resided  in  the  United  Kingdom  in
    accordance with the Regulations for a continuous period of five  years.
    The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction, and  I  do
    not consider that the claimant requires anonymity for these proceedings
    in the Upper Tribunal.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. On 15 June 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Levin granted  permission  to
    appeal for the following reasons:

         It is arguable that the judge's failure to  identify  the  relevant
         five year period and to  make  a  finding  with  reference  thereto
         renders the judge's decision materially flawed.

Relevant Background

 3. On 1 February 2013 the Secretary of State gave her reasons for refusing
    the claimant's application for a permanent residence card as the family
    member of Laszlo Kovacs, a Hungarian national.  In her application, she
    stated that her EEA national sponsor (the husband of her daughter)  had
    been employed for a continuous period of five years.  She had  provided
    two P60s to support this claim.  She had not provided evidence  of  how
    her EEA sponsor had been exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom
    from 2008 to the present day, with the result that she  was  unable  to
    establish that her EEA national  sponsor  had  been  exercising  treaty
    rights in the United Kingdom for a  continuous  period  of  five  years
    whilst employed.

 4. The claimant's appeal against the decision came  before  Judge  Ghaffar
    sitting at Sheldon Court in Birmingham on 19 June 2014.   Both  parties
    were legally represented.  The  evidence  was  that  the  claimant  had
    entered the United Kingdom on 5 March 2007 to live  with  her  daughter
    and son-in-law.  She had been issued with a five year residence card on
    13 September 2007.  In January 2010, her daughter  had  separated  from
    her husband.  Notwithstanding the separation,  on  15  March  2011  her
    daughter had been issued with a permanent residence card.

 5. In his subsequent decision,  the  judge  found  there  was  nothing  to
    suggest that Mr Kovacs had ceased exercising his  treaty  rights  since
    the claimant was first granted a residence card  or  indeed  since  her
    daughter was granted permanent residence.  Accordingly, he  found  that
    Mr Kovacs had continued to exercise his treaty rights in the  UK  since
    the claimant's daughter had been granted permanent residence, and still
    continued to exercise  his  treaty  rights  in  the  UK.   However,  he
    dismissed the appeal because he held  (wrongly)  that  the  wording  of
    Regulation 15 required the claimant to be  living  with  Mr  Kovacs  or
    required that her daughter and Mr Kovacs had got a divorce  before  she
    could claim permanent residence.

 6. The decision of Judge Ghaffar was set aside  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Poole sitting in the Upper Tribunal at Newport  on  26  November  2014.
    Judge Poole said it was common ground between the  parties  that  Judge
    Ghaffar had made an error of law in his decision of 2 July 2014.  Judge
    Poole found that the Secretary of State was correct  to  say  that  the
    claimant had to demonstrate on the balance of  probabilities  that  her
    daughter's husband was exercising treaty rights.  The lack of  evidence
    that he was not exercising treaty rights was inadequate to  demonstrate
    that he was.  The judge had  wrongly  used  the  lack  of  evidence  to
    establish a precedent fact and this was wrong in law.

The Hearing  Before,  and  the  Decision  of,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on
Remittal

 7. Judge Poole remitted the appeal for a hearing de novo.  Ms McCarthy  of
    Counsel appeared on behalf of the claimant before Judge Page, but there
    was no appearance on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State.   The  judge
    received oral evidence from the claimant, and  took  into  account  the
    documents contained in her bundle for the hearing, which she listed  at
    paragraph [11].

 8. At paragraph [22] of her decision, she recorded the submissions that Ms
    McCarthy made at the end of the hearing.  Ms McCarthy accepted that the
    claimant had to prove that Laszlo Kovacs was a  qualified  person,  and
    she submitted that the evidence on this issue had to be assessed as  at
    the date of the hearing.   She  submitted  that  the  emails  and  text
    messages in the bundle, and in particular a Halifax form completed on 6
    March 2015, were sufficient to prove on the  balance  of  probabilities
    that Laszlo Kovacs was  working  and  exercising  treaty  rights.   She
    submitted that in the event that the judge was  satisfied  that  Laszlo
    Kovacs was working at the date of  the  hearing,  the  claimant  should
    succeed in her appeal.

 9. At paragraph [23] the judge expressed agreement  with  the  submissions
    made by Ms McCarthy.  She directed herself that the remaining issue  in
    the appeal was a narrow one, which was whether Mr  Kovacs  "remains"  a
    qualified person in the UK.  She found that the  evidence  provided  by
    way of appeal was conclusive evidence that Mr Kovacs "is"  a  qualified
    person, working full-time as a chef.  He was certainly due to work as a
    chef on 3 April  2015  which  was  Good  Friday  because  he  told  the
    appellant's daughter this in a text message which she  had  read.   She
    was also satisfied Mr Kovacs was exercising treaty rights on the day of
    the hearing on 2 April 2015.  She was therefore  allowing  this  appeal
    and she trusted the claimant could now be granted a permanent residence
    card as confirmation of her permanent right to reside in the UK.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

10. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal,  arguing  that
    the judge had erred in law by only finding that Mr Kovacs  "remains"  a
    qualified person, rather than identifying the relevant period  of  five
    years over which he has continuously exercised his treaty rights.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

11. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Ms McCarthy directed my attention to the supplementary bundle  for
    the appeal hearing on 2 April 2015 which she  relied  on  as  providing
    adequate  evidence  to  show  that  Mr  Kovacs  had  been  continuously
    exercising treaty rights since the claimant's daughter  was  granted  a
    permanent residence card.  So even if, which she did  not  accept,  the
    judge had not given adequate reasons for finding that the claimant  was
    entitled to be issued with a permanent residence card, the  documentary
    evidence provided to the First-tier Tribunal showed that the error  was
    not material.

12. In reply, Ms Fijiwala submitted that the judge had  not  asked  herself
    the correct question.  It was  apparent  from  the  decision  of  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Poole that it was not enough simply to establish that Mr
    Kovacs was exercising treaty rights at the date of the  hearing  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.  There was nothing in the documentary evidence
    going to the period between 2011 and 2012, and there was simply not the
    necessary evidence available  for  a  decision  on  an  entitlement  to
    permanent residence to be made, or remade, in the claimant's favour.

Discussion

13. I find that Judge Page clearly addresses the wrong question.  In  order
    to qualify for a permanent residence card in accordance with Regulation
    15, the claimant needed to identify a five year period during which  Mr
    Kovacs had been continuously exercising treaty rights.  She  could  not
    rely on the same five year period as that successfully relied  upon  by
    her daughter, as she had not joined her daughter and son-in-law in  the
    United Kingdom until 2007.  So the earliest potential  end  date  of  a
    qualifying  five  year  period  was  going  to  be  sometime  in  2012.
    Alternatively, the claimant could rely on a later end date, such as the
    date of the hearing before Judge Page.  But either way,  there  was  an
    evidential black hole for  at  least  a  one  year  period  (2011-2012)
    following the grant of a permanent residence card to her daughter.

14. The judge  gave  adequate  reasons  for  finding  that  Mr  Kovacs  was
    currently exercising treaty rights,  and  there  is  no  error  of  law
    challenge to this finding.  The judge did not make any  findings  about
    the exercise of treaty rights by Mr Kovacs between 2011 and  2015.   So
    her finding that the claimant qualified for a permanent residence  card
    is plainly erroneous in law.

The Remaking of the Decision

15. I am unable to remake the decision in  the  claimant's  favour  on  the
    evidence that was placed before the First-tier Tribunal.   Ms  McCarthy
    is in effect inviting me to commit the same error as that made by Judge
    Ghaffar.  Just because there is evidence of Mr Kovacs exercising treaty
    rights in 2015, it does not follow that he was exercising treaty rights
    in, for example, 2012.

16. I accept that under the Regulations  2006  Mr  Kovacs  could  have  had
    periods of voluntary or involuntary unemployment which would  not  have
    the legal consequence of him ceasing to be  a  qualified  person.   But
    where there is no evidence one way or the other, I cannot simply assume
    the facts in the claimant's favour, particularly  when  the  burden  of
    proof rests with her, not with the Secretary of State.

17. It is arguable that Mr Kovacs is likely to have been in  employment  in
    2013 and 2014, as otherwise he would not have been able to pay for  his
    son to go on holiday with him in 2013 and 2014.  But the money for this
    expenditure could have  come  from  savings  or  from  extended  family
    members in his home country. In any  event,  I  do  not  consider  that
    evidence of this nature (emails passing between the  estranged  spouses
    about arrangements for the child to join  his  father  on  holiday)  is
    sufficient to discharge the burden of proof. Furthermore, there  is  no
    equivalent evidence for the earlier period  (2011-2012)  following  the
    grant of a permanent residence card to the claimant's daughter.

18. As the claimant has discharged the burden of proving that Mr Kovacs  is
    currently exercising treaty rights in the UK, she has an extended right
    of residence in the United Kingdom pursuant to Regulation 14.  She  has
    not however shown that she qualifies  for  the  issue  of  a  permanent
    residence card under Regulation 15.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law,  and
accordingly the  decision  is  set  aside  and  the  following  decision  is
substituted: the claimant's appeal is dismissed  under  Regulation  15,  but
allowed under Regulation 14 of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.


No anonymity direction is made.


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD



In the light of my decision  to  re-make  the  decision  in  the  appeal  by
allowing it in part, I have considered whether to make a fee award.


I make no fee award.


Reasons:
The appellant has failed to achieve her  primary  objective,  which  was  to
prove that she was entitled to a permanent residence card.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

