
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: ia/42212/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 15 March 2016                     |On 25 April 2016                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY


                                   Between

                              RODRIGUE TCHOKOGA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Nwaekwu, Moorehouse Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Cameroon born on 29 November 1987. On  3
    June 2014 he applied for a residence card as confirmation of a right to
    reside in the UK under the  European  Economic  Area  Regulations  2006
    ("EEA Regulations") on the basis of his marriage  to  an  EEA  national
    Sewa  Perpetue   Mandeng-Houehenou.   The   Respondent   refused   that
    application and concluded that the  marriage  was  one  of  convenience
    under regulation 2 of the EEA Regulations.

 2. The Appellant appealed against the decision to refuse to  issue  him  a
    residence card and that appeal was heard by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Lawrence who dismissed his appeal finding that the marriage was one  of
    convenience. He dismissed his appeal  under  the  EEA  Regulations  and
    under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

 3. The Appellant sought permission to appeal  against  that  decision  and
    permission was granted on 2 February 2016 by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Pooler. He found that  it  was  arguable  that  the  judge  misdirected
    himself as to the burden as proof. He refused permission in relation to
    the other grounds.

    The Grounds

 4. The Appellant was granted permission in respect  of  one  ground  only.
    That ground is that Judge misdirected himself as to the burden of proof
    as explained in Papajorgji  (EEA  Spouse  -  marriage  of  convenience)
    Greece [2012] UKUT 00038 and Rosa v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 14.

    The Rule 24 Response

 5. The Respondent acknowledges that the First-tier Tribunal  did  fail  to
    note that there was no burden at the outset  of  an  application  on  a
    claimant to demonstrate that a marriage to an EEA national was not  one
    of convenience and that there was an evidential burden on the  claimant
    to address evidence justifying reasonable suspicion that  the  marriage
    was entered into for the purpose of securing residence rights. However,
    the Respondent submits that any error in the determination of the First-
    tier Tribunal is immaterial as this was a case where there was  plainly
    information before the First-tier Tribunal which justified a reasonable
    suspicion that the  marriage  was  entered  into  for  the  predominant
    purpose  of  securing  residence  rights.  It  is   argued   that   the
    determination makes it clear that  the  Appellant  failed  entirely  to
    address  the  information  justifying  a  reasonable   suspicion.   The
    Appellant's wife did not attend the hearing and there was an absence of
    evidence in relation to cohabitation and no adjournment was  sought  to
    secure her attendance or to demonstrate that she had been  admitted  to
    hospital as claimed. It is therefore submitted  that  there  is  not  a
    material error of law.

    The Hearing

 6. Mr Nwaekwu submitted that it was critical that the burden was addressed
    properly and it was a clear and material error of law. A  fair  hearing
    was not conducted and that was the primary requirement in cases such as
    this. If the error of law was material the matter  should  be  remitted
    back to the  First-tier  Tribunal.  It  was  a  narrow  point  and  was
    critical. The Judge did not comply with the guidance in the case law.

 7. Mr Melvin said that there was nothing to add to the Rule  24  response.
    The technical error could not be material on the findings of fact made.





    Discussion and Findings

 8. The First-tier Tribunal Judge directed himself at paragraph  7  of  the
    decision that the "appellant bears the legal burden of proof from start
    to finish and the standard of proof is on the balance of  probability".
    In R and Others v  SSHD  (2005)  EWCA  Civ  982  the  Court  of  Appeal
    identified the most frequently encountered points of law which includes
    making a material misdirection of law on any material matter.

 9. In Papajorgji (EEA spouse - marriage of convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT
    00038 (IAC) (Blake J) the Tribunal held that (i) There is no burden  at
    the outset of an application  on  a  claimant  to  demonstrate  that  a
    marriage to an  EEA  national  is  not  one  of  convenience;  (ii)  IS
    (marriages of convenience) Serbia [2008] UKAIT 31 establishes only that
    there is an evidential burden  on  the  claimant  to  address  evidence
    justifying reasonable suspicion that the marriage is entered  into  for
    the predominant purpose of  securing  residence  rights.  The  Tribunal
    clarified at [33] that they did not accept there was a burden  as  such
    on the appellant and at [39] concluded that when the issue  was  raised
    in an appeal, the question for the judge would therefore be:

         "... in the light of the totality of  the  information  before  me,
         including  the  assessment  of  the  claimant's  answers  and   any
         information provided, am I satisfied that it is more probable  than
         not this is a marriage of convenience."

10. In Rosa v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 14 Richards LJ held  at  [24]  that  the
    reasoning in Papajorgji was compelling and that the legal  burden  lies
    on the Secretary of State to prove that an otherwise valid marriage  is
    a  marriage  of  convenience  so  as  to  justify  the  refusal  of  an
    application for a  residence  card  under  the  EEA  Regulations.   The
    evidential burden can shift as explained in Papajorgji ([29]).

11. There is  a  clear  misdirection  at  paragraph  7  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision as the Judge places the legal burden throughout  on
    the Appellant. However, the error  of  law  can  only  be  said  to  be
    material if the Tribunal could not have reached the same conclusion had
    it directed itself properly.

12. In my judgment, the error was not material.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    made clear  findings  in  relation  to  the  question  of  whether  the
    Appellant's marriage was a marriage of convenience. He found that there
    was only one single bed at the property, that  the  Appellant  did  not
    identify any items that belonged to his spouse at the property and that
    the utility bills relied on did not demonstrate that she lived  at  the
    address.   The findings were sufficient to shift the evidential  burden
    in this case onto the Appellant. The Appellant produced evidence in  an
    attempt to deal with  them.   However,  the  tribunal  found  that  the
    failure of the Appellant's spouse to attend the hearing, the failure to
    produce evidence as to why she could not attend  the  hearing  and  the
    incredible evidence of the witness  led  to  the  conclusion  that  the
    marriage was one of convenience. He found at  paragraph  26  that  "the
    marriage to Ms Mandeng-Houehenou is one of convenience to secure status
    in the UK on a false basis".  This  clearly  indicates  that  that  the
    outcome did not turn on the tribunal's direction as to  the  burden  of
    proof.  There is no merit in the suggestion that the finding might have
    been different if the tribunal had approached the matter on  the  basis
    that the legal burden of proof  lay  throughout  on  the  Secretary  of
    State.

    Conclusions:

13. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

14. I do not set aside the decision.

    Anonymity

The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  order  for  anonymity  and  no
application has been made for such an order.


Signed      Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray
