

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/42675/2014
                                                               IA/42748/2014


      IA/42752/2014
[pic]

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |      Decision and Reasons           |
|On 22nd June 2015                        |Promulgated                 On 4th   |
|                                         |September 2015                       |
|                                         |                                     |
|                                         |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN

                                   Between

                                JEHANGIR KHAN
                         Ms ESTELLA SUGUE VERGINISA
                              Miss PAULA SUGUE
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr J. Wells of Maliks & Khan Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1     This is an appeal brought by the Appellants against the  determination
      of  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  (Judge  of  the  First  tier  Tribunal
      Manyarara) dated 26th January 2015.

2     The first appellant is a national of  Pakistan,  born  on  21st  March
      1979. On 31st July 2014, he applied to the Respondent for a  residence
      card under Regulation 17 of the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)
      Regulations 2006 ('the 2006 Regulations') on the basis that he claimed
      to  be  a  family  member  of  a  qualified  person  under  the   2006
      Regulations, being married to A2, a Spanish national, who was said  to
      be working in the UK.

3     On 4th November 2014, the Respondent conducted  a  marriage  interview
      with the first and second appellants. The Respondent formed  the  view
      that the marriage was one of convenience, and on  10th  November  2014
      made a decision in respect of A1 refusing him a residence card, on the
      ground that as a party to a marriage of convenience, he was not to  be
      treated as A2's 'spouse', as defined by Reg 2, 2006 Regulations.

4     Further, in  Respect  of  A2  and  the  third  appellant  (A2's  minor
      dependent daughter from  a  previous  marriage,  and  also  a  Spanish
      national), the Respondent made decisions dated 4th  November  2014  to
      remove them administratively  to  Spain  under  s.10  Immigration  and
      Asylum Act 1999, pursuant to Regulations 19(3)(c) and 21B of the  2006
      Regulations, ie on the basis that their removal was justified  on  the
      grounds of A2's 'abuse of rights', as defined by  Reg  21B(1)  of  the
      2006 Regulations. It is therefore  to  be  noted  that  the  decisions
      served on A1 on the one hand and A2 and A3  on  the  other  are  quite
      different.

5     The Appellants appealed, and their  appeals  were  heard  together  by
      Judge of the First tier Tribunal Manyarara on 15th  January  2015.  In
      dismissing the appeals under the 2006 Regulations and on human  rights
      grounds, the Judge held:

      (i)   that the marriage was one of convenience (paras 31 to 44);

      (ii)  that it would be in A3's  best  interests  to  remain  with  her
           mother, A2 (para 45-46); and

      (iii)  any  interference  with  Article  8  ECHR  in  the   case   was
           proportionate (para 47).

6     The Appellants sought permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  on
      grounds, in summary, as follows:

      (i)   that the FTT erred in law in reaching findings on  the  marriage
           of convenience point that were not supported by the evidence and
           that her reasons were inadequate; and

      (ii)  the FTT made wholly inadequate findings in respect of Article  8
      for A2 and A3.

7     The application for permission was considered by Judge  of  the  First
      tier Tribunal Foudy.  In relation to those grounds, she expressed  the
      following view:

           "3. The Judge dealt with the  oral  evidence  and  documents  in
           detail. Her determination sets out the matters  relied  upon  by
           the Appellant and  makes  findings  in  respect  of  them  in  a
           comprehensive and reasoned manner.
           4. However it is arguable that the Judge did not  make  adequate
           findings respect of her Article 8 decision. This is an  arguable
           error of law."

8     It is therefore clear that permission was granted only in  respect  of
      the second ground.  No renewed application for permission  to  appeal,
      to the UT directly, under Reg 22  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
      Tribunal) Rule 2008 was made.

9     At the hearing before us on 22nd June 2015, Mr  Wells,  appearing  for
      the Appellants, submitted a  skeleton  argument  seeking  to  re-argue
      Ground 1.

10    We refused permission to the Appellants to re-open  Ground  1,  for  a
      number of reasons:

      (i)   no application had been made in  a  timely  manner  and  on  the
           proper form seeking to renew an application on such grounds;

      (ii)  no adequate explanation as to why such a renewed application had
           not been made was provided;

      (iii) the ground not only fails to disclose a material error  of  law,
           it is also wholly misleading, seeking to argue that  out  of  an
           alleged 230 questions asked of the Appellants in  interview  (in
           fact is was 124 each) the Respondent took  issue  with  only  6,
           representing a mere 2.5% of the answers,  whereas  our  view  is
           that a proper inspection of the FTT determination  reveals  that
           the Judge relied upon at least 13 issues, discussed at paras 35-
           43, in support of her finding  that  the  marriage  was  one  of
           convenience,  none of which  were  properly  challenged  in  the
           grounds of appeal, and the actual number  of  questions  in  the
           interview from which those issues arose (which was greater  than
           6 in any event) was irrelevant.


      The Article 8 issue

11    The appeal proceeded with the parties making submissions  in  relation
      to  the  second  ground,  challenging  the  adequacy  of   the   FtT's
      determination on Article 8 Grounds.

12    It is appropriate to set out the relevant part of  the  decision.  The
      Judge's consideration as to whether the A1 and A2's marriage  was  one
      of convenience concluded at paragraph 44. She then proceeded:

           "45 In now turn to consider Article 8 in respect of the  removal
           decisions  concerning the second and third  appellants.  I  also
           note the date of the previous determination and  the  subsequent
           legal developments which have illuminated  the  approach  to  be
           taken in respect of cases involving children  and  the  need  to
           consider the interests of the child. They are section 55 of  the
           Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Ac 2009 and ZH  Tanzania  v
           Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department  [2012]  UKSC  4
           respectively.

           46. I find that the best  interests  of  the  child  (the  third
           appellant) in this case are served by being with her mother (the
           second Appellant). By the second appellant's own  evidence,  the
           third appellant is a shy child who needs  to  get  used  to  new
           people, and also  that  she  had  difficulty  adjusting  to  the
           education system in the United Kingdom as a result  of  language
           barriers. The third appellant speaks Spanish,  as  confirmed  by
           the second appellant, and would  be  returning  to  the  country
           where she was born and where  she  spent  her  formative  years.
           There was no evidence  to  support  the  claim  that  the  third
           appellant had therapy needs. Even if it were the case that  such
           needs existed, there was no evidence before me that  they  could
           not be catered for in her country of origin. There would  be  no
           separation from what  the  third  appellant  is  familiar  with.
           Indeed  considering  the  submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the
           appellants  in  this  respect,  the  third  appellant  has   not
           completely adjusted to life in the United  Kingdom  having  only
           lived here since 2013.


           47. Finally, I have considered the five steps propounded by Lord
           Bingham in Razgar v SSHD [2004] (which I do not  reiterate)  and
           am satisfied that any interference with Article 8 in  this  case
           is proportionate, in the light of  my  findings  in  respect  of
           marriage in this case."

13    Before considering the parties' submissions  as  to  the  adequacy  of
      those findings on the proportionality of A2 and A3's removal, we  note
      two things.

14    Firstly, that there has been no successful challenge  to  the  finding
      that the marriage between A1 and A2 was one of convenience.  There  is
      therefore no Article 8 family life as between A1 on the one  hand  and
      A2 and A3 on the other. Whatever shortcomings there are alleged to  be
      in relation to the FtT's  considerations  of  the  lawfulness  of  the
      decision to remove A2 and A3, A1''s appeal, against  the  decision  to
      refuse him a residence card, therefore stands to be dismissed. Whether
      the Respondent seeks to remove A1 at a later date is a matter for her.



15    It is also to be noted that the Judge's reference at paragraph  45  to
      an earlier determination appears to be a determination of  a  previous
      appeal brought unsuccessfully by A1  against  an  earlier  refusal  to
      grant him a residence permit, apparently on the grounds  that  he  had
      not shown that A2 was a qualified person. However, the evidence before
      the FtT in the present appeal appears to suggest  that  A2  had  since
      obtained a new job, and the IS151A dated 4th November 2014 in  respect
      of her does not seek to rely upon Reg 19(3)(a) of the 2006 Regulations
      (power to remove where a person does not have  or  ceases  to  have  a
      right to reside under these Regulations). A2 and A3  (being  a  family
      member of A2) therefore appear to be asserting that they have a  right
      of residence under the Regulations.

16    The parties submissions on as  to  whether  the  Judge's  findings  on
      Article  8  were  relatively  brief,  arguing  respectively  that  the
      paragraphs above were not (Appellants) or were  (Respondent)  adequate
      in respect of the dismissal of the appeals.

17    We find that the Judge's consideration of the proportionality  of  the
      proposed removals was inadequate in law.

18    It is appropriate to set out the relevant law.

19    EEA Regs 2006; 19 and 21B:

           "19.- Exclusion and removal from the United Kingdom

           ...
           (3) Subject to paragraphs (4) and (5), an EEA national  who  has
           entered the United Kingdom  or  the  family  member  of  such  a
           national who has entered the United Kingdom may be removed if-

                 (a) that person does not have or ceases to have a right  to
                 reside under these Regulations;
                 (b) the Secretary of State has decided  that  the  person's
                 removal is justified on grounds of  public  policy,  public
                 security or public health in accordance with regulation 21;
                 or
                 (c) the Secretary of State has decided  that  the  person's
                 removal is justified on  grounds  of  abuse  of  rights  in
                 accordance with regulation 21B(2).
           ...

           21B.- Abuse of rights or fraud

           (1) The abuse of a right to reside includes-
                 (a) engaging in conduct which appears  to  be  intended  to
                 circumvent the requirement to be a qualified person;
                 (b) attempting to enter the United Kingdom within 12 months
                 of being removed pursuant to regulation 19(3)(a), where the
                 person attempting to do so is unable  to  provide  evidence
                 that, upon re entry to the United Kingdom,  the  conditions
                 for any right to reside, other than the  initial  right  of
                 residence under regulation 13, will be met;
                 (c) entering, attempting  to  enter  or  assisting  another
                 person to enter or attempt to enter, a  marriage  or  civil
                 partnership of convenience; or
                 (d) fraudulently obtaining  or  attempting  to  obtain,  or
                 assisting another to obtain or attempt to obtain,  a  right
                 to reside.

           (2) The Secretary of State may  take  an  EEA  decision  on  the
           grounds of abuse of rights where there are reasonable grounds to
           suspect the abuse of a right to reside and it  is  proportionate
           to do so.

           (3) Where these Regulations provide that an EEA  decision  taken
           on the grounds of abuse in the preceding twelve months affects a
           person's right to reside, the person who is the subject of  that
           decision may apply to the Secretary of State to have the  effect
           of that decision set aside on grounds  that  there  has  been  a
           material  change  in  the  circumstances  which  justified  that
           decision.

           (4) An application under paragraph (3) may only be  made  whilst
           the applicant is outside the United Kingdom.

           (5) This regulation may not be invoked systematically.

           (6) In this regulation, "a right to reside"  means  a  right  to
           reside under these Regulations." (Our emphasis)

20    These Regulations are of  course  intended  (whether  successfully  or
      not) to incorporate into domestic law the relevant provisions  of  the
      Citizens Directive 2004/58/EC:

           "Article 35
           Abuse of rights
           Member States  may  adopt  the  necessary  measures  to  refuse,
           terminate or withdraw any right conferred by this  Directive  in
           the case of abuse of rights  or  fraud,  such  as  marriages  of
           convenience. Any such measure shall be proportionate and subject
           to the procedural safeguards provided for in Articles 30 and 31.

           ...
           Article 30
           Notification of decisions
           1. The persons concerned shall be notified  in  writing  of  any
           decision taken under Article 27(1), in such a way that they  are
           able to comprehend its content and the implications for them.
           2. The persons concerned shall be  informed,  precisely  and  in
           full, of the public policy, public  security  or  public  health
           grounds on which the decision taken  in  their  case  is  based,
           unless this is contrary to the interests of State security.
           3. The notification shall specify the  court  or  administrative
           authority with which the person concerned may lodge  an  appeal,
           the time limit for the appeal and, where  applicable,  the  time
           allowed for the person to leave  the  territory  of  the  Member
           State. Save in duly substantiated cases  of  urgency,  the  time
           allowed to leave the territory shall be not less than one  month
           from the date of notification.

           Article 31
           Procedural safeguards
           1. The persons concerned shall  have  access  to  judicial  and,
           where appropriate,  administrative  redress  procedures  in  the
           host Member State to  appeal  against  or  seek  review  of  any
           decision taken against them on the  grounds  of  public  policy,
           public security or public health.
           2. Where the application for appeal against or  judicial  review
           of the expulsion decision is accompanied by an  application  for
           an interim order to suspend enforcement of that decision, actual
           removal from the territory may not take place until such time as
           the decision on the interim order has been taken,
           except:
            - where the expulsion decision is based on a  previous  judicial
           decision; or
           - where the  persons  concerned  have  had  previous  access  to
           judicial review; or
           - where the expulsion decision is based on imperative grounds of
           public security under Article 28(3).
           3. The redress procedures shall allow for an examination of  the
           legality  of  the  decision,  as  well  as  of  the  facts   and
           circumstances on which the proposed measure is based. They shall
           ensure that the decision is not  disproportionate,  particularly
           in view of the requirements laid down in Article 28.
           4. Member States may exclude the individual concerned from their
           territory pending  the  redress  procedure,  but  they  may  not
           prevent  the  individual  from  submitting  his/her  defence  in
           person,  except  when  his/her  appearance  may  cause   serious
           troubles to public policy or public security or when the  appeal
           or judicial review concerns a denial of entry to the territory.

           Article 28
           Protection against expulsion
           1. Before taking an expulsion  decision  on  grounds  of  public
           policy or public security, the  host  Member  State  shall  take
           account of  considerations  such  as  how  long  the  individual
           concerned has resided on its territory, his/her  age,  state  of
           health, family  and  economic  situation,  social  and  cultural
           integration into the host Member State and the extent of his/her
           links with the country of origin.

           2. The host Member State may  not  take  an  expulsion  decision
           against Union citizens or their family members, irrespective  of
           nationality, who have the right of permanent  residence  on  its
           territory, except on serious grounds of public policy or  public
           security.
           3.  An  expulsion  decision  may  not  be  taken  against  Union
           citizens, except if the decision is based on imperative  grounds
           of public security, as defined by Member States, if they:
                 (a) have resided in the host Member State for the  previous
                 10 years; or
                 (b) are a minor, except if the expulsion is  necessary  for
                 the best interests of the child, as  provided  for  in  the
                 United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child of  20
                 November 1989."

20    Relevant guidance

      Chapter 50 (EEA) - EEA Administrative Removal
           Instructions for assessing whether to administratively remove an
           EEA national [or a family member of an EEA national]

           https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_d
           ata/file/424570/Chapter_50_EEA__v7_EXT_20150428.pdf


                 5.5.2 Personal circumstances
                 Personal circumstances must  be  taken  into  account  when
                 considering whether a decision under   regulation  19(3)(c)
                 is proportionate. This  includes  regard  to  the  relevant
                 person's:
                 * age
                 * state of health
                 * family ties to the United Kingdom
                 * length of residence in the United Kingdom
                 * social and cultural integration
                 * economic situation.

           Contrast the two examples below:
                 1. an EEA national who has been in the UK  for  six  months
                 and has entered into a  marriage  of  convenience  in  full
                 knowledge that the marriage was not genuine. They  are  fit
                 and healthy and although they  are  working  they  have  no
                 other ties to the UK.
                 2. an EEA  national  with  a  lawfully  acquired  right  of
                 permanent residence who has lived in the UK  for  the  past
                 seven years and who has recently entered into a marriage of
                 convenience in full knowledge that  the  marriage  was  not
                 genuine. They have three children with a previous  partner,
                 the children have lived their whole life in the UK. The EEA
                 national continues to work in the  UK  and  has  integrated
                 fully into UK life.

           Although in both examples the EEA national was complicit in  the
           marriage of convenience,  it  would  be  less  proportionate  to
           remove  in  the  second  example  because  of  their  length  of
           residence, ties with the UK and their integration."

21    In contrast to A1, who received a 5 page letter  dated  10th  November
      2014 containing the reasons as to why he was being refused a residence
      permit, the only documents we have  seen  relating  to  the  decisions
      taken in respect of A2 and A3 are  notices  IS151A  (EEA)  and  IS151B
      (EEA) dated 4.11.14 in respect of both of them. The IS151A's   provide
      that they are:

            "...by virtue  of  regulations  19(3)  and  24(2)  a  person  in
           respect of whom removal directions may be  given  in  accordance
           with section 10 of the Immigration and  Asylum  Act  1999  as  a
           person whose removal is justified on the  grounds  of  abuse  of
           rights in accordance with regulation 21B(2) of  the  Immigration
           (Economic Area) Regulations 2006."

      Further, the 'Specific Statement of Reasons' on the forms provide:

           "You are specifically considered a person  who  is  involved  in
           abuse of free movement rights by entering into a  marriage  that
           has been deemed a sham. A removal decision  has  therefore  been
           taken under regulation 19(3)(c) of the EA Regulations." (A2)

      and

           "You are specifically considered the dependent of a  person  who
           is involved in abuse of free movement rights by entering into  a
           marriage that has been deemed a sham.  A  removal  decision  has
           therefore been  taken  under  regulation  19(3)(c)  of  the  EEA
           Regulations." (A3) (Our emphasis)

23    We note that the Appellants raised, in their grounds of appeal to  the
FtT:

      (i)   breach of EEA Regs and/or directive
      (ii)  failure to apply relevant guidance from European Commission
      (iii) breach of Art 8 (&4, which we presume is a typographical error).



24    We are of the view that the consideration of  the  proportionality  of
      removal, on the grounds of 'abuse of rights',  of  persons  who  would
      otherwise appear to have a right of residence  in  the  UK,   requires
      something very much more  than  the  treatment  that  it  received  at
      paragraph 47 of the present determination, which was, with respect  to
      the Judge, somewhat perfunctory. A proper recitation of 5 step process
      in  Razgar  would  have  assisted  her  in  her   deliberations.   The
      proportionality of the decision needs  to  be  considered  both  as  a
      result of EU law principles (Reg 21B(2) and under Article 8  ECHR.  It
      is to be  further  noted  that  the  consideration  of  the  issue  of
      proportionality under these two regimes in not in any event the  same.
      see eg para 26, R (Lumsden and others) v  Legal  Services  Board[2015]
      UKSC 41.

25    The was no adequate consideration of:

      (i)   the ties that A2 and A3 have to the United Kingdom;
      (ii)  the fact that A2 claimed to be in employment in the UK;
      (iii) the presence of A2's 23 year old niece, who lives  in  the  same
           household as A2 and A3, and indeed shares a  room  with  A3  and
           looks after her (see Respondent's bundle page I16 q 68-69);
      (iv)   the  seriousness  of  the  wrongdoing  on  A2's  part;  see  in
           particular Article 31(3) of the  Directive,  which  requires  an
           examination the facts and circumstances on  which  the  proposed
           measure is based.

26    There having been no adequate consideration of  these  issues  in  the
      FtT below, , and lack of findings  in relation to them, we cannot  say
      what the outcome of the appeals for A2 and A3 would or ought  to  have
      been. The lack of  adequate  consideration,  whether  under  the  2006
      Regulations,  or Article 8 ECHR of the proportionality of the proposed
      removal of A2 and A3 would have caused us to allow their  appeals  and
      to have remitted them to a different Judge of the Fist tier  Tribunal,
      with the preserved finding that A2  had  engaged   in  a  marriage  of
      convenience.

27    However, we find that there is in fact a flaw of a  different  nature,
      within the original Respondent's decisions for A2  and  A3  dated  4th
      November 2014.

28    We find that the invocation of the power to remove under Reg  19(3)(c)
      and 21B(2)  of  the  2006  Regulations  involves  the  exercise  of  a
      discretion. The provisions permit removal, but do not  mandate  it  if
      abuse of rights  is  established.  Further,  Reg  21B(5)  specifically
      provide that Regulation 21B 'may not be invoked systematically'.

29    There is no  evidence  before  us  to  indicate  that  the  Respondent
      appreciated that she had a discretion whether or  not  to  proceed  to
      make a s.10 1999 Act removal  decision  upon  abuse  of  rights  being
      established. There is no reference within the IS151B (EEA) for  either
      A2 or A3 that the Respondent appreciated that  she  possessed  such  a
      discretion. Indeed, the language used in the notices for both  A2  and
      A3 ('A removal decision has  therefore  been  taken  under  regulation
      19(3)(c)  of  the  EA  Regulations')  suggests  that  the   Respondent
      considered it mandatory to proceed to make  a  s.10  removal  decision
      upon abuse of rights being established. Nor is there any reference  to
      the Respondent's own published policy as  to  whether  the  discretion
      should be exercised.

30    We therefore find that the decisions of the  Respondent  are  unlawful
      by reason of:

      (i)   failure to exercise a discretion contained within the  Directive
           and/or 2006 Regulations; and/or

      (ii)  failure to consider and apply a published policy.

31    The Respondent's decisions in respect of A2 and A3 are  therefore  not
      in accordance with the law (s.86(3)(a)  Nationality,  Immigration  and
      Asylum Act 2002 refers). If any authority is required to  support  our
      course of action, we believe it may be found in head note paragraph  5
      of AG and others (Policies; executive discretions; Tribunal's  powers)
      Kosovo [2007] UKAIT 00082:

           "But where within the terms of the policy  the  benefit  to  the
           appellant depends on the exercise of a  discretion  outside  the
           Immigration Rules, the Tribunal has no power to  substitute  its
           own decision for that of the decision-maker."

32    The appeals of A2 and A3 are therefore allowed to the extent  that  we
      find that the decisions are unlawful. Any further decision (should the
      Respondent chose to proceed to remake a decision in respect of A2  and
      A3, which is a matter for her) should be made in accordance  with  the
      guidance in this determination.

33    To the extent that the point we raise at  paragraphs  27-32  above  is
      one which was not raised by the Appellants in their grounds of appeal,
      we feel that it is closely related to the  grounds  actually  advanced
      (adequacy of Article 8 consideration), or is an obvious  point  (R.  v
      SSHD ex p Robinson [1998] QC 929). Further, when we raised  the  issue
      of the Respondent having failed to  exercise  her  discretion  at  all
      under the 2006 Regulations, advocates for both parties agreed that the
      correct outcome would be for the appeals of A2 and A3  to  be  allowed
      and for the Respondent to consider making a fresh decision.

      Decision:

34    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      the making of an error on a point of law in respect of A1. The  appeal
      of A1 is dismissed.

35    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve  the
      making of an error on a point of law in respect of A2 and A3.

36    The determination, as it applies to A2 and A3, is set aside.

37    We re-make the decision in the appeals of A2 and A3, by  allowing  the
      appeals, to the extent that we find that the Respondent's decisions in
      respect of A2 and A3 were not in accordance with the law.  The  matter
      awaits a lawful decision by the Secretary of State.



Signed:                                            Date: 7th August 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan


