
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/42063/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th May 2016                              |On 27th May 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                           Cherise Annalise howell
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Emma King, Counsel instructed by Irving & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge M R Oliver sitting at Richmond  on  24  July
    2014) whereby the Tribunal dismissed under  the  Regulations  2006  the
    appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of  State  to
    refuse to issue her with a derivative residence card as confirmation of
    her right to reside in the United Kingdom as the  primary  carer  of  a
    British national child,  [SC],  born  on  [  ]  2008.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction, and  I  do  not  consider
    that an anonymity direction is required for these  proceedings  in  the
    Upper Tribunal.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. On 6 October 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge P J M Hollingworth  granted
    permission to appeal for the following reasons:

         An arguable error of law has arisen in relation to the findings  of
         the judge set against the conclusions reached by the judge.  It  is
         arguable that given the  elements  which  the  judge  found  to  be
         satisfied the conclusion reached would  be  different.   A  further
         arguable error of law arises in the context of  the  absence  of  a
         consideration of whether there be a breach of Article 8.

Relevant Background

 3. The appellant is a national of Jamaica,  whose  date  of  birth  is  12
    September 1978.  On 25 October 2012 she applied for a  third  time  for
    the issue of a derivative  residence  card.   On  4  October  2013  the
    respondent gave her reasons for refusing the  application.   There  was
    insufficient evidence to show that the British citizen child  would  be
    unable to remain in the United Kingdom if she was forced to leave.  She
    had not provided evidence as to why the child's father  was  not  in  a
    position to care for the child if she was forced to leave the  country.
    It was also noted that she provided  letters  of  support  from  family
    members in the United Kingdom.  There was no evidence to  suggest  that
    they could not care for the child in substitution for her.   It  should
    be noted that any unwillingness to assume care responsibility  was  not
    by itself sufficient for the  claimed  primary  carer  to  assert  that
    another direct relative or guardian was unable to care for the  British
    citizen child.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 4. Both parties were legally represented before Judge Oliver.   The  judge
    received oral evidence from the appellant and from her sister,  Patrice
    Howell.  The bundle of documents compiled by the appellant's solicitors
    included letters from the child's father.

 5. The appellant's evidence was that the child's father took  no  part  in
    her life.  The child lived with her, and it was she  who  took  her  to
    school and to the doctor.  They lived with  her  twin  sister  and  her
    children.  The father of the child was married to  another  woman,  who
    knew nothing about the child.  The twin  sister's  elder  daughter  was
    confined to a wheelchair, and her sister did not  know  how  she  would
    manage both her own two children and  [SC]  if  the  appellant  had  to
    return to Jamaica.

 6. In cross-examination, she said she did not know whether her  daughter's
    father was still living with his wife and two children.  At the time of
    the relationship he was, but at that time she had not known that he was
    married.  The relationship he had with her had  lasted  about  a  year.
    She now had another child, but she was  no  longer  with  that  child's
    father, and she did not know the father's immigration status.  She  had
    come to the United Kingdom from  Jamaica  in  the  year  2000,  leaving
    behind a son, who was only aged  8  months.   She  explained  that  her
    brother had told her that coming to England would make  a  better  life
    for her.  She had hoped to bring him here.   She  had  not  thought  to
    report  [SC]'s  father  to  social  services  in  order  to  get  child
    maintenance support from him.

 7. In her evidence, Patrice Howell said she had come to the United Kingdom
    in 1999, and currently had discretionary  leave  to  remain  for  three
    years.  She had applied to extend that leave.  The appellant  had  been
    living with her since her arrival  in  the  year  2000.   Her  own  two
    children were British citizens.  She did not live with either of  their
    fathers.  She was not in a relationship with one of  the  fathers,  but
    she was with the other father.  [SC] at times called her mum as well as
    the appellant.  In cross-examination, she explained that when she  took
    her elder daughter to hospital, the appellant looked  after  her  other
    children.  She described her older daughter's condition as MS.

 8. In a subsequent decision, the judge set out his findings at  paragraphs
    [11] onwards.  He found that the appellant was  the  primary  carer  of
    [SC] and that if the appellant was required to leave the United Kingdom
    he concluded that [SC] would in practice be unable to remain.  He  went
    on to explain why he reached this conclusion.

 9. In paragraph [12] he found that [SC]'s father, [RC], had ILR  and  that
    [SC] had  a  British  passport.   He  had  heard  seriously  conflicted
    evidence as to the involvement of [SC]'s father in her  life.   In  her
    statement, the appellant stated he saw his daughter about  twice  every
    three months and was unreliable  in  marking  her  birthday.   In  oral
    evidence, the appellant had given the date of the last contact as being
    a non-appearance by him on [SC]'s birthday  before  last,  which  would
    have been April 2013.  The judge said he somehow had to reconcile  this
    with two letters from [SC]'s father, both undated, in which  he  stated
    he was fully involved in her life and went to visit her three  times  a
    week and picked her up from school:

         I find considerable reason to doubt whether the evidence I received
         was reliable.

10. At paragraph [13], he said that the position he found himself was  best
    approached in the manner expressed in Sanneh, R (on the application of)
    v Secretary of State for Work and Pensions and other  [2013]  EWHC  793
    (Admin).  This was a judgment of Hickinbottom J and the  passage  cited
    by Judge Oliver is at paragraph [101]:

         In fact, as cases such as Dereci and Harrison make clear,  Sambrano
         is not to  be  construed  as  Mr  Knafler  contends.   Those  cases
         properly emphasise that the  determinative  question  in  right  to
         reside cases based on Articles 20 and 21 of the TFEU is whether, as
         a matter of fact, an EU citizen would be compelled to leave the  EU
         to follow a non-EU national upon whom he is dependent.   That  does
         not envisage  an  irrebutable  assumption,  but  rather  a  context
         specific and evidence driven investigation of whether  there  would
         or might be such compulsion.

11. At paragraph [14], the judge said he bore in mind that  the  background
    facts in this appeal were highly unattractive from the public  interest
    aspect.  The appellant had spent many years in the  United  Kingdom  in
    breach of immigration law.  She had virtually abandoned  her  18-month-
    old child in order to pursue a better economic life  in  the  UK.   Her
    evidence was the involvement of the father of the child she  had  borne
    in the United Kingdom had been less than  reliable.   Her  twin  sister
    until recently never had leave to remain and had worked  in  breach  of
    immigration  law.   One  of  the  twin  sister's  children  regrettably
    suffered what appeared to be a  serious  disorder,  "the  cost  to  the
    public purse of this must of course be met, but it adds to  a  cost  to
    the public purse of  the  overall  dependency,  which  would  not  have
    occurred if Immigration Rules had been respected".

12. However, the judge continued in paragraph [15], he found  that  refusal
    of the appeal would in reality lead to the removal  of  [SC].   It  was
    better for her brought up in the United Kingdom, the only country where
    she had ever lived.  She had now lived here for  over  six  years.   He
    found that  in  the  circumstances  it  was  undoubtedly  in  her  best
    interests under Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration
    Act 2009 to remain in the United Kingdom with her mother:

         I am satisfied the mother is effectively the sole  carer  and  that
         the father will be unable to fulfil this role in her absence.

13. At paragraph [16] the judge said:

         I therefore find that if unable to reside means only by application
         of law, then the appeal must be dismissed; if it means in practice,
         then the decision on the appeal is more questionable.  I find  that
         it means the former  and  that  the  interests  of  [SC]  would  be
         protected by the  need  for  a  further  decision  on  whether  the
         appellant is to be removed.

The Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

14. It is only necessary to refer  to  ground  1  of  the  application  for
    permission to appeal settled by Counsel.  It was  submitted  the  judge
    had misdirected himself in holding that it was necessary for  there  to
    be a removal decision in order for Regulation 15A  to  be  engaged.   A
    person's right to reside under EU law could not be deemed only to arise
    once removal action was taken against that person.  By the judge's  own
    findings, the appellant satisfied Regulation 15A and she was  therefore
    entitled to a derivative residence card.

The Rule 24 Response and Attempted Cross-Appeal

15. Mr John Parkinson apparently settled the Rule 24 response opposing  the
    appeal, although the  Rule  24  response  is  not  on  file.   However,
    according to an application for permission  to  cross-appeal  dated  30
    November 2014, which was  settled  by  Michael  Shiliday,  Senior  Home
    Office Presenting Officer, Mr Parkinson said in the  Rule  24  response
    that he was unable to respond in detail  as  the  IAC  in  Newport  had
    omitted to provide a  copy  of  the  determination  with  the  grounds.
    However he observed from the Secretary of State's  refusal  letter  and
    the Presenting Officer's  attendance  note  that  the  appellant's  own
    evidence appeared to indicate that  the  child's  father  was  able  to
    provide care for the child.

16. On 20 November 2014 the Secretary of State applied out of time to cross-
    appeal.  The grounds for seeking to cross-appeal are on  file.   It  is
    only necessary to refer to ground 1.  Ground 1 was that the  judge  had
    erred at paragraph [15] of his decision in finding that in reality  the
    British citizen child would  be  compelled  to  leave  the  UK  if  the
    appellant was removed, as in making this  finding  the  judge  had  not
    actually reconciled the conflicting evidence before him referred to  in
    paragraph [12] of his decision.

17. On 21  November  2014  Judge  Drabu  heard  the  Secretary  of  State's
    application for permission to cross-appeal  at  Field  House.   In  his
    written submissions resisting  the  application,  Mr  Kirk  of  Counsel
    submitted it was unclear to what extent there was  a  conflict  between
    [RC]'s letters and the  evidence  of  the  appellant,  given  that  the
    letters were written prior to the submission of the  appellant's  first
    application on 15 December 2011.  But even  if  there  was  a  conflict
    between [RC]'s letters and the appellant's evidence, that conflict  was
    immaterial because in the  letters  [RC]  clearly  confirmed  that  the
    appellant was [SC]'s primary carer and expressly stated that [SC] could
    not live with him.  But even if the judge had failed to  reconcile  the
    conflict of [RC]'s precise level of involvement in  [SC]'s  life,  that
    failure could not have any bearing on the  judge's  finding  that  [RC]
    would not care for [SC] in the appellant's absence.

18. After hearing from both Mr Kirk and Mr Shiliday, Judge Drabu  dismissed
    the Secretary of State's application for permission.  However,  he  did
    so as a First-tier Tribunal Judge, thus giving the Secretary  of  State
    the opportunity to make a renewed application for permission to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal.

19. Judge Drabu's written decision is dated 4 December 2014, and it is said
    to have been promulgated on 20 February 2015.  In his decision he  said
    that he had informed Mr Shiliday that his application for permission to
    cross-appeal was refused for  timeliness  and  also  that  the  grounds
    advanced did not raise arguable grounds to establish a  material  error
    of law.  He said that Mr Shiliday had informed him that  he  would  let
    the Tribunal know within three days whether the respondent had plans to
    appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  against  the  decision  to  refuse  the
    application.  He said that to date he had not heard from him.

20. In fact, Mr Shiliday had applied in-time for permission  to  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal from Judge Drabu's decision. This is  apparent  from
    other documents on file, including the document settled by Mr  Shiliday
    on 30 November 2014 and a memorandum  from  the  First-tier  Permission
    Applications Unit in Loughborough dated 16 January 2015.

21. Insofar as it is material, I find that due to administrative error  and
    confusion the renewed application for permission  to  cross-appeal  was
    never processed.




The Error of Law Hearing

22. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, and if so, how this decision should be remade, Ms  King  submitted
    that the decision of the Court of Appeal in Sanneh [2015] EWCA  Civ  49
    supported  the  judge's  finding  of  fact  that  the  child  would  be
    practically compelled to leave the country if her mother was forced  to
    leave.  The judge's only error was the legal one of imposing a  further
    requirement that the mother should be served with a  removal  decision.
    The judge's error on this issue  did  not  contaminate  his  clear  and
    sustainable finding of fact, and accordingly  the  decision  should  be
    remade in the appellant's favour, without  the  need  for  any  further
    hearing.

23. On behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  Mr  Kandola  submitted  that
    questions of fact and law were intermingled.  The judge had not  really
    grappled with the inconsistencies in the evidence, and so there  should
    be a de novo hearing.

Discussion

24. The parties are in agreement that the judge misdirected himself in  law
    in holding that it was necessary for the appellant to be served with  a
    removal decision before she could qualify for the issue of a derivative
    residence card as the primary carer  of  a  British  national.   Absent
    recognition by the Secretary of State that the appellant has a right of
    residence under Regulation 15A, the appellant's status here is illegal,
    and thus she is  required  to  leave  the  country.   So  the  risk  of
    compulsory departure is inherent in the appellant's situation, and  the
    judge was wrong to hold that she  did  not  qualify  for  a  derivative
    residence card because her removal was not imminent.  Accordingly,  the
    decision must be set aside and remade.

25. The more difficult question is how the decision should be  remade.   On
    this issue, I do not find it necessary  to  decide  whether  the  Upper
    Tribunal should or should not grant the Secretary of  State  permission
    to cross-appeal in accordance with ground 1 of the cross-appeal settled
    by Mr Shiliday.  I am satisfied that John Parkinson of  the  Specialist
    Appeals Team raised  in  the  Rule  24  response  the  issue  which  is
    canvassed in ground 1 of the  cross-appeal,  albeit  not  in  the  same
    terms.  Put broadly, it has always been the Secretary of  State's  case
    by way of a Rule 24 response that the outcome of the appeal was correct
    as the child could be cared for by her father in substitution  for  her
    mother, and thus the child was not practically compelled to  leave  the
    United Kingdom with her mother.

26. There are passages in Judge Oliver's decision  in  which  his  line  of
    reasoning could be  said  to  be  fully  compliant  with  the  required
    approach, as illuminated by Hickinbottom J in Sanneh.   But  there  are
    other passages in which he strays off line, such as in paragraph  [15],
    where he finds it would be in the child's best interest  to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom with her mother.  That is not in itself a sufficient
    reason to find that the child would be compelled to leave  the  country
    with her mother.  As stated in Harrison (Jamaica) and  AB  (Morocco)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  1736  at
    paragraph 66 (cited by Hickinbottom J at paragraph 17 of his judgment):



         Even if a non-EU national is not relied upon to  provide  financial
         support, typically there will be strong emotional and psychological
         ties within the family and separation will be likely  significantly
         to rupture those ties, thereby diminishing the  enjoyment  of  life
         for the family members who remain.  Yet is plainly not the case, as
         Dereci makes clear and  Mr  Drabble  [Counsel  for  the  appellant]
         accepts, that this consequence will be sufficient to engage EU law.
          Furthermore, if Mr Drabble's submission were correct, it would jar
         with the description of the Zambrano principle as applying only  in
         exceptional circumstances, as the court in  Dereci  observed.   The
         principle would regularly be engaged.

27. In the light of the judge's earlier finding that the appellant has been
    less than reliable on the topic  of  the  involvement  of  the  child's
    father in her life, I consider that the judge has  not  given  adequate
    reasons at the end of paragraph [15] for holding that the father  would
    be unable to fulfil the role of sole carer in the mother's absence.  It
    would clearly be undesirable for  the  child  to  be  parted  from  her
    mother, but that is not the test.

28. The line taken by the Secretary of State in  the  refusal  decision  is
    consistent  with  the  Secretary  of  State's  published  guidance   to
    caseworkers dated 12 December 2012 quoted by Mr  Shiliday,  and  it  is
    also consistent with the authorities discussed by Hickinbottom J.   The
    guidance provides inter alia as follows:

         28.  An example of when a person may be  considered  unsuitable  to
             care for a child would be where  there  are  child  protection
             issues  which  prevent  the  child  being  placed  with   this
             particular relative/legal guardian - for example as  a  result
             of a particular criminal conviction or because of findings  in
             family law proceedings.  Another example might  be  where  the
             person in question would be unable to care for the  child  due
             to a physical or mental disability.

         29.  A lack of financial resources or an  unwillingness  to  assume
             care responsibility would not, by itself,  be  sufficient  for
             the primary carer to assert that another  direct  relative  or
             guardian is unable  to  care  for  a  British  citizen.   Case
             workers are to work from the assumption that  where  there  is
             another direct relative or legal guardian in the UK, that they
             can care for the British citizen unless  there  is  sufficient
             evidence to the contrary.

29. In conclusion, I consider that the judge did not give adequate  reasons
    for finding that there was not another direct relative who  could  care
    for the British citizen child in the mother's absence.

Conclusion

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law,  and
accordingly the decision is set aside in its entirety.  None of the  judge's
findings of fact shall be preserved.

Directions

This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor House for a  de
novo hearing before any judge apart from Judge M R Oliver.

None of the findings of fact of the previous Tribunal shall be preserved.

My time estimate for the fresh hearing is two hours.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 27 May 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
