
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/42736/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 11 September 2014                            |On 02 October 2014         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Rene Jones
                        [No anonymity direction made]

                                                                    Claimant

Representation:

For the claimant: Ms S Naik
For the respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The claimant, Rene Jones, date of  birth  14.10.80,  is  a  citizen  of
    Gambia.

 2. This is the appeal of the Secretary of State against the  determination
    of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Newberry,  who  allowed  the  claimant's
    appeal against the decision of the respondent to refuse his application
    for leave to remain in the UK as the spouse of a British citizen.   The
    Judge heard the appeal on 24.2.14.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford granted permission to appeal on 16.5.14.

 4. Thus the matter came before me on 3.7.14 as  an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 5. In my decision promulgated on 9.7.14, I found that there was  an  error
    of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  such
    that the determination  of  Judge  Newberry  should  be  set  aside  in
    relation to the findings and conclusion on article 8. As there  was  no
    cross appeal against the decision in respect of the findings dismissing
    the appeal on immigration grounds,  that  part  of  the  decision  must
    stand. I adjourned the re-making of the decision in the appeal to allow
    the opportunity for written submissions by  either  party  and  excused
    attendance, on the basis that both parties agreed  that  there  was  no
    need to adduce further evidence.

 6. Both parties were represented  when  the  resumed  hearing  was  listed
    before me  on  11.9.14  and  made  further  submissions.  Having  heard
    submissions I reserved my decision, which I now give.

 7. It is unnecessary to repeat here the reasons for which I found an error
    of law in relation to the article 8 part of the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal, but have annexed that decision to this determination.

 8. The relevant background can be summarised as follows. The claimant came
    to the UK as a student in 2000. His leave  was  extended  to  2003  but
    thereafter he remained in the UK without any valid leave,  i.e.  as  an
    overstayer.  In  2009  he  was  convicted  of  possession  of  a  false
    instrument  with  intent  (a  false  birth  certificate)  and  given  a
    suspended sentence of imprisonment, but there was no attempt to  remove
    him. A number of  subsequent  applications  for  leave  to  remain,  on
    grounds of long residence and article 8 ECHR, were refused. In December
    2012 he made an application for leave to remain  as  the  spouse  of  a
    British citizen, which was refused in March 2013. He  pursued  judicial
    review of that refusal and the Secretary of State was invited to make a
    further decision, effectively giving the claimant a  right  of  appeal.
    That further decision, made on 1.10.13, was to refuse  his  application
    and it was the appeal against that decision  which  came  before  Judge
    Newberry on 24.2.14.

 9. The claimant is now the father of a  British  citizen  child,  born  on
    21.8.14. I therefore must have regard to the welfare and best interests
    of the child under section 55 and bear in mind that neither  the  child
    nor the mother can be required to leave the  UK.  As  this  is  an  in-
    country application, if I proceed to consider article  8  ECHR  outside
    the Rules, I must also take the  best  interests  of  the  child  as  a
    primary, though not necessary paramount, consideration.

10. At  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  claimant's  represented  apparently
    conceded that the appellant could not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

11. As the finding of the First-tier Tribunal that  the  claimant  did  not
    meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules has not been appealed  I
    must proceed on the basis that for one reason  or  another,  either  as
    conceded or found at the First-tier Tribunal that the claimant does not
    meet either Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE.

12. In any event, there has been no issue  in  any  event  in  relation  to
    276ADE, as it is pretty obvious that the  claimant  cannot  demonstrate
    that he has no ties to his home country, including social, cultural and
    family.

13. In relation to Appendix FM, the Secretary of State considered that  the
    claimant does not  meet  the  suitability  requirements  of  S-LTR  1.6
    because of his criminal conviction and his presence is not conducive to
    the  public  good  because  his  conduct  (including  his  conviction),
    character, associations, or other reasons make it undesirable to  allow
    him to remain in the UK. There were other reasons given for not meeting
    the requirements of Appendix FM for  leave  to  remain  as  a  partner,
    including that as he was in the UK with no lawful leave then he did not
    meet the immigration requirements of E-LTRP 2.2 and EX1 did  not  apply
    as there were not insurmountable obstacles to  continuing  family  life
    with that partner outside the UK.

14. Ms Naik did not argue that I should now consider whether  the  claimant
    meets either S-LTR or E-LTRP, even though EX1(a)  might  be  argued  in
    relation to the appellant's child.

15. For completeness, I indicate that I am satisfied that the refusal under
    the suitability requirements was entirely  justified.  The  matter  for
    which he was convicted was a serious offence,  possession  of  a  false
    birth certificate, used as identification in order to illegally  obtain
    employment, and which offence seriously undermines immigration control.
    On the other hand, I take into account that  he  received  a  suspended
    sentence and no action was taken at the time to remove him from the  UK
    on the basis that his presence was not conducive to public good. I take
    into account the finding of Judge Newberry at �24 of the  determination
    that the claimant was genuinely sorry for his actions  and  whilst  the
    birth certificate falsely suggested birth in the UK, the  identity  and
    date of birth were, apparently, correct. I'm not satisfied that amounts
    to any significant mitigation at all. I  take  into  account  that  his
    conviction would now be regarded as spent  and  how  long  ago  he  was
    sentence, in 2009,  and  the  length  of  the  sentence  at  40  weeks,
    suspended. It is also relevant to this consideration under this heading
    that the claimant was unlawfully present in the UK. He should have left
    in 2003 but did not do so. A series of applications, all of which  were
    refused, demonstrates that he is determined to remain in the UK.

16. The first question I have to answer is the same as that raised  in  the
    Secretary of State's grounds of  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    whether there is any  justification  for  considering  article  8  ECHR
    private and family life outside the Immigration  Rules,  on  the  basis
    that there are compelling circumstances  insufficiently  recognised  in
    the Rules and which may render the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    unjustifiably harsh.

17. In MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192, the Court of  Appeal  held
    that in relation to deportation cases the 'new' Immigration Rules are a
    complete code but involve the application of  a  proportionality  test.
    Whether that is done within the new rules or outside the new  rules  as
    part of the article 8 general law was described as a sterile  question,
    as either way the result should be  the  same;  what  matters  is  that
    proportionality balancing exercise is required to be carried  out.  The
    Court of Appeal  observed  that  it  was  inclined  to  the  view  that
    insurmountable  obstacles  (the  test  under  exception  EX1)  did  not
    literally mean obstacles  which  it  is  impossible  to  surmount,  but
    implied a reasonableness test. In other words, a  proportionality  test
    is required whether under the new rules or article 8. MF (Nigeria)  was
    followed in Kabia (MF: para 398  -  "exceptional  circumstances")  2013
    UKUT 00569 (IAC).

18. In Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 00640
    (IAC) the Upper Tribunal set out, inter alia, that on the current state
    of the authorities:


            (b)    after applying the requirements of the  Rules,  only  if
           there may be arguably good grounds for granting leave to  remain
           outside them is it necessary for Article 8 purposes to go on  to
           consider  whether  there  are   compelling   circumstances   not
           sufficiently recognised under them: R (on  the  application  of)
           Nagre v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2013]  EWHC
           720 (Admin);


           (c)    the term "insurmountable obstacles" in provisions such as
           Section EX.1 are not obstacles which are impossible to surmount:
           MF (Article 8 - new rules)  Nigeria  [2012]  UKUT  00393  (IAC);
           Izuazu (Article 8 - new rules) [2013]  UKUT  00045  (IAC);  they
           concern  the  practical  possibilities  of  relocation.  In  the
           absence of such insurmountable obstacles,  it  is  necessary  to
           show other non-standard and  particular  features  demonstrating
           that removal will be unjustifiably harsh: Nagre.


19. It is illustrative that in Gulshan the Upper Tribunal  considered  that
    it was not unduly harsh for a husband who originated from Pakistan  but
    was now a British national, to return to Pakistan with his wife who was
    seeking leave to remain as his spouse. The panel acknowledged that  the
    couple would suffer some hardship, as he had been in the UK since 2002,
    he had worked here and was receiving a pension, and housing benefit and
    other state benefits,  some  of  which  could  not  be  transferred  to
    Pakistan.


20. In Shahzad (Art 8: legitimate aim) [2014] UKUT 00085 (IAC),  the  Upper
    Tribunal also held:

    (i)  Failure on the part of the Secretary of State to identify  in  her
         decision any legitimate aim under Article 8(2) of the ECHR does not
         prevent a court or tribunal from seeking to do so on the  basis  of
         the materials before it.

     (ii)  "Maintenance of effective immigration  control"  whilst  not  as
         such a legitimate aim under Article 8(2) of the ECHR  can  normally
         be assumed to be either an aspect of  "prevention  of  disorder  or
         crime" or an aspect of "economic  well-being  of  the  country"  or
         both.

     (iii)  "[P]revention of disorder or crime" is  normally  a  legitimate
         aim both in expulsion cases where there has been  criminal  conduct
         on the part of the claimant and in expulsion cases where there have
         only been breaches of immigration law.

     (iv)  MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 held that the new  immigration
         rules regarding deportation of a foreign criminal  are  a  complete
         code. This was because  of  the  express  requirement  in  them  at
         paragraph 398 to have regard to exceptional circumstances and other
         factors.

     (v)     It follows from this that any other rule which has  a  similar
         provision will also constitute a complete code;

     (vi)   Where an area of the  rules  does  not  have  such  an  express
         mechanism, the approach in R (Nagre) v Secretary of State  for  the
         Home Department [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) ([29]-[31]  in  particular)
         and Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013]  UKUT
         640 (IAC) should be followed: i.e. after applying the  requirements
         of the rules, only if  there  may  be  arguably  good  grounds  for
         granting leave to remain outside them is it necessary for Article 8
         purposes  to  go  on  to  consider  whether  there  are  compelling
         circumstances not sufficiently recognised under them.

21. These judgments have made it clear that the question of proportionality
    must be looked at in the context of the Immigration Rules with no  need
    to go on to a specific assessment under Article 8 if it is  clear  from
    the facts that  there  are  no  particular  compelling  or  exceptional
    circumstances requiring that course to be taken. That  is  an  approach
    consistent with the Court of Appeal in MF (Nigeria) and Huang. Where an
    area of the Rules does not have an express mechanism, such as found  in
    deportation appeals, the approach should be  that  after  applying  the
    requirements of the Rules, only if there may be arguably  good  grounds
    for granting leave to remain outside them is it necessary for Article 8
    purposes  to  go  on  to  consider   whether   there   are   compelling
    circumstances not sufficiently recognised under them.

22. I further note that the  suitability  requirement  of  Appendix  FM  is
    itself an assessment of  proportionality.  It  is  also  arguable  that
    276ADE is such a complete code, since at formulated for application  to
    this case it requires an assessment as to whether if the  claimant  has
    not completed at least 20 years lawful residence he has lost  all  ties
    with his home country, including social, cultural and family.  This  is
    in effect an exceptional circumstances or  proportionality  assessment,
    making provision for leave to remain where a person does not  meet  the
    long residence requirements but has no remaining  ties  with  his  home
    country, including social, cultural and family.  However,  the  crucial
    issue in this case is not any stand alone private life claim,  but  the
    claimant's family life circumstances.

23. I found in my error of law decision that the First-tier Tribunal was in
    error to go on to consider the  claimant's  circumstances  outside  the
    Immigration Rules under article 8 ECHR, without having  identified  any
    compelling circumstances to justify doing so.

24. I have however considered afresh  whether  there  are  such  compelling
    circumstances  in  this  case  insufficiently  recognised   under   the
    Immigration Rules. It is appropriate to do so  not  least  because  the
    claimant is now the father of the recently born child. In doing  so,  I
    have taken into account all those factors urged upon me by Ms Naik  and
    as are disclosed in the papers before me.

25. I take into account  factors  referenced  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision, including that all of the claimant's family are  now  in  the
    UK, including his mother and he has no remaining family in the  Gambia.
    His wife and child are British citizens and his wife was  born,  raised
    and educated in the UK. She has no connection with the  Gambia  She  is
    close to  her  family,  leaving  nearby.  She  is  in  the  process  of
    qualifying as a lawyer and is in full-time employment.  She  relies  on
    the claimant to care for their child whilst she pursues her career.

26. I am also required to take account of section  117B  of  the  2002  Act
    that:

         (4)  Little weight should be given to-

             (a) a private life, or

             (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,  that  is
             established by a person at a time when the person  is  in  the
             United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration  status  is
         precarious.

         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom.

27. In  the  circumstances,  I  accord  little  weight  to  the  claimant's
    relationship formed at a time when he was in the UK unlawfully and  his
    immigration status was precarious.

28. Without having to repeat them, I also have to  take  account  of  those
    matter set out above relating to the claimant's suitability,  including
    his conduct and criminal conviction. He remained in the  UK  unlawfully
    for a number of years. He has no legitimate expectation to be  able  to
    remain simply because that is his desire or because of his relationship
    and child.

29. I do not accept Ms Naik's submission that had the claimant been able to
    reach consideration of EX1 he would have been able to demonstrate  that
    there were insurmountable obstacles to continuing family  life  outside
    the UK, or that it would be a disproportionate, unjustifiably harsh and
    perverse outcome. Insurmountable involves  an  assessment  of  all  the
    circumstances. In Gulshan it was held  that  the  term  "insurmountable
    obstacles" in provisions such as Section EX.1 are not  obstacles  which
    are impossible to surmount; they concern the practical possibilities of
    relocation. In the absence of  such  insurmountable  obstacles,  it  is
    necessary  to  show  other   non-standard   and   particular   features
    demonstrating that removal will be unjustifiably harsh.  There  may  be
    difficulties and some hardship in relocating, but if they are such that
    can be overcome, the  obstacles  are  not  insurmountable.  Whilst  the
    partner has never visited the Gambia and is established with  work  and
    family in  the  UK,  and  all  the  other  attendant  circumstances  as
    referenced elsewhere in this determination, I  am  not  satisfied  that
    there  is  sufficient  evidence   to   demonstrate   that   there   are
    insurmountable obstacles. Should they choose to accompany the claimant,
    and that is a matter for them,  their  child  is  young  and  will  not
    appreciate any change of  circumstances.  The  sponsor  will  have  the
    support of the claimant returning to his own country. She will be  able
    to use the qualifications obtained in the UK  and  her  legal  training
    will no doubt put her in a more favourable position than many others in
    such circumstances.

30. I have taken into account the claimant's marriage to a British  citizen
    and that he is the father of a British  citizen  child.  However,  both
    that relationship and the conception and birth of that child took place
    at a time when he had no lawful status in the UK  and  his  immigration
    status was precarious. He does not become entitled to remain in the  UK
    simply because he has fathered a child here.

31. I bear in mind that  the  best  interests  of  a  child  are  generally
    considered to be raised by both parents, but best interests  is  not  a
    trump card and has to be considered in the context of the facts of  the
    case and in the evidential round.

32. I also bear in mind 117B(6)  that  in  a  non-deport  case  the  public
    interest does not require removal  of  the  claimant  where  he  has  a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a child and it  would
    be unreasonable to expect the child to leave the UK. In effect, this is
    identical to that under EX1(a), with a qualifying child meaning  either
    a British citizen or a child who has lived in the UK for 7 years.

33. However, I have to consider whether the public  interest  requires  the
    claimant's removal where, as I accept, he has a genuine and  subsisting
    relationship with his child. This involves an assessment as to  whether
    it would be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.  In  making
    such an assessment it cannot be the case that it is never reasonable to
    expect a British citizen child to leave the UK,  otherwise  that  would
    have been provided for in the statute. Instead, what is required is  an
    assessment of all the circumstances.

34. In  Azimi-Moayed  and  others  (decisions  affecting  children;  onward
    appeals) [2013] UKUT 197, the Upper Tribunal gave guidance on decisions
    affecting children, highlighting that very young children  are  focused
    on parents and that 7 years from age 4 is likely to be more significant
    than the first 7 years of life:

         "Decisions affecting children

          "(1) The case  law  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  has  identified  the
         following principles to assist  in  the  determination  of  appeals
         where children are affected by the appealed decisions:

             i) As a starting point it is in the best interests of children
             to be with both their parents and if both  parents  are  being
             removed from  the  United  Kingdom  then  the  starting  point
             suggests that so should dependent children who  form  part  of
             their household unless there are reasons to the contrary.

             ii) It is generally in the interests of children to have  both
             stability and continuity of social and  educational  provision
             and the benefit of growing up in the  cultural  norms  of  the
             society to which they belong.

             iii) Lengthy residence in a country other than  the  state  of
             origin  can  lead  to  development  of  social  cultural   and
             educational ties that it would be inappropriate to disrupt, in
             the absence of compelling reason to the contrary. What amounts
             to lengthy residence is not clear cut  but  past  and  present
             policies have identified seven years as a relevant period.

             iv) Apart from the terms of published policies and rules,  the
             Tribunal notes that seven years from age four is likely to  be
             more significant to a child that  the  first  seven  years  of
             life. Very young children are focussed on their parents rather
             than their peers and are adaptable.

             v) Short periods of residence, particularly ones without leave
             or the reasonable expectation of leave  to  enter  or  remain,
             while claims are promptly considered,  are  unlikely  to  give
             rise to private life deserving of respect in  the  absence  of
             exceptional factors. In any event, protection of the  economic
             well-being of society amply justifies removal in such cases."

35. For the reasons set out herein, I am not  satisfied  that  any  of  the
    circumstances of the claimant, his partner and child could properly  be
    described as compelling or in any way exceptional. Neither  do  I  find
    the decision of the Secretary of State unjustifiably harsh.

36. As stated the claimant had no right to be in the  UK.  He  should  have
    left a long time ago. I place no store on his many attempts to seek  to
    remain as evidence of a desire to regularise his status; I regard  such
    as a determined attempt to delay removal and prolong his stay.  He  has
    now formed a relationship with a British  citizen  and  has  a  British
    child. Does that mean that he should now be allowed to  stay?  Are  his
    circumstances  compelling  and   insufficiently   recognised   in   the
    Immigration Rules so that removal would be unjustifiably harsh? Clearly
    each case must be determined on its own facts and I have given  anxious
    scrutiny and consideration to the facts of this case.  It  is  relevant
    that the claimant has not been able to meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules for leave to remain. Article 8 is not intended to  be
    a shortcut to compliance with the Rules. There  is  no  entitlement  to
    remain in the UK just because the claimant  and  his  partner  wish  to
    settle  together  here.  Appendix  FM  and  paragraph  276ADE  are  the
    Secretary of State's response to article  8  private  and  family  life
    claims and are intended to be a complete code. It seems to be that  the
    Immigration Rules recognise such situations as that  of  the  claimant,
    notwithstanding that he  has  no  legal  basis  for  remaining  and  no
    legitimate expectation of being able to do  so.  The  Rules  provide  a
    route to remain which involves an assessment of  the  circumstances  of
    such a person. There is provision for consideration of  the  claimant's
    particular circumstances within those Rules. However, he has a criminal
    conviction for a serious offence and taken with his illegal presence in
    the UK, makes it undesirable to allow him to remain in the UK. He  thus
    failed at the suitability hurdle and does not meet the requirements  of
    the Rules.

37. The public interest in the claimant's removal is stronger in this  case
    because of the criminal conviction  and  the  nature  of  the  offence,
    together with his long illegal stay in the UK.  By  section  117B,  the
    countervailing interests of the claimant in respect of his relationship
    with his partner and any private life  are  reduced  and  carry  little
    weight when he has no  legal  status  and  his  immigration  status  is
    precarious. I have however taken account herein of  the  reasonableness
    of expecting his child to leave the UK to accompany him to the  Gambia,
    and have found that in all  the  circumstances,  and  for  the  reasons
    given, that it would not be unreasonable.

38. On the facts of this case and assessing  the  factors  set  out  above,
    taking the whole matter in the round as a whole, I find that there  are
    here no  compelling  circumstances  insufficiently  recognised  in  the
    Immigration Rules that would justify granting leave to  remain  outside
    the Rules under article 8 ECHR on the basis that the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State is unjustifiably harsh.

39. Even if I found that there were compelling circumstances and went on to
    consider the claimant's article 8 rights to  respect  for  private  and
    family life under article 8 ECHR outside the Rules, applying  the  five
    Razgar steps, I would have reached the conclusion that the decision  of
    the Secretary of State is not disproportionate.

40. Whilst there is family life  that  would  be  interfered  with  by  the
    claimant's removal such as to engage article 8, the crucial  issue,  of
    course, is the proportionality balancing exercise between the rights of
    the claimant and his family on the  one  hand  and  on  the  other  the
    legitimate and necessary aim of protecting the economic  well-being  of
    the UK through the application of Immigration controls.  I  have  taken
    into account all those factors set out above, including placing  little
    weight on the relationship formed by the claimant with his partner when
    he had no lawful status in the UK and his  immigration  status  was  at
    best precarious. I  take  into  account  that  he  has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with his child, a  British  citizen,  and  take
    into account all those factors that relate to the  British  nationality
    and residence of that child and the mother.  However,  there  are  very
    significant factors weighing in the balance against the claimant and in
    favour of the public interest in ensuring his  removal,  not  least  of
    which is his criminal record and the particular offence which tends  to
    undermine immigration control.

41. Whilst it would obviously be desirable for the child to  be  raised  by
    the claimant and his partner, on the  facts  of  this  case  I  do  not
    consider it to be unreasonable to expect that family  relationship  and
    for the child to leave the UK and accompany the claimant to the Gambia.



42. It is of course a matter for the child's mother  and  the  claimant  to
    decide as to whether she and the child will follow. However, that  they
    cannot be required to leave is not the same thing as a finding that  it
    would be unreasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.  As  stated,
    I have found that it would not be unreasonable to expect a small  child
    with no conception of life outside the family  home  to  accompany  the
    claimant and his spouse, should they choose to do so.

Conclusion & Decision

43. For the reasons set out above, I find that the claimant has  failed  to
    demonstrate that removal from the  UK  would  infringe  his  article  8
    rights to respect for private and family life. As stated  above,  there
    was no cross-appeal against  the  decision  dismissing  the  appeal  on
    immigration grounds and that part of the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal must also stand.

                    The appeal is dismissed on immigration grounds.

                    The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.
Signed: [pic]     Date: 29 September 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup



Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of the  Asylum  and
Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.
Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.


Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
(rule 23A (costs) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
2005 and section 12(4)(a) of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007).

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: the appeal has been dismissed.
Signed: [pic]     Date: 29 September 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup
