
[pic]
IAC-HW-MP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/42435/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 June 2014                                |On 15 June 2015               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVID TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                    m b a
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms F Allen of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   Although the appellant to this appeal is, strictly,  the  Secretary  of
    State I have for the sake of consistency  continued  to  refer  to  the
    parties by their original First-tier Tribunal designations.   Thus  the
    Secretary of State continues to be described as "the respondent".

2.   The appellant is a 28 year old citizen of Nigeria (born 23 March  1983)
    who appealed against  the  respondent's  decision  of  7  October  2014
    refusing her application for leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  by
    virtue of Article 8 of the European Convention on  Human  Rights.   The
    basis of her claim is that her  11  year  old  daughter,  R,  has  been
    lawfully resident in the UK since she and her  daughter  came  here  in
    2010.  Her daughter now has an EEA residence permit in  line  with  R's
    father.  R lives with  her  father  but  the  appellant  has  extensive
    contact rights (as ordered by Luton County Court by consent  on  2  May
    2012) and, essentially, the child now spends  as  much  time  with  her
    mother as she does with her father.

3.   The application was refused by the respondent on 7  October  2014.   In
    the reasons for refusal letter of that date the  respondent  held  that
    the appellant did not meet  the  requirements  of  Appendix  FM  and/or
    paragraph 276ADE of the  Immigration  Rules  and  that  there  were  no
    exceptional  circumstances  requiring  the  respondent  to  grant   the
    application outside the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  It  was
    noted that the appellant had entered the United Kingdom  on  2  January
    2010 with a visit visa which  had  expired  on  2  July  2010  and  had
    overstayed without leave.

4.   The appellant appealed.  In a decision promulgated on 9  February  2015
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Ferguson allowed the  appeal.   It  had  been
    accepted [4] by the appellant that she did not meet the requirements of
    the Immigration Rules and was relying only on  Article  8  outside  the
    Rules.  The main issue was proportionality with particular reference to
    Section 55 of the Borders etc. Act 2009.   I  set  out  below  relevant
    extracts from the decision on the basis of which he allowed the  appeal
    outside the Rules:

         "16. The substantive reasons given  in  the  respondent's  decision
             refer to a lack of evidence provided by the appellant that she
             was having continued contact with her daughter.  At the appeal
             hearing there was considerable evidence available  that  Ms  A
             was having at least as much contact as provided by the  order,
             and most likely considerably more.  The factual  circumstances
             were not really challenged by the respondent  at  the  hearing
             and  it  is  established  on  the  evidence  that   R   spends
             considerable time with  her  mother,  Ms  A.   ...  Since  the
             contact order the family relationship had improved so  that  R
             now spent more than half the time with  her  mother,  who  was
             responsible   for   many    of    the    important    parental
             responsibilities, such as choice of school  and  liaison  with
             the school.  Although it is expressed in terms  of  'contact',
             the reality is that  R  is  being  raised  in  a  shared  care
             arrangement, spending considerable amounts of each  week  with
             her mother, as well as with her father and stepmother.

         17.  The respondent's decision does not engage with the reality  of
             the situation for this family, relying on a  lack  of  updated
             information about the contact to reach the  decision  that  it
             was not disproportionate to remove.  The best interests  of  R
             are referred to at  paragraph  27  of  the  decision  but  the
             decision to remove Ms A is still made  because  'there  is  no
             evidence of family  life  with  her  daughter  in  the  United
             Kingdom' and because it was considered that  R's  father  'had
             sole responsibility for her' (paragraph 29).

         19.  The considerations set out at Section 117B are not significant
             on the facts  of  this  case.   Although  the  maintenance  of
             immigration control is  still  a  significant  factor  in  the
             public interest, Ms A speaks English and does not rely on  her
             private life or a relationship with a partner  as  reasons  to
             remain in the United Kingdom.  Paragraph 117B acknowledges the
             reduction in  the  public  interest  for  a  genuine  parental
             relationship with a child where it would not be reasonable for
             the child to leave the United Kingdom.

         20.  R and her father are lawfully in the United Kingdom with leave
             afforded to them under  the  EEA  Regulations.   There  is  no
             suggestion that R should  return  to  Nigeria  with  Ms  A  to
             maintain family life there.  The decision is made on the basis
             that it is not disproportionate for Ms A to return to  Nigeria
             and exercise family life with  her  daughter  through  'modern
             means of communication' and occasional visits.  That  decision
             does not take into account that R's father does  not  exercise
             'sole responsibility' for her: the evidence showed that  Ms  A
             has had increasing responsibility  for  R  since  the  contact
             order  in  2012   and   if   anything   now   exercises   more
             responsibility for her 11 year old daughter  than  Mr  O.   In
             view of the fact that Ms A did have sole responsibility for  R
             during the seven years from her birth in 2003 until her  visit
             to the United Kingdom in 2010, that is not surprising.

         21.  R's best interests are met by being raised by both her parents
             even if that involves for her two  separate  households.   The
             evidence about the involvement of her  mother  throughout  her
             life (in contrast to her father who was  entirely  absent  for
             the first seven years) means that it would be disproportionate
             to remove Ms A and thereby disrupt family life between her and
             R.   The  existence  of  Skype  does  not  make  the  decision
             proportionate."

5.   Permission to appeal  was  granted  to  the  Respondent  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Foudy on the grounds that the judge erred in failing  to
    address Appendix FM or to take into account Section 117B  of  the  2002
    Act.  She held that the grounds were arguable.  Thus the matter came on
    before me.

6.   On the question of an error  of  law  Mr  Tufan,  for  the  respondent,
    relied on the grounds and in particular the fact that the judge had not
    fully considered Appendix FM and/or paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration
    Rules.  The judge, he  submitted,  should  have  considered  the  Rules
    notwithstanding the appellant's concession at the  First-tier  Tribunal
    that the appellant did not meet the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The judge should also not have  taken  into  account  paragraph
    117B insofar as it is clear that the child is not a qualifying child as
    she has not been in the United Kingdom for seven years.

7.   I did not call on Ms Allen to reply.  I indicated that I was  satisfied
    that there had been no error of law in the First-tier Tribunal decision
    such that it ought to be set aside and that I would give my reasons  in
    a written decision.  I now do so.

8.   In reaching my decision I have had primary regard to the  recent  Court
    of Appeal decision in SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387 and to the various
    cases referred to in the  court  judgment  which  was  handed  down  as
    recently as 23 April 2015.  It is clear from that  judgment  -  see  in
    particular [44] - that the proper approach should always be to consider
    first whether an applicant satisfies the conditions of the  Immigration
    Rules.  If an applicant does not satisfy the Rules then

         "... if there is a reasonably arguable case under Article  8  which
         has not already been sufficiently dealt with  by  consideration  of
         the application under the substantive provisions of the Rules  then
         in considering that case the individual interests of the  applicant
         and others whose Article 8 rights are in issue should  be  balanced
         against the public interest, including as expressed in  the  Rules,
         in order to make an assessment where the refusal to  grant  LTR  or
         LTE, as the case may be, is disproportionate and hence unlawful  by
         virtue of Section 6(1) of  the  HRA  read  with  Article  8".   [My
         underlining].

9.   Although the judge  did  not  make  a  detailed  consideration  of  the
    Article 8 provisions within the  Rules  he  cannot  be  criticised  for
    failing to do so having regard to the appellant's concession  that  she
    did not in any event meet the requirements of the Rules.  Nor  did  the
    judge specifically give  reasons  for  finding  that  there  were  good
    reasons for considering Article 8 outside the Rules.

10.  But it is, in my judgment, abundantly clear  from  the  facts  of  this
    case as set out in detail  by  the  judge  in  his  decision  that  the
    circumstances are unusual.  The appellant came to the UK with her young
    daughter in 2010 in order to see  her  family  and  also  in  order  to
    introduce her daughter to the child's father.  There  were  undoubtedly
    exceptional and unusual circumstances in  this  case,  particularly  in
    light of the findings of the judge  that  the  responsibility  of  both
    parents towards R is now joint and equal and that for several years the
    child has been spending as much  time  with  her  mother  as  with  her
    father.  Notwithstanding the contact  order,  the  appellant  has  been
    largely responsible for the upbringing and welfare of R throughout  her
    life. There can  be  no  reasonable  doubt  that  the  child  would  be
    adversely affected if her mother were compelled to  return  to  Nigeria
    without her and there is no suggestion that  R  should  accompany  her.
    Indeed R primary residence is in the UK with her father.

11.  Based on the findings of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  which  were
    unquestionably open to him on the evidence, any remittal and re-hearing
    by a First-tier Tribunal Judge would undoubtedly  result  in  the  same
    decision,  namely  that  the  removal  of  the   appellant   would   be
    disproportionate having particular regard to the adverse effect that it
    would have on the child.  In my judgment, if there was any error of law
    by  the  judge  in  failing  to  explain  why  there  were  exceptional
    circumstances enabling him to consider Article  8  outside  the  Rules,
    such an error was not material to the final outcome.

12.  The judge's assessment of Article 8 proportionality outside  the  Rules
    was more than adequate and in itself did not disclose any error of  law
    or of approach to his findings.  For those reasons the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal must stand.



Notice of Decision

There was no error of law in the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  such
that it should be set aside.  The decision shall stand.

No anonymity direction was sought and none is made.



Designated Judge David Taylor
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
12 June 2015

