
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/42960/2014
     IA/42975/2014
     IA/42994/2014
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 February 2016                          |On 24 March 2016              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                        Alpeshkumar Ashokbhai Makwana
                          Payalben Manharbhai Patel
                                    [K M]
                         (anonymity Orders not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr A Arayn of Farani Javid Taylor Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   These are linked appeals against the decisions of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Ross promulgated on 1 June 2015.


2.   The principal Appellant, upon whom the  other  appeals  depend,  is  Mr
    Alpeshkumar  Makwana,  an  Indian  national  born  on  5   July   1983.
    (References herein to 'the Appellant' are references to  the  principal
    Appellant unless the contrary  is  indicated.)  It  is  unnecessary  to
    rehearse in detail his immigration history, which is a matter of record
    on file.


3.   However, it is germane  to  note  that  on  10  May  2014  he  made  an
    application for leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student under the
    points-based system.  That application was refused for reasons set  out
    in a combined 'reasons for  refusal'  letter  ('RFRL')  and  Notice  of
    Immigration Decision  dated  14  October  2014.   The  application  was
    refused  with  reference  to  paragraphs   245ZX(d)   in   respect   of
    maintenance, and also paragraph 245ZX(a) with  reference  to  paragraph
    322(1A) of the Immigration Rules.  I shall return  to  the  refusal  in
    respect of maintenance in due course.


4.   The invocation of paragraph 322(1A) was based upon an exchange  between
    the Secretary of State for the Home Department and a  course  provider,
    International School of Business Studies ('ISBS').  The  Appellant  had
    submitted  certificates  purportedly  from  ISBS  in  support  of   his
    application, and on 2 June 2014 by way of email an enquiry  was  raised
    with ISBS by the Respondent as to the authenticity of those  documents.
    The enquiry was essentially in these terms:

         "Would it be possible please for you to confirm:


         1)    Did  the  individual  named  on  the  certificate  study   at
             International School of Business Studies?


         2)   If so, does the subject taken by the above student match  your
             records?


         3)   Does the reference number,  date  subject  passed,  university
             crest, authorised signatures  and  security  features  on  the
             certificate match your records?"




5.   A response to that enquiry was sent by email on 6 June  2014  from  the
    Director of Business Development at the school.  The response,  so  far
    as it is material, is in the following terms:

         "Thank you for your email below with the attachment  asking  us  to
         confirm the documents attached as  scanned.   I  can  confirm  that
         although the student was sponsored by us  he  was  reported  to  UK
         Border Agency and our sponsorship was withdrawn  in  2011.   I  can
         also confirm that both certificates presented by the named  student
         are forged and a blatant abuse of our name for which we reserve our
         right to take legal action."




6.   The Appellant's application having been refused,  he  appealed  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The appeal was listed for hearing on 28 May  2015
    in accordance with the indication given by the Appellant in his  Notice
    of Appeal that he wished  to  have  an  oral  hearing  of  his  appeal.
    However, on 26  May  2015  representatives  acting  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant wrote to the Tribunal to indicate that the Appellant  now  no
    longer wished to pursue his appeal by way of an oral hearing and  would
    like his appeal to be decided 'on the papers'.


7.   On 27 May 2015 a further letter was sent to the Tribunal  by  facsimile
    transmission setting out submissions  in  respect  of  the  Appellant's
    case, and also including a six page bundle.  The bundle  contained  the
    Notice of  Appeal,  a  short  witness  statement  from  the  Appellant,
    excerpts from the Indian Department of Financial Services  relevant  to
    the financial institution from which the Appellant was claiming he  was
    to be funded, and also an extract from the list of Tier 4 Sponsors.  It
    appears that that communication of 27 May was not sent until very  late
    in the day.  The case had remained in the hearing list for 28 May,  and
    it appears that it was on that date that the  case  was  placed  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Ross for the first time.


8.    It  is  also  apparent  that   Judge   Ross,   having   observed   the
    correspondence of 26 May  -which  he  refers  to  in  his  decision  at
    paragraph 2 - identified that the Appellant no longer  wanted  an  oral
    hearing of his appeal, and although the matter was listed for  an  oral
    hearing the Judge decided to determine the case as a 'paper case'.


9.   It is equally apparent that the materials sent in on 27  May  were  not
    before Judge Ross, who makes no reference to their  existence  anywhere
    in his 'Decision and Reasons'.  It seems to  me  that  this  is  almost
    inevitably a matter that arises by reason for the late delivery of  the
    documents on 27 May, in  circumstances  where  the  Appellant  and  his
    representatives could not reasonably have expected those  documents  to
    reach the Tribunal file by the following morning.  It is  to  be  noted
    that Judge Ross  has  dated  his  decision  28  May  2015  and  it  was
    promulgated on the following Monday, on 1 June 2015.


10.  Judge Ross dismissed the Appellant's appeal.   The  decision  of  Judge
    Ross in particular focuses  upon  the  letter  from  the  International
    School of Business Studies sent by email on 6 June 2014.  Amongst other
    things the Judge also states at paragraph 7 of his  decision:  "I  have
    been unable to assess the Appellant's credibility  by  virtue  of  this
    being dealt with (at the Appellant's request) on the papers."   In  the
    circumstances the Judge dismissed  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.


11.  The Appellant has sought permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    arguing that there was procedural unfairness and/or a material error of
    law in that his representations and supporting bundle  were  not  given
    due consideration by the Tribunal.  Permission to appeal was granted in
    this regard on 14 December 2015 by Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley.


12.  It clearly is the case that the  materials  that  the  Appellant  would
    have liked to have relied upon in the context of his  appeal  were  not
    before Judge Ross.  No criticism is to be made of Judge  Ross  in  this
    regard.  It seems to be  entirely  a  matter  beyond  his  control.   I
    acknowledge that a decision made in the absence of materials that  have
    been submitted to the Tribunal - even if those materials are  submitted
    late - may potentially result in an error of law, and it  seems  to  me
    that what is really germane in this case is the issue of materiality.


13.  This is not in any way to suggest that the  conduct  of  the  Appellant
    and his representatives in submitting the materials very  late  in  the
    day is to be exonerated; but it is often the case that materials arrive
    late and in such circumstances the Tribunal then at the very least  has
    to give some consideration to whether such  late  materials  should  be
    admitted into evidence, and if so then  due  consideration  has  to  be
    given to  them.  In  the  strictest  sense  the  cut-off  date  is  the
    promulgation date, because up until that  point  there  is  always  the
    possibility of re-evaluation of a paper  case  in  light  of  documents
    received after the date set for serving and filing by Directions. Where
    documents received prior to promulgation  do  not  reach  the  Judge  -
    perhaps because of an administrative error - then even though there  is
    no error or fault in the approach taken by the Judge to  the  materials
    before him, there is scope for contending that the Judge  proceeded  on
    the basis of a material misconception of fact amounting to an error  of
    law.


14.  The particular issue that Judge Ross relied upon in his decision is  in
    respect of the  allegation  that  the  Appellant  had  submitted  false
    documents in support  of  his  application.   The  Appellant's  witness
    statement that was included in the materials sent to the Tribunal on 27
    May 2015 says very little on this particular  subject.   Indeed,  apart
    from asserting at paragraph 6 that he was a genuine student who  wishes
    to continue to study, the only particular  engagement  in  the  witness
    statement with the allegation of the use of false documents  is  to  be
    found at paragraph 5.  That paragraph  in  its  entirety  is  in  these
    terms:

         "The second reason for refusal is  that  it  is  asserted  that  my
         educational documents are false.  The certificate was awarded to me
         by  the  college,  after  this,  the   college   had   no   further
         correspondence with me and I was not informed by anyone whether  it
         was closed  or  not,  something  which  I  subsequently  discovered
         myself.  As a result of this I did  not  receive  any  letters  nor
         emails about my visa expiring."




15.  With the best will in the world, it seems to me that that goes  no  way
    at all to addressing the substance of the allegation raised against the
    Appellant and supported  by  the  evidence  to  which  I  have  already
    referred by way of the correspondence with ISBS.   Nothing  further  is
    provided by the Appellant by  way  of  corroborative  evidence  of  his
    attendance at the college: no course work is provided  and  nothing  is
    provided by way of confirmatory statements from any of  his  tutors  or
    fellow students.  The witness statement provides no more than a  denial
    of the allegations.


16.  My attention nonetheless is  drawn  to  the  written  submissions  that
    accompany the Appellants' bundle. After reciting certain  case  law  in
    respect of allegations of forgery and use of false documents, and  also
    seeking to address issues in respect of maintenance, essentially  three
    points are raised in respect of the  Secretary  of  State's  case  with
    regard  to  the  supposedly  false   documents   submitted   with   the
    application.


17.  The three points in summary are these:

    (i) ISBS was no longer  an  accepted  Tier  4  Sponsor,  and  in  those
    circumstances it was argued that little or no weight should be given to
    any communication from that particular institution.


    (ii) It was suggested that it was not clear why it was the Director  of
    Business Development who was responding to  the  query  raised  by  the
    Respondent.


    (iii) It was submitted that the Director of  Business  Development  had
    not adequately answered the specific questions raised by the  Secretary
    of State in her enquiry dated 2 June 2015.


18.  In my judgment there is no substance to any  of  those  three  matters.
    The fact that the International  School  of  Business  Studies  was  no
    longer considered to be an acceptable Tier 4 Sponsor could have  arisen
    for any number of reasons unrelated specifically to a lack of  honesty.
    It seems to me that the circumstantial evidence of  the  school  having
    come off the Tier 4 register is not in and of itself an adequate reason
    to suggest that the information that would have been  provided  to  the
    Secretary of State would  have  been  false  in  any  material  degree,
    particularly when that information is  in  response  to  a  simple  and
    straightforward enquiry.


19.  Further, in my judgment it is neither here nor there  that  it  is  the
    Director of Business Development that has responded to the enquiry.


20.  As regards the third  point,  in  my  judgment  it  is  clear  that  in
    substance each and every one of the enquiries raised by  the  Secretary
    of State has been adequately answered.


21.  Accordingly I can see nothing of substance in  the  matters  raised  in
    the written submissions sent to the First-tier Tribunal, and nothing of
    substance in the Appellant's statement on the issue.


22.  Even if it were otherwise and it  might  be  said  that  those  matters
    would require some further engagement or thought, the  real  difficulty
    here is the matter clearly and precisely identified by  Judge  Ross  in
    his Decision to the effect that the Appellant's election not to  attend
    an oral hearing made it not  possible  for  the  Judge  to  assess  his
    credibility. Ultimately, irrespective of the written submissions, those
    submissions were going to have to be considered in the overall  context
    of  the  materials  submitted  by  the  Secretary  of  State  and   the
    Appellant's evidential response to those materials.


23.  As I have  observed,  evidentially  the  Appellant  makes  no  sort  of
    response to the Secretary of State's materials at all.


24.  In all of the circumstances it seems to me  that  the  absence  of  the
    bundle sent by fax on 27 May 2015 from the consideration of Judge  Ross
    could not in any way have affected the outcome in respect of the  issue
    relating to the  academic  documents  submitted  by  the  Appellant  in
    support of his application.


25.  In any event, even if I am wrong in that regard it  seems  to  me  that
    the Appellant could not possibly have succeeded on his appeal under the
    Immigration Rules because of significant shortfalls in respect  of  the
    requirements with regard to maintenance.


26.  I should preface these comments with the  following  two  observations.
    The Respondent appears to have been in error in the RFRL in considering
    the supporting evidence in respect of maintenance  by  way  of  a  bank
    letter in respect of a loan in the context of  'financial  sponsorship'
    from an institution.  It seems to me that there was no suggestion  that
    the Appellant was being sponsored by the Indian Overseas  Bank  in  the
    same way that some students might be sponsored by a government, or  the
    British Council, or some other international  organisation.   This  was
    evidence  that  was  being  produced  by  the  Appellant  in  order  to
    demonstrate that maintenance funds were available to him,  and  not  to
    show that he was being sponsored by an institution.


27.  The second matter that I should say by way  of  prefacing  what  is  to
    follow is that Judge Ross himself did not engage with the issue of  the
    maintenance in this case at all. (Of course, having found  against  the
    Appellant on 322(1A) grounds it was unnecessary for him to do so.)

28.  Be that as it may, I have had the opportunity of exploring  this  issue
    with  the  representatives  today.   Mr  Arayn  acknowledges  that  the
    Appellant was in effect trying to demonstrate the availability of funds
    by way of a  loan  being  available  to  him  rather  than  by  way  of
    sponsorship.  He also acknowledges the requirement as specified in  the
    RFRL - that the Appellant would need to have demonstrated that  he  had
    available �1,600 for a consecutive 28 day period up to the date of  his
    application.  In this context, again it is acknowledged that because of
    this being a  points-based  system  appeal  the  jurisprudence  of  the
    Tribunal to consider evidence, as it were, after the event  in  respect
    of maintenance is extremely limited.


29.  I turn then to a brief consideration  of  the  supporting  evidence  in
    respect of maintenance.  The letter that is on  file  from  the  Indian
    Overseas Bank is dated 31 May 2014, although erroneously it is referred
    to as being a letter dated 10 May 2014  in  the  Respondent's  decision
    letter.  The dating of this letter is in itself a curiosity given  that
    the application was made on 10 May 2014 and so the letter in support of
    the application appears to post-date the application.


30.  Be that as it may, it is clear that the first part  of  the  letter  is
    simply indicating the sanctioning of a loan to the Appellant's father -
    albeit the letter on its face acknowledges  the  context  of  the  loan
    being the Appellant's wish to study in the United Kingdom.


31.  Under the section of the letter headed 'Disbursement' it  is  indicated
    that the loan will be  disbursed  at  some  unspecified  point  in  the
    future: "We will disburse this loan when applicant requirement  [sic.].
    Loan will be proceeds credit in to [and then a bank account  number  is
    given] in  name  of  Mr  Ronakkumar  Divyakant  Desai  &  Mr  Divyakant
    Bhikhabhai Desai."


32.  In the first instance it seems to me that this  is  a  contingent  loan
    arrangement and does not in itself demonstrate that the Appellant  held
    the necessary funds for a consecutive 28 day period prior to  the  date
    of his application.  Moreover it  is  again  curious  that  the  letter
    refers to the payment of the loan being to  two  individuals,  both  Mr
    Desai.  The letter itself is addressed to the  Appellant's  father,  Mr
    Ashokbhai Bhailalbhai Makwana, and Mr Aran was unable to assist  me  as
    to who the Mr Desais were or how they fitted into the scheme of things.
     The Appellant himself has not attended this hearing and so he  is  not
    in a position to assist his representative any further in this matter.


33.  So there it is.  The bank letter has a couple of  curious  features  in
    that it is dated at a date after the application  and  also  identifies
    individuals who are not obviously related in any way to  the  Appellant
    or his schemes in respect of study in the United Kingdom. In any  event
    the bank letter does not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules
    in that it does not demonstrate that the relevant funds  were  held  by
    the Appellant for the specified period, or at all.


34.  That means that even if I am completely wrong in respect of  the  issue
    in respect of the authenticity of the Appellant's academic  certificate
    from the International School of Business Studies  he  could  not  have
    succeeded in his appeal under the  Rules  because  he  could  not  have
    demonstrated  that  he  met  the  maintenance   requirements.    Again,
    essentially this means that the error, if there were an error, in Judge
    Ross proceeding without the Appellants' bundle could not have  affected
    the outcome.


35.  In all of the circumstances I decline to set aside the decision in  the
    appeals and they will stand.


Notice of Decisions

36.  The decisions of the First-tier Tribunal contained no  material  errors
    of law and they stand.


37.  Each of the appeals is dismissed.


38.  No anonymity orders are sought or made.


The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:                                 Date: 8 March 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

