
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/42226/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 10 November 2015                  |On 26 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                LORD TURNBULL
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETRAY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                ARSLAN SADIQ
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P. Nash, Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    Mr Z. Ranjha, Legal Representative


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is the appeal of the Secretary of State against  the  decision
         of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of Mr Sadiq, who  in
         turn appealed against  the  decision  to  refuse  to  grant  him  a
         residence card as confirmation of his right of residence  under  EU
         law as the spouse of an EU citizen exercising treaty rights in  the
         United Kingdom. We shall use the same terminology as that  employed
         by the First-tier Tribunal Judge and  refer  to  Mr  Sadiq  as  the
         appellant. The First-tier tribunal did not make an anonymity order,
         and we do not  consider  that  the  appellant  should  be  accorded
         anonymity for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

      2. The appellant is 27 years old and is a citizen of Pakistan. He  has
         been in the United Kingdom since around 2012 and was granted  leave
         to remain as a student until  26  March  2015,  although  this  was
         curtailed an 8 July 2014.  On  25  March  2014  he  applied  for  a
         residence card as confirmation of a right to reside in  the  United
         Kingdom.

      3. The appellant's application was based upon  the  premise  that  his
         wife, Amreen Khan, a French national, was exercising treaty  rights
         in the United Kingdom. In support of his  application  he  provided
         details of her employer, including a business telephone number, the
         number of hours worked  per  week,  the  salary  received  and  her
         national insurance number. The name and address of the employer was
         given as:

             "Privilege Security Services Limited 26 Coopers Lane,  Leyton,
             London, E10 5DG"

      4. On 25 October 2014 the Secretary of State wrote  to  the  appellant
         giving her  reasons  for  refusing  his  application.  That  letter
         included an explanation that various unsuccessful checks  had  been
         undertaken to verify his wife's employment. It  was  noted  that  a
         telephone call made to the employer the day  before  could  not  be
         connected and that the company could not be  located  at  Companies
         House or on websites searches.  It  was  explained  that  in  these
         circumstances the Secretary of State was  not  satisfied  that  the
         business  was  genuine.   The   letter   included   the   following
         explanation:

             "Whilst every attempt has been made by the UK Border Agency to
             establish your EEA family member's employment  the  burden  of
             proof rests with the applicant to provide  such  evidence  and
             you have failed to do so. It is therefore concluded  that  you
             have failed to provide sufficient evidence to demonstrate that
             your EEA family member is currently a qualified person in  the
             United Kingdom as a worker, as detailed under Regulation 6  of
             the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006"

      5. It was plain from the content of the Secretary  of  State's  letter
         that an error had occurred in the verification  process  which  had
         been undertaken. Instead of using the company name as  supplied  by
         the appellant in his application, the searches which the  Secretary
         of State undertook were in the name of:

             "Priveleg Security Systems"

         It was therefore not altogether surprising that no  record  of  the
         appellant's wife's claimed employer had been discovered.

      6. At the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  Secretary  of
         State was not represented and  on  the  basis  of  the  information
         before her the judge concluded that  the  respondent  had  searched
         under the wrong name when making enquiries relating  to  Ms  Khan's
         exercise of treaty rights. For that reason she concluded  that  the
         Notice of Decision refusing the issue of  the  Residence  Card  was
         erroneously based. She then decided  that  the  appellant's  appeal
         must succeed.

      7. The First-tier Tribunal Judge however also drew attention  to  what
         she  described  as   "curious   facts"   apparently   showing   the
         intertwining of Ms Khan's employers and the domestic lives  of  the
         appellant and Ms Khan. She  noted  that  in  the  application  form
         completed by the appellant in March 2014 the address given for both
         him and Ms Khan was  "26  Coopers  Lane,  Leyton,  London,  E10"and
         observed that this same address was given in various documents  for
         the company by which Ms Khan was said to  be  employed.  She  noted
         that by the time of the hearing before  her  the  address  for  the
         appellant and Ms Khan was "31 Belvedere Road, Leyton, London,  E10"
         and observed that this was the address given  for  the  company  in
         more recent documentation. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  explained
         that the link between the  apparent  employers,  Ms  Khan  and  the
         appellant required further investigation. In the circumstances  she
         held that she was not able to make any directions as to  the  issue
         of a Residence Card.

      8. Before us Mr Nath submitted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  had
         apparently held that the Secretary of State's decision had not been
         in accordance with law but had then purported to allow  the  appeal
         outright, without making a finding that the appellant qualified for
         the issue of  a  Residence  Card.  Mr  Ranjha  on  the  other  hand
         contended that there had been no error of law and that in light  of
         the obvious mistake which had been made in the verification process
         the First-tier Tribunal Judge had made the only decision which  was
         open to her.

    Discussion and Conclusion

      9. It appears to us that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  has  made  an
         error of fact in paragraph 2 (e)  of  her  decision  in  which  she
         states: "On 25th March 2015 the day before the  expiration  of  his
         leave the appellant applied for a Residence Card". It is plain from
         what is said in  the  Secretary  of  State's  reasons  for  refusal
         letter, and from the date of that letter, that the application made
         by the appellant was  dated  25  March  2014,  a  year  before  the
         original expiry of his leave to remain and before  that  leave  was
         curtailed. In the circumstances which we shall  go  on  to  explain
         this error as to chronology is of no importance.

     10. In the circumstances which we have set out above we  are  satisfied
         that the First-tier Tribunal Judge has not given  adequate  reasons
         for her decision to allow  the  appeal  outright  and  has  made  a
         material error of law in so doing. She  was  no  doubt  correct  to
         decide, on the information provided to  her,  that  the  conclusion
         which the Secretary of State  had  arrived  at  was  based  upon  a
         mistaken approach  to  verification.  The  appellant's  application
         however was based upon the  claim  that  his  wife  was  exercising
         treaty rights in the United Kingdom. No findings were made on  this
         crucial  issue  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.  Indeed,  she
         expressly stated in paragraph 9.2 of her decision that she was  not
         able to make any finding on this issue  as  a  consequence  of  the
         reservations  which  she  entertained  over  the  apparent  linkage
         between the  company  said  to  be  Ms  Khan's  employers  and  the
         appellant and Ms Khan herself.

     11. We will therefore allow the Secretary of  State's  appeal  and  set
         aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge promulgated  on
         4 June 2015. We will re-make  the  decision  by  finding  that  the
         Secretary of State's decision  as  explained  in  her  reasons  for
         refusal letter dated 25 October 2014 was not in accordance with law
         and we will  order  that  the  appellant's  application  should  be
         remitted to the Secretary of State for  a  lawful  decision  to  be
         made.

    Notice of Decision

     12. The appeal is allowed. Mr Sadiq's application for a residence  card
         is remitted to the Secretary of State to permit a  lawful  decision
         to be made thereon.




    Signed: Alan D. Turnbull
    Judge of the Upper Tribunal


    Date: 24/11/2015


