
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
IA/42730/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                   |           Decision & Reasons           |
|                                    |Promulgated                             |
|On 24 August 2017                   |           On 11 September 2017         |
|                                    |                                        |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                taimoor aziz
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Davison, Ison Harrison, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Taimoor Aziz, is a citizen of  Pakistan.   Following  an
    initial hearing in this appeal on 14 May 2014, I made a  decision  that
    the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law such that its decision fell to
    be set aside.

 2. As matters have transpired, the optimism which the parties expressed as
    to the likely speed of the  conclusion  of  the  family  court  contact
    proceedings which the appellant had commenced  in  2014  has  not  been
    justified.  After a number of adjournments, this matter came before  me
    on 24 August 2017 at Bradford.  Surprisingly, even now no  final  order
    has been made on the appellant's application to have contact  with  his
    children.  However, the most recent order (22 July 2017)  provides  for
    the appellant to have continuing supervised contact.  It is also  clear
    from the order that CAFCASS and the family court are proceeding towards
    a conclusion on the basis that the  appellant  will  continue  to  have
    regular contact whether supervised or unsupervised.

 3. It is clearly time that these proceedings are brought to a  conclusion.
    Both representatives agreed with me at the hearing that, in  the  light
    of  the  appellant's  evident  commitment  to  his  children  and   his
    determination to maintain a relationship  with  them,  the  appropriate
    course of  action  would  be  for  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  allow  the
    appellant's appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds.  The length of any  leave
    which will be granted to the appellant is, of course, a matter for  the
    Secretary of State.  In any event, the appellant has and  continues  to
    enjoy a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  qualifying  children
    who are British citizens.  In the circumstances,  the  public  interest
    will not require his removal from the United Kingdom.

Notice of Decision

 4. Having set aside the First-tier Tribunal determination promulgated on 3
    March  2014,  the  Upper  Tribunal  has  remade  the   decision.    The
    appellant's appeal is allowed on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

 5. No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 5 September 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane












