








UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/42444/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 6 May 2104 and 5 August 2014              |On: 1 September 2014         |
|Prepared:  28 August 2014                     |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          Mrs Monica Evelyn Ofukama
                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    On 6th May 2014: Mr R O Ojukotola, SLA Solicitors
     On the 5th August 2014: No appearance

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. For the sake of convenience I shall refer  to  the  appellant  as  the
      "secretary of state" and to the respondent as "the claimant."


   2. The claimant is a national of Nigeria, born  on  6th  June  1978.  She
      appealed before the First-tier Tribunal against the  decision  of  the
      secretary of state refusing her application made on 31st January  2013
      for a residence card as a confirmation of her right to reside  in  the
      UK pursuant to the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006  ("the  2006
      Regulations"). Her application was refused on the 1st October 2013.


   3. She opted for a determination of  her  appeal  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal on the papers.


   4. In a determination promulgated on  7th  January  2014  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge allowed the claimant's appeal  under  the  "immigration
      rules." She found that the certificate produced indicated registration
      of a proxy marriage in Nigeria "which is, then,  recognised  as  valid
      under the Immigration Rules." Accordingly she found that the  marriage
      was valid.


   5. On 4th April 2014,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Davidge  granted  the
      secretary of state's application to appeal. She  stated  that  in  the
      light  of  remarks  made  by  the  Judge  concerning  the  absence  of
      documentation to establish the validity of the marriage,  the  grounds
      revealed an arguable material error of law.  Further,  the  Judge  had
      fallen into error for failing to take the approach set out in the case
      of Kareem (Proxy Marriages - EU Law) [2014] UKUT 24.


   6. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal on 6th May 2014, I found that
      the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge involved the making of a
      material error on a point of law as no evidence had been  produced  as
      to whether the marriage was contracted between the  claimant  and  the
      qualified person according to the national law of the EEA  country  of
      the qualified person's nationality, in this case France.


   7. At the same time I gave directions to the parties.  The  claimant  was
      represented on that occasion by Mr  R  O  Ojukotola,  SLA  Solicitors.
      Permission was granted to the  claimant  to  file  and  serve  further
      evidence, including expert evidence  regarding  the  validity  of  her
      marriage according to French law, such evidence  to  be  filed  on  or
      before 30th June 2014. The secretary of state was given permission  to
      respond to such evidence by 22nd July 2014.


   8. No evidence has been produced or filed pursuant to those directions.


   9. On 4th August 2014 the claimant's solicitors, SLA Solicitors, wrote to
      the Tribunal seeking an adjournment on the basis that Mrs Ofukama  was
      currently in admission at a hospital following the premature birth  of
      her child. They were in the process of obtaining medical  evidence  to
      be adduced to the court as a matter of urgency. It was contended  that
      she had serious medical complications and was in  intensive  care.  No
      such evidence was produced, however.


  10. On 4th August  2014,  a  Judge  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  refused  the
      adjournment on the basis that the case  had  been  considered  on  the
      papers before the First-tier Tribunal. Having regard to the issue that
      is to be determined in the Upper Tribunal, there was no reason why the
      hearing  could  not  proceed  without  the  claimant  being   present,
      particularly as she has representation.


  11. On 5th August 2014, I stood the appeal  down  until  after  midday  in
      order to ascertain whether the solicitors would be attending.  I  also
      ascertained that no further faxes, letters or telephone calls had been
      sent or made by the representatives.


  12. I am satisfied that notice of the hearing including the date, time and
      place was sent not only to the claimant but the solicitors as well.


  13. In the absence of any explanation as to why  the  solicitors  did  not
      attend the hearing, I proceeded to determine the appeal in the absence
      of the claimant. Mr Deller on behalf of the secretary of state opposed
      any further adjournment in this case. He noted that there had  been  a
      failure to comply with the directions.


  14. At the hearing, Mr Deller  submitted  that  the  decision  in  Kareem,
      supra, had recently been considered by the Upper Tribunal in the  case
      of TA and Others (Kareem explained) Ghana  [2014]  UKUT  00316  (IAC).
      There it was held that following Kareem, the determination of  whether
      there  is  a  marital  relationship  for  the  purposes  of  the  2006
      Regulations should always be examined in accordance with the  laws  of
      the member state from which the union citizen obtains nationality.


  15. There has been no attempt to comply with the directions which gave the
      claimant the opportunity  of  adducing  relevant  evidence,  including
      expert evidence regarding the validity of her  marriage  according  to
      French law.


  16. Accordingly, Mr Deller submitted that the claimant's appeal should  be
      dismissed.


     Decision


  17. Following the decision  in  Kareem,  as  referred  to  in  my  earlier
      decision on the error of  law,  the  claimant  has  not  provided  any
      evidence from France as to whether there is a marital relationship for
      the purposes of the 2006 Regulations.


  18. I accordingly find that the claimant and her sponsor  are  not  to  be
      treated as being married for the purposes of the 2006 Regulations  and
      that the claimant cannot therefore establish  that  she  is  a  family
      member for the purpose of Regulation 7 of those regulations.


  19. From the refusal decision it is evident that the  secretary  of  state
      had also considered and refused the application pursuant to Regulation
      8 of the 2006 Regulations.  She  was  not  satisfied  that  there  was
      sufficient evidence that the claimant was in  a  durable  relationship
      with an EEA National.


  20. The grounds of appeal before the First-tier Tribunal were directed  to
      the validity of  the  proxy  marriage.  There  was  no  ground  raised
      relating to the secretary of state's assertion regarding  the  durable
      relationship. The grounds contended that the secretary  of  state  had
      erred by not recognising or taking into consideration  the  provisions
      of 'Article 8 of the Human Rights Act 1998'.


  21. In paragraph 7 the grounds it was also asserted  with  regard  to  the
      European Convention "the Convention recognises the fact that  person's
      EEA Member State can exercise a Treaty right in the UK  and  so  doing
      all rights  enjoyed  by  them  should  be  extended  to  their  family
      members".


  22. It is further averred that the secretary of state exhibited bad  faith
      and that the decision is unreasonable, illegal  and  perverse.  It  is
      also contrary to the UK's obligations  under  the  Geneva  Convention,
      1951.


  23. The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not make any findings with regard to
      Regulation 8(5) of the 2006 Regulations. The secretary  of  state  had
      contended that there was insufficient  evidence  to  demonstrate  that
      they had lived together before the date of the customary marriage  and
      that there was no evidence that they knew each other or had met before
      the date of that marriage. Accordingly, it had not  been  demonstrated
      that the claimant was in a durable relationship for  the  purposes  of
      the 2006 Regulations [6].


  24. There was no counter appeal by or on behalf of the claimant as to  the
      issue of durable relationship.


     Decisions


  25. The First-tier Tribunal's determination contains an error on  a  point
      of law and is set aside.


  26. The decision I substitute is to dismiss the claimant's appeal.

                               Signed                     Date 28 August
                                   2014










                               C R Mailer
                               Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge




