
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/42649/2014
                                                               IA/42656/2014
                                                               IA/42661/2014
                                                               IA/42668/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower,          |Determination Promulgated            |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 18 March 2016                     |On 25 October 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN


                                   Between

                                EVAN [U] (1)
                                  [U U] (2)
                                  [N U] (3)
                                  [E U] (4)
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No attendance
For the Respondent:    Mrs Petterson, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1    This is an appeal against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Ghani)  dismissing  the  Appellants'
    appeals against the Respondent's decisions in relation to each of  them
    dated 7 October 2014, refusing to  vary  their  leave  to  remain,  and
    making decisions to remove them under section  47  Immigration,  Asylum
    and nationality Act 2006.

2    The Appellants are nationals of Nigeria, being mother and  three  minor
    dependent children respectively. They entered  the  United  Kingdom  in
    2008 with leave to enter as dependents of a person with leave to remain
    as a student (their husband/father respectively, who has since left the
    United Kingdom). They remained in the  United  Kingdom  with  leave  to
    remain, the last period of leave to remain expiring on 6  August  2014.
    On that day, the Appellants applied, with the assistance of  Ikon  Law,
    Solicitors and Advocates, for further leave to remain on the grounds of
    the long residence of the children in the United Kingdom, and the first
    Appellant's caring role for them.

3    In the decisions dated 7 October 2014, the  Respondent  considered  the
    positions of  the  applicants,  found  that  the  requirements  of  the
    immigration rules were not satisfied, considered the  position  of  the
    children, and found that there were no grounds to grant leave to remain
    on Article 8 ECHR.

4    The Appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal by  way  of  notices
    of  appeal  completed  on  24  October  2014.  In  those  notices,  the
    Appellants requested an oral hearing of  their  appeals.  A  notice  of
    hearing was subsequently issued giving notice to  the  Appellants  that
    the appeals were to be heard at the First-tier Tribunal, Sheldon Court,
    Birmingham on 29 January 2015.

5    The appeals were actually listed in the float  list  at  Sheldon  Court
    that day. On 29 January 2015, i.e. on the day of the hearing, Ikon  Law
    sent a faxed  letter  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  at  Sheldon  Court
    applying for an adjournment of the hearing on that day, on grounds,  in
    summary, that the Appellants had  not  been  able  to  gather  all  the
    supporting evidence that they wished prior to the appeal. There was  no
    indication in the letter that anyone  intended  to  attend  at  Sheldon
    Court on that day.

6    There is a handwritten endorsement  on  the  copy  of  the  adjournment
    application which is in the Tribunal file, which reads:

         "Refused" "The appellant has had sufficient  time  to  prepare  the
         appeal. The reasons given for  wanting  more  time  are  inadequate
         given the interests of justice to avoid delay".

    There is also in the papers on the Tribunal file a copy of a notice  on
    form IA40 dated 29 January 2015 giving notice to the Appellants at that
    their application for adjournment of the appeal had been refused,  with
    typed reasons identical to those on the handwritten endorsement I refer
    to above. Also recorded, by hand, on  this  form  IA40  is  a  note  as
    follows: "Phoned rep with refusal & faxed".

7    It is apparent, therefore, that  the  Appellants'  representatives  had
    been informed  on  29  January  2015  that  their  application  for  an
    adjournment had been refused.

8    The decision of the judge dismissing  the  appeals  was  signed  on  21
    February 2015, and promulgated on 9 March 2015.  The front face of  the
    decision appears to indicate that the appeal was heard at Birmingham on
    9 February 2015.  Also recorded on  the  front  face  under  the  title
    'representation' that is neither  the  Appellant  nor  Respondent  were
    represented. Further, at paragraph 3 of the decision, the following  is
    recorded:

         "The parties have indicated that the appeal is to be determined  on
         the basis of the documentation submitted to me all of which I  have
         taken into account.'

9    The judge was clearly aware that an application for  adjourn  had  been
    refused on 29.1.15. At pararaph11 the following is recorded:

         "The Appellant's solicitors Ikon Law wrote to the Tribunal on  29th
         January 2015 requesting an adjournment. The appeals had been listed
         as float on 29th January  2015.  The  letter  from  the  solicitors
         maintains that the Appellants had tried their best  to  gather  all
         the supporting evidence from their home country and from  here  but
         have been unable to provide this  in  time  for  the  hearing.  The
         adjournment request was declined because the  Appellants  have  had
         sufficient time to prepare the appeal."

10   The judge noted that no evidence and no bundle had  been  submitted  on
    behalf  the  Appellants.  The  judge  considered  the  nature  of   the
    application for leave to remain made by the Appellants, summarised  the
    Respondent's reasons for refusing that application, and considered  the
    merits of the appeals, dismissing them.

11   In an application dated 23 March 2015 for permission to appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal, the Appellants argued as follows (in manuscript):

         '1.  The Appellants repeat the grounds of appeal before the FT  and
         submit that it is arguable that FT Judge Ghani has made an error by
         finding at paragraph 3 of his determination that both "parties have
         indicated that the appeal is to be determined on the basis  of  the
         documents submitted".

         2.   It is arguable that  the  Appellants  solicitor  letter  dated
         29/01/2015 was only a request for adjournment. The  Appellant  paid
         the court fee for oral hearing and when the case was not  heard  on
         29/01/2015, it is arguable that it was not open to FT to treat  the
         appeal as on 'papers only'.

         3.   It is arguable that the Appellants  have  been  deprived  from
         their statutory right for oral  hearing  and  therefore  have  been
         prejudiced.

         4.   It is arguable that FT has made a material error  of  law  and
         the breach of FT procedural rules.'

12   It in a decision dated 18th of  June  2015,  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Pooler granted permission to appeal on the following grounds:

         "The judge stated at [3] that the parties had  indicated  that  the
         appeal was to be determined on the basis of the documents submitted
         to the Tribunal. He was arguably wrong in this  respect.  Moreover,
         there is no indication that the Appellants were given notice  of  a
         hearing on 9 February 2015. Arguably the requirements  of  rule  26
         were not met and there was a  procedural  irregularity  capable  of
         making a material difference to the fairness of the proceedings."

13   The matter  was  subsequently  listed  for  hearing  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal and was in the list before me on 18 March 2016. Notice of this
    hearing was sent to Ikon  Law  solicitors  and  the  Appellants  on  18
    February 2016.  There  was  no  appearance  by  or  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellants at the hearing before me. The Clerk  to  the  Tribunal  made
    enquiries of Ikon Law solicitors as to  their  intentions  for  today's
    hearing. I was subsequently provided with a note by my Clerk indicating
    that he had spoken to a Mr Khan from  Ikon  Law  at  12:25pm,  who  had
    indicated that Ikon Law were without instructions from the  client  and
    therefore had not attended the hearing.

14   I was satisfied by seeing the notice of hearing to  Ikon  Law,  and  to
    the Appellants personally, and by reason of the conversation between my
    Clerk and Ikon Law Solicitors, that the Appellant  had  had  notice  of
    today's hearing. There was no application  for  adjournment  by  or  on
    behalf of the Appellants in relation to today's hearing.

15   For her part, Mrs Pettersson  relied  upon  the  Respondent's  Rule  24
    response dated 25th of June 2015, which indicated that  the  Respondent
    was of the view that the First-tier Tribunal had  directed  himself  in
    law appropriately.

Discussion

16   It is to be noted that the only challenge against the judge's  decision
    is procedural; the grounds of  appeal  do  not  challenge  the  judge's
    reasoning in relation to the substantive dismissal of the  appeal,  and
    do not allege any misdirection in law in relation to the  consideration
    of the Appellants'  position  under  the  immigration  rules  or  their
    entitlement to leave to remain under article 8 ECHR. It is also  to  be
    noted that the grounds  of  appeal  do  not  challenge  the  Tribunal's
    decision of 29 January  2015  to  refuse  the  Appellant's  adjournment
    request.

17   The nature of the challenge, on procedural grounds, is that it was  not
    correct that the Appellants had indicated that the appeals were  to  be
    determined on the basis of documentation submitted to the Tribunal, and
    that it was not open to the Tribunal to treat the appeal as  a  'papers
    only' appeal. There is also an  inference  drawn  by  judge  Pooler  in
    granting permission, that there was a hearing on 9  February  2015,  to
    which the Appellant had not been given notice  under  rule  26  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014.

18   I perused all the papers in the Upper Tribunal file in  my  possession.
    It was not clear why the front face of the judge's decision would state
    that the appeal had been heard at Birmingham on 9 February 2015. I have
    not seen any notice of hearing issued giving notice of a hearing taking
    place on that date.

19   As the appeal was in the float list on 29 January 2015,  it  would  not
    have been allocated to a specific judge's list at the start of the day.
    The file had obviously come to the attention of a judge at  some  point
    on that day, because the application to adjourn was refused in  writing
    and communicated to the Appellants. At some point  in  time,  the  file
    must have been allocated to a judge for determination. That might  have
    happened on 9th February, or before.  I find that the  reason  for  the
    date of 9 February 2015 appearing on the  front  face  of  the  judge's
    decision is ultimately, unknown. However,  I  find  that  there  is  no
    evidence that a separately convened hearing took place after 29 January
    2015; whether on 9 February 2015, or at all.

20   I do not find that the  Appellants  have  experienced  any  unfairness,
    either by the date 9 February 2015 appearing on the front face  of  the
    decision, or in it being recorded at paragraph 3 that the  parties  had
    indicated that the  appeal  was  to  be  determined  on  the  basis  of
    documentation submitted; nor by other reason.  The  judge  was  clearly
    aware of the refusal to adjoined on 29 January 2015 - this  is  clearly
    set out at his paragraph 11.

21   It is to be noted that the Appellants were not prepared for the  appeal
    of 29th of January 2015.  Their application of 29  January  to  adjourn
    was refused on that day. The judge was aware of that history. Following
    that refusal of adjournment, there appears  to  have  been  no  further
    effort on the part of the Appellants to submit any evidence in  support
    of the appeal, either on 29 January, or at  any  time  thereafter.  The
    expectation of the Appellants must have been that  they  would  in  due
    course receive a decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  determining  the
    appeal that was listed on 29th of January 2015, taking into account the
    evidence that was before the Tribunal on that  day.   That  is  exactly
    what happened. The Appellants were not deprived  of  an  oral  hearing;
    they failed to  attend  it  on  29  January  2015,  and  their  written
    application for it to be adjourned was refused.

22   As noted above, the grounds of appeal take no issue with  the  decision
    to refuse an adjournment on 29 January 2015, nor  is  any  issue  taken
    with the reasoning of the judge in dismissing the appeal.

23   I find  that  there  is  no  procedural  irregularity  in  the  judge's
    decision which in any way undermines the fairness of  the  proceedings,
    or at all.

Decision

There is no material error of law in the judge's decision, which I uphold.

The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.


Signed:  Date: 22.10.16

     [pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan

