
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: IA/42240/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Determination & Reason Promulgated   |
|On January 12, 2016                  |On January 14, 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                              MS KUBURA YUSSIF
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant   Miss Chinwuba (Legal Representative)
Respondent  Ms Johnstone (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, citizen of Ghana, and she applied for a  residence  card
    on March 25, 2014 as the spouse of an EEA family member. The respondent
    refused this on September 29, 2014  and  the  appellant  appealed  this
    decision on October 17, 2014 under Regulation  26  of  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006  and  Section  82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 2. The appeal came before Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Williams  on
    January 12, 2015 and he dismissed  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules in a decision promulgated on January 27, 2015.

 3. The appellant sought permission to appeal that decision on February  3,
    2015. Permission to appeal was granted on a limited basis by Designated
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Zucker on March 11, 2015 on the  basis
    the Judge had not considered the issue of  whether  the  appellant  and
    sponsor were in a durable relationship.

 4. The matter came before me on the above date and on that  date  I  heard
    submissions from both Miss Chinwuba and Ms Johnstone.

 5. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity  direction  and
    pursuant to Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I make no order now.

    ERROR IN LAW

 6. Miss Chinwuba accepted that the issue of a durable relationship  was  a
    red herring in this appeal because the sponsor was not an EEA  national
    but was in fact a Ghanaian national like herself. The EEA national  was
    in fact her brother-in-law.

 7. I indicated to  Miss  Chinwuba  that  this  was  the  only  area  where
    permission had been granted and on the  face  of  it  the  granting  of
    permission seemed to be an because "durable  relationship"  was  not  a
    relevant factor in this appeal bearing in mind the Judge  had  accepted
    the appellant and her husband were  lawfully  married.  The  issue  was
    dependency and the judge rejected her claim to have been dependent  and
    permission to challenge this had been refused. Miss  Chinwuba  did  not
    disagree with me on the "durable relationship" point and  she  accepted
    that permission to appeal was only on that point. Other  points  raised
    by her were not relevant to the permission to appeal.

 8. In the circumstances I find there was no error of law and I dismiss the
    appeal.

    DECISION

 9. There was no material error and I uphold the original decision.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




FEE AWARD

I make no fee award as I have dismissed the appeal.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

