
IAC-TH-CP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/42099/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 May 2015                               |On 29 May 2015                |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MISS Ferial Fattahi
                         (anonymity ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. C. Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr. O. Noor, Counsel.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in this case is the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department.  However, for the sake of clarity, I shall use  the  titles
    by which the parties were known before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  with
    the Secretary of State referred to as "the respondent" and Miss Fattahi
    as "the appellant".

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iran born on 14 May 1987.   She  appealed
    against a decision of the respondent dated 30 October 2014 refusing  to
    vary her leave to enter the United Kingdom and to remove her by way  of
    directions under Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality
    Act 2006.

 3. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on  12  January  2010  with
    leave to enter as a Tier 4 (General) Student valid to 15 December 2012.
     She was subsequently granted  an  extension  of  stay  in  the  United
    Kingdom until 31 October 2013 as a Tier 4 (General) Student  and  then,
    again subsequently granted an extension of stay in the  United  Kingdom
    until 20 October 2014 as a Tier 4 (General) Student.  On 29 August 2014
    she applied for leave to remain on the basis of her private life in the
    United Kingdom.

 4. The appellant  appealed  the  respondent's  decision  and  following  a
    hearing at Birmingham before Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  James,
    and in a decision promulgated on  18  February  2015,  the  appellant's
    appeal was allowed.

 5. The respondent  sought  permission  to  appeal  which  was  granted  by
    Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Garratt on 16  April  2015.
    His reasons for so doing are:-

         "1.  The respondent applies in time to appeal against the  decision
             of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal L James  who  allowed  the
             appeal on human rights grounds against  the  decision  of  the
             respondent of 30th October 2014 to refuse  to  vary  leave  to
             enter and to remove by way of directions under Section  47  of
             the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

         2.   The grounds contend that the  judge  failed  to  consider  the
             public interest considerations now set out  in  Sections  117A
             and 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002
             (as amended).  Further it is argued that the judge  failed  to
             resolve a conflict of fact by finding that the appellant would
             be at risk from the authorities on return to Iran  but  could,
             nevertheless, make short visits to the country.   The  grounds
             also contend that it is not clear whether  the  judge  allowed
             the appeal outright under Article 8  or  whether,  in  finding
             that the respondent's decision was not in accordance with  the
             law, the application remained outstanding.

         3.   All grounds are arguable.  The relatively  short  findings  of
             fact and conclusions in the twelve page decision do  not  show
             that the judge gave any consideration to the  public  interest
             issues now specified in Sections 117A and  117B  of  the  2002
             Act, which was arguably wrong.  It is also arguably  perverse,
             in the legal sense, for the  judge  to  have  found  that  the
             appellant would be at risk from the authorities on  return  to
             Iran yet could visit the country for short periods without any
             such risk arising.  The point in relation to  the  basis  upon
             which the appeal was allowed is also arguable.

         4.   Permission is granted."

 6. Thus the appeal came before me today.

 7. Mr Avery relied on three grounds.  Firstly that the  judge  misdirected
    himself in law by failing to  give  particular  regard  to  the  public
    interest considerations in Section 117B of the Immigration, Nationality
    and Asylum Act 2002, secondly that he failed to resolve a  conflict  of
    fact in relation to potential risk the appellant would face upon return
    to her country of origin and finally the lack of clarity as to  whether
    the appeal had in fact been allowed under  Article  8  or  whether  the
    judge's finding was that the decision is not in accordance with the law
    and as such that the application remains outstanding  until  a  further
    decision is made by the respondent.

 8. For the moment, and for reasons that will become clear  below,  I  will
    focus upon the first ground.

 9. Mr Avery argued that not only was  there  no  mention  of  Section  117
    within the judge's decision  but  no  attempt  to  address  the  public
    interest and that this in itself amounted  to  a  fatal  error.   Quite
    simply the  judge  has  not  addressed  the  issues  that  fell  to  be
    considered under Section 117 and in particular there is no  mention  of
    the  English  language  issue,  financial  independence  issue  or  the
    precariousness of private life.

10. Mr Noor quite helpfully provided me  with  a  skeleton  argument  which
    fully sets out his submissions and has been taken into account  by  me.
    Again, for reasons that will be clear below I  shall  once  more  focus
    upon the first of the respondent's grounds of appeal.  Mr Noor  brought
    to my attention the authority of Dube (ss.117A-117D) [2015] UKUT  00090
    (IAC) and helpfully set out  within  his  skeleton  argument  the  main
    considerations within Section 117B relevant to this appellant's appeal.
     He emphasised that the judge heard evidence at a hearing lasting  some
    three hours from a  total  of  ten  witnesses  and  was  provided  with
    extensive documentation thereby exposing him  to  a  wide  spectrum  of
    considerations.  He accepted  that  the  issues  of  English  language,
    financial  independence  and  establishment  of   private   life   when
    immigration status was precarious had not been explicitly  set  out  in
    the decision.  Nonetheless he asserted that the judge was taken through
    all such factors throughout the course of the hearing.

11. Within his skeleton  argument  he  does  most  helpfully  set  out  the
    evidence in relation to these three issues  that  was  put  before  the
    judge.

12. He also brought to my attention the authority of  Anoliefo  (permission
    to appeal) [2013] UKUT 00345 (IAC) and highlighted that where there  is
    no reasonable prospect that any error of law alleged in the grounds  of
    appeal could have made a  difference  to  the  outcome,  permission  to
    appeal should not normally be granted in the absence of some  point  of
    public  importance  that  is  otherwise  in  the  public  interest   to
    determine.

13. He then went on to address me in relation to the other two grounds.

14. However, my consideration of the submissions of both Mr  Avery  and  Mr
    Noor in relation to the second and third grounds is,  in  light  of  my
    decision in relation to the first ground, redundant.

15. This is a decision where the judge has materially erred as asserted  by
    the respondent in the first ground.  Not only is there  no  mention  of
    Section 117,  which  would  not  have  been  fatal,  but  there  is  no
    consideration  of  the  issues  contained  therein  which  fell  to  be
    considered.   Consequently  the  judge's  findings   in   relation   to
    proportionality  failed  to  take  into  account  the  public  interest
    considerations required by  the  2002  Act.   The  error  is  not  only
    material but fundamental and goes to the heart of this decision.

16. I conclude that it infects the totality of the findings such that  none
    can be preserved.

17. There is therefore no need for me  to  address  the  second  and  third
    grounds of appeal.

18. For all these reasons I find the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    contains errors of law and has to be set aside in  its  entirety.   All
    parties agreed that, in the circumstances, it was appropriate  for  the
    appeal to be remitted and all matters determined afresh by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

19. The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law.  The decision is set aside.   The
    appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, to be dealt with afresh,
    pursuant  to  Section  12(2)(b)(i)  of  the   Tribunals,   Courts   and
    Enforcement Act 2007 and Practice Direction 7.2(b),  before  any  judge
    aside from Judge James.

20. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date 28 May 2015.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard

