




UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/42600/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 7 August 2014                             |On 1 September 2014          |
|Prepared: 28 August 2014                      |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Mr Jevgeni Ivaniskin
                           No anonymity order made
                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Burrett, counsel

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. For the sake of convenience I shall refer  to  the  appellant  as  the
      "secretary of state" and to the respondent as "the claimant."


   2.  The  secretary  of  state  appeals  with   permission   against   the
      determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Powell promulgated  on  3rd
      June 2014 allowing the claimant's  appeal  against  the  secretary  of
      state's refusal of his application for permanent residence pursuant to
      Regulation  10(5)  of  the  Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
      Regulations 2006 ("the 2006 Regulations").


   3. The claimant had applied for permanent residence  as  confirmation  of
      his right to reside in the UK on the basis  of  a  retained  right  of
      residence. The parties were both represented at the hearing before the
      First-tier Tribunal where Mr Burrett also  represented  the  claimant.
      The issue identified at the hearing was whether the claimant  met  the
      requirements for a retained right  of  residence  in  accordance  with
      Regulation 10(5) of the 2006 Regulations.


   4. There was no dispute that the  claimant  had  divorced  his  wife,  Ms
      Sirotina, an EEA national. He married his wife on 19th September  2008
      and the marriage was "finally dissolved" on 28th December  2012.   The
      decree absolute was produced.


   5. The Judge found that there was no dispute that the claimant's  ex-wife
      was an EEA National.


   6. He stated at  paragraph  16  of  the  determination  that  "on  closer
      examination of the case, it was common ground  that  Ms  Sirotina  was
      employed as a chambermaid."


   7. Having identified the issue as to whether the claimant had a  retained
      right of residence, the judge noted that the claimant had to show that
      Ms Sirotina was continuing to exercise Treaty rights as at the date of
      the termination of their marriage on 28th December 2012 [17].


   8. The claimant and his  ex-wife  had  separated  in  February  2009  but
      remained in contact until April  2010.  The  relationship  broke  down
      completely after April 2010. The claimant saw her only once, namely in
      December 2012. The claimant recalled in evidence before the Judge that
      his wife ".....said she was working. [His] recollection was vague.  He
      was not particularly interested in his ex wife's life  or  well  being
      and, since then, continued not to be interested in her....." [19].


   9. At paragraph 20, the Judge noted that all the claimant could  say  was
      that "....he believes his ex wife was  working  at  the  date  of  the
      decree absolute.  He  has  no  documentary  evidence  to  support  his
      assertion. He relies on what she told him about working as  a  cleaner
      for three days a week in central London in December 2012."


  10. The Judge found that the claimant's  evidence  ".....was  credible.  I
      have no reason to think that the claimant was trying  to  deceive  the
      Tribunal. Had he  wished,  he  could  certainly  have  given  stronger
      evidence of his ex-wife's work in December 2010 (sic) but he  did  not
      do so. He told me what he knew. I accept his evidence." [21]


  11. The Judge stated that it was not 'practicable or reasonable' to expect
      the  claimant  to  produce  documentary  evidence  of  his   ex-wife's
      employment. They are not in contact. They have no  relationship.  They
      have been separated for  more  than  three  years  before  the  decree
      absolute [22].


  12. The Judge then 'recognised' that he could have directed the  secretary
      of state to carry out checks with  HMRC  or  the  Benefits  Agency  to
      ascertain whether Ms Sirotina was working in December  2012.  However,
      having regard to the overriding objective and reminding himself of the
      proportionality of such an inquiry, "decided not to  so  direct."  The
      secretary of state did not seek such an order and could  have  carried
      out such a check in any event, either at the date of  application,  in
      response to the  claimant's  notice  of  appeal  or  since  the  Judge
      adjourned the proceedings part heard [23].


  13. In the event, the Judge was satisfied that the claimant had  shown  on
      the balance of probabilities that he had a retained right of permanent
      residence [24].


  14. The secretary of state applied for permission to appeal,  noting  that
      the Judge found that the claimant "....had made out his case that  his
      ex-wife had been working in the UK at the date of termination  of  the
      marriage; with reference to paras 20 and 21". The secretary  of  state
      asserted that these paragraphs "are unlawful" because:


     a)  At  paragraph  23  the  Judge  found  that  it  would  have   been
        disproportionate to have directed the secretary of  state  to  make
        HMRC checks and/or the secretary of  state  could  have  done  that
        anyway;


     b) That shifted the burden of proof to the secretary of state when, as
        a matter of law, that "is with the claimant".


     c) Equally, the Judge failed to have regard to the authority of Amos v
        Secretary of State [2011] EWCA Civ 552 which ".....makes plain  the
        evidential burden on the claimant  and  the  options  open  to  the
        claimant as a matter of the procedure rules (sic)".


  15. First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchinson granted  the  secretary  of
      state's application for permission to appeal on the basis that it  was
      an arguable error of law that the Judge "....has  made  out  his  case
      that his ex-wife had been working  in  the  UK  at  the  time  of  the
      termination of their marriage by shifting  the  evidential  burden  of
      proof to the respondent......"


  16. At the hearing on 7th August 2014, Mr Duffy  sought  to  rely  on  the
      grounds. He  also  submitted  that  the  burden  had  in  effect  been
      reversed.


  17. Mr Duffy referred to  paragraph  20,  emphasising  that  the  claimant
      "believed" that his wife  was  working.  The  Judge  should  not  have
      accepted that and should have directed checks.


  18. On behalf of the claimant, Mr Burrett submitted  that  the  Judge  was
      entitled to come to the conclusions based on the evidence before  him,
      namely whether she had been exercising Treaty rights at  the  relevant
      time. Although he could have asked for checks to have been made,  that
      was not the approach adopted at the appeal. Given the burden of proof,
      the Judge was entitled  to  accept  the  claimant's  evidence  in  the
      circumstances. There was no reason to suppose that his  wife  was  not
      working.


  19. I reserved my decision.


  20. I have had regard to the decision of the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Amos,
      supra. The second appellant in that appeal, Ms Theophilus,  stated  in
      evidence that when she met her husband he worked as a  chef.  She  did
      not know whether he had continued to work after their  separation  and
      in particular she did not know whether he was working at the  date  of
      their divorce, or even whether he was still in the UK at that date.


  21. It is in  that  context  that  the  Court  of  Appeal  considered  the
      procedural law of the Tribunal, and  in  particular  Rule  51  of  the
      Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal  (procedure)   Rules   2005   which
      authorises the Tribunal to allow oral, documentary or  other  evidence
      to be given of any fact which appears to be  relevant  to  an  appeal,
      even if that evidence would be inadmissible in a court of law [40].


  22. In that case, the submission made was that Mrs Theophilus  could  have
      applied under Regulation 50 for a witness summons  requiring  her  ex-
      husband to attend and give evidence relating to his work. She had  not
      done so. Nor did she seek a direction  under  Rule  45  requiring  the
      secretary of state  to  provide  the  necessary  information  for  the
      determination of her appeal.


  23. As already noted, Ms Theophilus did not know  whether  her  ex-husband
      had continued to work after their separation, and  in  particular  did
      not know whether he had been working at the date of their divorce,  or
      even whether he was in the UK at that date.


  24. In the appeal before me, however, Judge Powell did make a  finding  in
      relation to whether Ms Sirotina had been working at the relevant date.
      He first of all stated at paragraph 16 that it was common ground  that
      Ms Sirotina was employed as a chambermaid. Moreover, when the claimant
      spoke to his former wife in December 2012, she told him that  she  was
      working. Although there was no documentary evidence  to  support  that
      assertion, he relied on what she told him about working for three days
      a week in December 2012.


  25. The Judge found that evidence to be credible and stated that there was
      no reason to think  that  the  claimant  was  trying  to  deceive  the
      Tribunal. Accordingly, that evidence was accepted.


  26. I have had regard to the secretary of state's reasons  for  appealing.
      It is noted at paragraph 1 that the Judge found that the claimant  had
      made out his case that his ex-wife had been working at the time of the
      termination of their marriage.


  27. It is not asserted that the Judge had not been  entitled  to  come  to
      that conclusion. The secretary of state's assertion is simply that the
      Judge found at paragraph 23 that it would have  been  disproportionate
      to have directed the secretary of state to make HMRC  checks  or  that
      the secretary of state could  have  done  that  anyway.  That  however
      shifted the burden of proof and it remained with the claimant.  It  is
      also contended that the Judge failed to have regard to the decision in
      Amos, supra, which makes plain that the evidential burden  is  on  the
      claimant.


  28. The First-tier Tribunal Judge had however  already  made  the  finding
      that the claimant's ex-wife was working at  the  date  of  the  decree
      absolute. He went on to note at paragraph 23 of the determination that
      although he could have directed the secretary of state  to  carry  out
      the necessary checks, he  had  not  done  so,  having  regard  to  the
      overriding objective and the proportionality of such an  inquiry.  Nor
      did the secretary of state seek such an order.  He noted that  such  a
      check could in any event have been carried out at any time.


  29. I do not construe paragraph 23 of the determination to be transferring
      the burden of proof to the secretary of state.  The  Judge  is  merely
      referring to options which might have been available to  him,  but  he
      had already found that the claimant's ex-  wife  was  working  at  the
      relevant date.


  30. The secretary of state in  the  grounds  seeking  permission  did  not
      contend that the finding that the claimant's ex-wife was  working  was
      "unlawful" on the basis, for example, that there was not a sufficiency
      of evidence apart from his belief.


  31. Unlike the appellant in Amos, the claimant had in fact given  evidence
      relating to his ex-wife's employment at the relevant date.  The  Judge
      had already noted that it was common ground that she had been employed
      as a chambermaid and had no reason to believe that he  had  sought  to
      deceive the Tribunal regarding  his  ex-wife's  information  regarding
      working as a cleaner for three  days  a  week  in  central  London  in
      December 2012.


  32. The Judge accordingly found  that  that  evidence  was  sufficient  to
      discharge the burden of proof that rested on the claimant. The rest of
      his determination referred to the fact that it was not practicable  or
      reasonable to expect him to produce documentary evidence. Although  he
      could have directed that checks against information held  by  HMRC  be
      undertaken, that was disproportionate.


  33. It may be that the finding by the Judge that  the  claimant's  ex-wife
      had been working at the date of  the  decree  absolute  was  generous;
      whilst it might be that another Judge may have found the evidence  not
      to be satisfactory or sufficient, there  is  no  suggestion  that  the
      conclusion drawn is in any  way  irrational  or  perverse.  It  was  a
      finding that was capable of being made on the basis  of  the  evidence
      adduced.









Decision


     The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
the  making  of      an  error  on  a  point  of  law.  The  decision  shall
accordingly stand.


     No anonymity order made.











                               Signed                     Date 28/8/2014


                               C R Mailer
                               Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


