
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA427212014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 21st April 2016                       |On 14th June 2016                   |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                             Mr harbhajan singh
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Hoare (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Moan, promulgated on  26th  May  2015,  following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham on 14th May 2015.  In the determination, the  judge  allowed
    the appeal of the Appellant to the extent that it was remitted back  to
    the Secretary of State to be reconsidered in accordance with  the  law.
    The Respondent Secretary  of  State,  applied  for,  and  was  granted,
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the  matter  comes
    before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of India, who was born on 3rd August
    1965.  He appealed against the decision of the Respondent Secretary  of
    State rejecting his application to  remain  in  the  UK  under  Tier  2
    (Minister of Religion) visa.  This was because the Appellant could  not
    meet  the  English  language  requirement  and   so   under   paragraph
    245HD(b)(i), the application was dismissed.  The date  of  decision  is
    2nd December 2012.  In this  appeal,  the  Appellant  argued  that  the
    Secretary of State had only considered Tier 2 requirements and not  the
    wider  issues  concerning  Article  8  of  the  ECHR  with  respect  to
    compassionate circumstances.

The Judge's Findings

 3. The judge had observed how there was no evidence  from  the  Respondent
    Secretary  of  State  that  confirmed  that  a  decision  outside   the
    Immigration Rules had been considered, as requested by  the  Appellant.
    The judge referred to the fact that,

         "There were considerations such as  the  Appellant's  work  in  the
         mosque (sic) and evidence from his supporters.  The effect  of  the
         removal of the Appellant from the UK upon the  local  community  or
         upon the  Appellant  had  not  been  taken  into  account  and  his
         proportionality assessed" (paragraph 18).

    The judge referred to the fact that the case  of  Zermani  [2015]  EWHC
    1226 confirmed that the Secretary of State should consider  whether  to
    grant leave outside the Immigration Rules in an application  for  leave
    to remain.

 4. The judge ruled  that  the  Secretary  of  State  should  consider  her
    decision afresh in particular with respect to those  matters  which  do
    not figure in her original decision.

Grounds of Application

 5. The grounds of application state that the judge erred in remitting  the
    case to the Respondent Secretary of State to consider  the  Appellant's
    Tier 2 application under Article 8 ECHR when the Appellant  was  served
    with the human rights  refusal  letter  by  the  Home  Office  on  29th
    September 2001 when he was in immigration detention.

 6. On 17th September 2015, permission to appeal was granted by  the  Upper
    Tribunal, on the basis that the Appellant had already been served  with
    a decision to address his human rights under Article 8 ECHR,  and  that
    in any event the judge ought not  to  have  considered  any  Article  8
    grounds herself without the need to remit the matter.

 7. A Rule 24 response was entered on 8th October 2015.





Submissions

 8. At the hearing before me on 21st April 2016,  Mr  Mills,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Respondent Secretary of State, stated that he  had  taken
    the opportunity of speaking with Mr Hoare, for the Appellant, and would
    like to withdraw the appeal.  This  is  because  the  Appellant  was  a
    religious worker.  He had been  refused  further  leave  in  2012.   He
    lodged an appeal against that  refusal  but  the  Tribunal  authorities
    mislaid the appeal and  claimed  not  to  have  received  it.   So  the
    Appellant was detained in 2014.  He  then  lodged  a  judicial  review,
    which was dismissed, but the Appellant was then released from detention
    and a letter of 29th September 2014 was written to his then  solicitors
    in Leicester, Jasvir  Jutla  &  Co  (Solicitors)  then  after  the  new
    solicitors took over the case they established that there had  been  an
    in-time appeal on 14th May 2015 which had gone before the judge and  it
    was argued that there was a clear human rights issue  that  had  to  be
    dealt with.  The 2012 refusal letter did not deal with the human rights
    issue at all.  The judge accepted this was the case.  The  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer agreed that this had not been done.  He agreed  that
    the matter should return back to the Secretary of State for a  decision
    on the human rights issues.  However, there had been a  refusal  letter
    in September 2014 which did consider, eight months prior to the hearing
    before the judge, the human rights issues, but Mr Hoare  and  his  firm
    had not been sent this refusal letter, and the Tribunal  did  not  have
    it, and the Home Office Presenting Officer did not raise it before  the
    Tribunal either.  In the circumstances Mr Mills submitted that he would
    have to accept that the matter should return  back  to  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State for  a  decision  on  the  human  rights  issues  as
    originally ruled by Judge Moan.

 9. For his part, Mr Hoare submitted that he would rely upon  his  Rule  24
    response and would agree that this was  the  only  sensible  course  of
    action.

No Error of Law

10. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision, for precisely the
    reasons put before me by Mr Mills.

Decision

11. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

12. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 11th June 2016
