
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/42398/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 20 August 2014                             |On 5 September 2014          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVID TAYLOR



                                   Between

                              MS ROZANNE BANGER
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Chipperfield of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State I  have,  for  the
    sake of consistency, retained the original  designations  of  appellant
    and respondent as in the First-tier Tribunal.
2.   The respondent,  Secretary  of  State,  has  appealed  with  permission
    against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Devittie  who,  in  a
    determination promulgated on  12  May  2014,  allowed  the  appellant's
    appeal against the respondent's refusal of a residence card  under  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations  2006  as  the  unmarried  partner  of  a
    British citizen.  The appellant is a South African national born on  18
    November 1965.  Her partner Mr Philip Rado and the appellant have  been
    in a relationship since January 2008 and have  been  co-habiting  since
    December 2009.

3.   The appellant and her partner lived together initially in South  Africa
    and moved together to the Netherlands in May 2010.  Mr Rado was working
    in the Netherlands until he and  the  appellant  moved  to  the  United
    Kingdom in July 2012.   During  their  time  in  the  Netherlands,  the
    appellant was granted a work permit there on the basis of her  accepted
    relationship with Mr Rado.

4.   The respondent refused the application on 26 September  2013.   In  the
    refusal letter the respondent  noted  that  the  appellant  sought  her
    application to be considered  under  the  judgment  in  Surinder  Singh
    [1992] EU ECJ C-370/90 on the basis that Mr Rado  had  been  exercising
    treaty rights in the Netherlands  before  returning  to  the  UK.   The
    refusal letter went on to refuse  the  appellant's  application  to  be
    regarded as a family member  under  the  2006  Regulations.     I  note
    however that the respondent, in the refusal letter,  did  not  consider
    whether the appellant, as an  unmarried  partner  of  an  EEA  citizen,
    should be regarded as an extended family member under Regulation  8(5).
    Finally, the refusal letter considered, and rejected,  the  appellant's
    Article 8 claims within the Immigration Rules.

5.   In his determination, the First-tier Tribunal Judge allowed the  appeal
    on human rights grounds.  At [10] of the determination it was  recorded
    that the appellant conceded  that  she  did  not  meet  the  Article  8
    requirements under Appendix FM of the Immigration  Rules.   The  judge,
    however, continued to consider Article 8 outside the  Rules  purporting
    to follow Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640.  That case held that an Article  8
    assessment outside the Rules shall only be carried out when  there  are
    compelling circumstances not recognised by the Rules.  At [11]  of  the
    determination the judge held that the  fact  that  the  respondent  had
    taken nine months to deal with the applicant's application  constituted
    a good ground for the Tribunal to consider this application outside the
    Immigration Rules.  That was the  only  reason  he  gave.  The  grounds
    seeking permission to appeal argue that the nine months' delay  do  not
    of itself constitute compelling circumstances to enable the Tribunal to
    consider Article 8 outside the Rules.  Permission  to  appeal  on  that
    ground was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer on 3 July 2014.

6.   At the hearing before me both  representatives  made  submissions.   Mr
    Kandola urged upon me that the nine months' delay by the respondent  in
    making her decision was not exceptional.  There was also a basic defect
    in the proceedings at the First-tier Tribunal because, it appeared,  no
    arguments had been put forward as  to  the  appellant's  rights  as  an
    extended family member under Regulation 8(5) of the  2006  Regulations.
    In reply, Mr Chipperfield urged upon me that there was no error of  law
    and that the nine month delay was an exceptional circumstance.

7.   I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal determination  did  contain
    an error of law and cannot stand.  The error of law was that the  judge
    gave no adequate reasons to show that  this  was  an  exceptional  case
    enabling him to consider Article 8 outside the  Rules.   A  nine  month
    delay by the respondent is by  no  means  (unfortunately)  unusual  and
    cannot in any way be regarded as exceptional.  There  was  no  evidence
    that such delay had cause any exceptional hardship to the appellant.

8.   It is clearly unfortunate that, until the hearing  before  me,  no  one
    appears to have taken the point that the appellant may well be entitled
    to be regarded as an extended family member under Regulation  8(5)  and
    that is an issue that will need to be decided on the evidence.

9.   For these reasons I consider that remittal to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    is appropriate.  The case will need to be heard  afresh.   One  of  the
    issues that will need to be  considered  is  whether  the  decision  in
    Surinder Singh applies equally to unmarried  partners  as  it  does  to
    married couples or to civil partners.  I am  told  by  Mr  Chipperfield
    that this Surinder  Singh  point  is  currently  being  considered,  in
    another case, in the High Court where the hearing has taken  place  but
    judgment has not been delivered.  I  agreed  to  direct  that  the  re-
    hearing of this appeal should be postponed until after the judgment  in
    the High Court case.

Decision

10.  The First-tier Tribunal determination contained an error of law and  is
    hereby set aside in its entirety.

11.  I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal (at Taylor House)  to  be
    heard afresh by any judge other than Judge Devittie.

12.  I direct that the re-hearing of this  appeal  shall  be  listed  on  or
    after 1 December 2014 (by which date it is hoped that the  judgment  of
    the High Court will have become available).  I grant  leave  to  either
    party to apply for further adjournment if the High  Court  decision  is
    not then available.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge David Taylor
5 September 2014
