
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/42385/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 October 2015                   |On 28 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   C L A M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

For the Respondent:    Mr E Wilford (counsel), instructed by M Reale,
solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I make an anonymity order under Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008,  precluding  publication  of  any  information
regarding the proceedings which would be  likely  to  lead  members  of  the
public to identify the appellant or her children. I do so on  the  basis  of
the  minority  of  the  children  and  their  best  interests  in  remaining
anonymous.

2.    The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal  but
in order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in  the
First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a
decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Mitchell, promulgated on22  May  2015,
which  allowed  the  Appellant's  appeal   under   the   Immigration   (EEA)
Regulations 2006 and on article 8 ECHR grounds.

Background

3.    The Appellant was born on 11 May 1981 and is a national of Brazil.  On
9 October 2014 the respondent refused  the  appellant's  application  for  a
derivative residence card as the primary carer of her two children, who  are
British Citizens.

The Judge's Decision

4.     The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   First-tier
Tribunal Judge  Mitchell  ("the  Judge")  allowed  the  appeal  against  the
Respondent's decision both under the Immigration (EEA)  Regulations  and  on
article 8 ECHR grounds.

5.    Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 26 August 2015  Designated  Judge
of the First tier Tribunal Zucker gave permission to  appeal  stating  inter
alia

    "The grounds submit that the Judge erred in that the  application  made
    by the appellant was not on human rights grounds and that the  decision
    was not one which interfered with the appellant's human rights  in  any
    event. The grounds are arguable: see Amirteymour & others (EEA appeals;
    Human Rights) [2015] UKUT 00466."

The Hearing

6.    Ms Everett for the respondent sought leave  to  vary  the  grounds  of
appeal. Permission to appeal  was  granted  on  the  basis  that  the  Judge
dismissed the appeal under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.  That  is
incorrect. At [19] the Judge clearly finds  that  the  appellant  meets  the
requirements  of  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006.   In   seeking
permission to appeal, at paragraph 3, the author of the  grounds  of  appeal
states "the FTT considered the refusal and appears  to  have  dismissed  the
appeal under the EEA regulations...." but then goes on to discuss  both  the
Immigration EEA Regulations 2006 and relevant case law.

7.    Mr Wilford, counsel for the  appellant,  opposed  the  application  to
vary the grounds of appeal arguing that the  amendment  sought  is  entirely
without merit because the appellant fulfils the requirements  of  regulation
15 A paragraph 4(a) (c) of the 2006 regulations. He argued that because  (in
his submission) the  ground  that  the  respondent  seeks  to  argue  cannot
succeed, variation of the grounds of appeal should not be permitted.

8.    I allow the application to vary the grounds  of  appeal.  The  amended
grounds of appeal focuses the issues between the parties. The appellant  was
put on notice of the matters which the respondent now seeks  to  argue  when
the grounds of appeal were originally drafted; indeed the rule  24  response
(tendered on behalf of  the  appellant  only  at  the  commencement  of  the
hearing)  specifically  addresses  paragraph  4A  of   regulation   15   the
Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006. I cannot see that the appellant  suffers
any prejudice by allowing  both  aspects  of  this  appeal  to  be  properly
ventilated.

9.    Ms Everett argued that the findings of the judge  [12]  are  perverse.
She told me that the Judge placed far  too  much  reliance  on  a  residence
order made by a family court, and reminded me  that  family  courts  do  not
take account of the Immigration (EEA)  Regulations  2006  when  making  such
orders. She told me that it is clear that  the  appellant's  children  would
not be compelled to leave the UK  because  the  appellant's  children  could
live with their father. She focused on the last two sentences  of  [12]  and
told me that  those  findings  are  perverse;  they  are  not  supported  by
evidence, and that they undermine the decision to such an  extent  that  the
decision must be set aside. In relation  to  the  Judge's  consideration  of
article 8 ECHR, Ms Everett relied on the case of Amirteymour &  others  (EEA
appeals; Human Rights) [2015] UKUT 00466, and argued that the  Judge  should
not have considered article 8 ECHR.

10.   Mr Wilford adopted the terms of the rule 24 reply.  He  told  me  that
even though family courts do not consider the Immigration (EEA)  Regulations
2006, the residence order produced is an  important  adminicle  of  evidence
demonstrating that the appellant is the primary carer  of  her  two  British
citizen children. He said that the  Judge  was  correct  to  find  that  the
residence order, together with the other evidence produced,  indicated  that
if the appellant was required to leave  the  UK,  British  citizen  children
would be unable to reside in the UK or in another EEA state. He argued  that
there was no reliable evidence that the children  will  be  able  to  reside
with their father in the absence of  the  appellant,  so  that  the  Judge's
finding was fully sustainable

11.   In the alternative, Mr Wilford argued that the final two sentences  of
[12] of the decision may be viewed as  ambiguous;  in  the  event  that  the
decision is tainted by material error of law  (which  is  denied)  the  only
appropriate course of action would be to remit the case  to  the  First-tier
to be determined of new.

Analysis

12.   The relevant  part  of  regulation  15  A  of  the  immigration  (EEA)
regulations is

    "15A. Derivative right of residence

         (1) A person ("P") who is not an exempt person  and  who  satisfies
         the criteria in paragraph

         ... (2), (3), (4), (4A) or (5) of this regulation is entitled to  a
         derivative right to reside in the United Kingdom for as long  as  P
         satisfies the relevant criteria.

         ... (4A) P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if-  (a)  P  is
         the primary carer of  a  British  citizen  ("the  relevant  British
         citizen"); (b) the relevant British  citizen  is  residing  in  the
         United Kingdom; and (c)  the  relevant  British  citizen  would  be
         unable to reside in the UK or  in  another  EEA  State  if  P  were
         required to leave."

13.   Reg 15A(7) states that a person, P, is to be regarded  as  a  "primary
carer" of another person if (a) P is a direct relative or a  legal  guardian
of that person; and (b) P- (i) is the person who has primary  responsibility
for that person's care; or (ii) shares equally the responsibility  for  that
person's care with one other person who is not an exempt person.

14.   At [11] & [12] the Judge makes a clear finding that the  appellant  is
the primary carer of two British citizens. At  [12]  the  Judge  finds  that
there was no evidence the children would be able to continue living  in  the
UK or in another EEA state if the appellant were required to leave  the  UK.
In making those findings, the Judge makes it clear that,  on  the  basis  of
the evidence placed before the Judge, the appellant is the primary carer  of
British citizen children, and there  are  no  alternative  arrangements  for
their care - so that if the appellant leaves the UK  the  children  have  to
leave with her. That is a finding which it was open to the Judge to make  on
the evidence led and the facts as he found them to be.

15.   Ms Everett argued that the error of law is contained in the final  two
sentences of [12] because they display perverse findings of fact.  There  is
no merit in that submission. Ms Everett candidly conceded that  there  is  a
high  threshold  to  be  passed  to  make  a  finding  of  perversity.   The
penultimate sentence of [12] is a comment that the Judge  passes  reflecting
on the submission made by counsel for the appellant. The final  sentence  is
an unambiguous statement "Yet on  balance  of  probabilities  the  appellant
meets the requirements of the 2006 regulations".

16.   In R and Others v SSHD (2005) EWCA civ 982 Lord Justice  Brooke  noted
that perversity represented a  very  high  hurdle.   It  embraced  decisions
which were irrational or unreasonable in the Wednesbury sense.

17.   It is not an arguable error of law for a  Judge  to  give  too  little
weight or too much weight to a  factor,  unless  irrationality  is  alleged.
Disagreement with a  Judge's  factual  conclusions,  his  appraisal  of  the
evidence or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of  risk  does  not
give rise to an error of law. Rationality is a very  high  threshold  and  a
conclusion is not irrational just because some alternative  explanation  has
been rejected or can be  said  to  be  possible.  Nor  is  it  necessary  to
consider every possible alternative inference consistent  with  truthfulness
because a Judge concludes that the story told is untrue.

18.   There is merit in Ms Everett's submissions in relation to the Judge's
treatment of article 8 ECHR. In Amirteymour and others (EEA appeals;  human
rights) [2015] UKUT 00466  it was held that where no notice  under  section
120 of the 2002 Act has been served and where no EEA decision to remove has
been made, an appellant cannot bring a Human Rights challenge to removal in
an appeal under the EEA Regulations. Neither the  factual  matrix  nor  the
reasoning in JM (Liberia) [2006] EWCA  Civ  1402  has  any  application  to
appeals of this nature.

19.   The respondent's decision of 9 October 2014  refused  the  appellant's
application by reference to the  2006  Regulations  alone.  No  section  120
notice was served on the appellant and there are no removal directions.

20.   I find that the Judge's consideration of Article 8 ECHR constitutes  a
clear & material error of law. At [18] & [19] the Judge  incorrectly  refers
to "family life" and "article 8 ECHR". Between  [13]  and  [18],  the  Judge
embarks on an exercise  considering  the  appellant's  rights  in  terms  of
Article 8 ECHR. It is beyond dispute that there is  neither  a  Section  120
notice nor removal directions in this case. The case  of  Amirteymour  makes
is quite clear that Article 8 ECHR was not a consideration in this case  and
was not a matter which could competently be considered by the judge.

Conclusion

21    I therefore find that the determination contains a material  error  of
law and must be set aside.

Decision

22.   The decision promulgated on 22 May  2015  is  tainted  by  a  material
error of law in regard to the consideration of Article 8 ECHR  and  must  be
set aside.

23.   I consider the case of new and substitute the following decision.

24.   The appeal is allowed under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.


Signed:     Date: 27 October 2015

      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
