
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/42404/2014
                                                               IA/42407/2014
                                                               IA/42416/2014
                                                               IA/42426/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2nd June 2016                             |On 3rd June 2016              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MRS MARIAM AFOLAKE FANU
                                    [O F]
                                    [M F]
                                    [S F]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. I Jarvis; Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. A Cooray; Joint Council for the Welfare of
Immigrants


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. This is an appeal against a decision  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Colyer promulgated on 9th May 2015 2015,  in  which  he  allowed  the
       appeals against the decisions of the Secretary of State for the  Home
       Department of 26th September 2014, to refuse the application made  by
       Mariam Afolake Fanu and her three dependent children,  for  leave  to
       remain in the UK pursuant to Article 8 ECHR.


    2. The appellant before me, is the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
       Department and the respondents to this appeal, are Mrs  Mariam  Fanu,
       her two sons [OF] and [MF], and her daughter [SF].  However for  ease
       of reference, in the course  of  this  decision  I  shall  adopt  the
       parties' status as it was before the First-tier Tribunal.  I shall in
       this decision, refer to Mrs Fanu and  her  three  dependants  as  the
       appellants and the Secretary of State as the respondent.


    3. The appellants are all Nigerian  national.   The  background  to  the
       decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set out at paragraphs  [1]  to
       [6] of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.   At  paragraph
       [5] of her decision, the Judge refers to a preliminary  point  raised
       on behalf of the appellants.  It  was  submitted  on  behalf  of  the
       appellants that as their first application for leave  to  remain  was
       made in July 2009, the respondent should have  considered  the  rules
       applicable on that date.  At paragraph [6] of her decision, the Judge
       records  that  he  considered  the  matter  raised,  as  having  some
       considerable merit.


    4. The findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  are  to  be  found  at
       paragraphs [8] to [13] of the decision.  The Judge notes at paragraph
       [8] that the application for leave to remain made on 27th  July  2009
       was refused on 18th June 2012.  The Judge notes at paragraph [9] that
       the appellants applied again on 12th October 2012 for leave to remain
       outside the rules and that application was refused on 13th  September
       2013.  Following a challenge to that decision by a claim for Judicial
       Review the parties agreed, by consent, that the  respondent  withdraw
       her decision.  The respondent made  a  further  decision  dated  26th
       September 2014 that gave rise to the  appeal  before  the  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge.


    5. The Judge accepted the submission advanced on behalf of the appellant
       that the applicable rules are those in force prior to  13th  December
       2012, because the application was made before that date. At paragraph
       [12] the Judge states:


          "12.     The initial decision regarding these Appellants was  made
             by the Respondent on 13th September  2013  after  the  change.
             No further application was made. The  decision  was  withdrawn
             and  remade  and  therefore  the  appeal  still  concerns   an
             application made prior to 13th December  2012.  I  accept  the
             argument put forward by the  Appellants'  representative  that
             this is significant  because  HC  760  amends  the  applicable
             Immigration Rule paragraph 276ADE.


    6. At paragraph [13] of his decision,  the  Judge  refers  to  paragraph
       276ADE(iv) in its original form and post the amendment introduced  by
       HC706.  The Judge states:


             "13. ... The Respondent  has  applied  the  amended  Rule  and
             considers that it would be reasonable to expect the Appellants
             to leave the United Kingdom.    I  accept  the  arguments  put
             forward by the Appellants that under  the  unamended  Rule  no
             such requirement applied."


    7. The  respondent  now  submits  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       erroneously concluded that the reasonableness  requirement  (inserted
       into 276ADE(iv) by virtue of HC 760) was not applicable this  appeal,
       as the application was made prior to 13th December 2012.


    8. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Dineen
       on 24th April 2016. The matter comes before me to consider whether or
       not the determination by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Colyer  involved
       the making of a material error of law,  and  if  so,  to  remake  the
       decision.


    9. Before me, Mr Cooray on behalf of the appellants  conceded  that  the
       decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge discloses a material  error
       of law.  In my judgement he was right to do so.


   10.  When  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  was  first   introduced   into   the
       Immigration  Rules  by  HC194,  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  it   simply
       required applicants, such as the children in this case, to  establish
       that they were  under  the  age  of  18  and  had  lived  in  the  UK
       continuously for  7  years.   However,  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  was
       amended from 13th December 2012 by HC760, such that  the  requirement
       is that an applicant must establish that they are under the age of 18
       and have lived continuously in the UK for at least  7  years  and  it
       would not be reasonable to expect the  applicant  to  leave  the  UK.
       Although the transitional provisions set out in HC760  provided  that
       the introduction of the reasonableness requirement did not  apply  to
       applications made before 13th December 2012,  that  was  subsequently
       changed by HC820 such that the reasonableness requirement applies  to
       all applications decided on or after 13th December  2012,  regardless
       of the date the application was made.


   11. The rules therefore required the Judge to consider whether  it  would
       be reasonable to expect the applicant to leave the UK.  The Judge did
       not do so.


   12. It follows that in  my  judgment,  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal discloses a material error of law and the  decision  of  the
       First-tier Tribunal is set aside.


   13. The decision needs to be re-made  and  I  have  decided  that  it  is
       appropriate to remit this appeal back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
       having taken into account paragraph 7.2  of  the  Senior  President's
       Practice Statement of 25th September 2012 which states;


          '7.2     The Upper Tribunal is likely on  each  such  occasion  to
             proceed to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case
             to the First-tier  Tribunal,  unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
             satisfied that;


              (a)  the effect of the error  has  been  to  deprive  a  party
                  before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other
                  opportunity for  that  party's  case  to  be  put  to  and
                  considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


          (b) the nature or extent of any  judicial  fact-finding  which  is
                  necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-
                  made  is  such  that,  having  regard  to  the  overriding
                  objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit  the  case
                  to the First-tier Tribunal.'


   14. In my view the requirements of paragraph 7.2(a) and (b)  apply.   The
       Judge has failed to set out and consider in his decision any  of  the
       evidence that was before him beyond the evidence  of  the  length  of
       time that the three children have spent in the UK.   The  nature  and
       extent of any judicial fact-finding  necessary  with  regard  to  the
       claim claim under the immigration rules, and  if  necessary,  outside
       the rules will be extensive. The parties will be advised of the  date
       of the First-tier Tribunal hearing in due course.


Notice of Decision


   15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.


   16. The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh.


   17. No anonymity direction is applied for and none is made.

Signed                                  Date 3rd June 2016


       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia



FEE AWARD


The First-tier Tribunal made no fee award.  As I  have  set  set  aside  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal and remitted the matter  for  re-hearing
I make no fee award.

Signed                                  Date 3rd June 2016


       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

