
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA424362014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 May 2016                                |15 June 2016                  |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            CAMELA BRYONIE CARTER
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow
For the Respondent:    Mr R Khosla (D J Webb & Co, Solicitors)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the appeal of the Secretary of State but I will  refer  to  the
    original appellant, a citizen of Jamaica born on 29 March 1979, as  the
    appellant herein.

2.   The appellant entered the UK on 6 October 2000 with a  visit  visa  and
    applied for further leave to remain prior to  the  conclusion  of  that
    visit in April 2001.  That application generated  a  refusal  dated  16
    August 2001 against which it  appears  that  the  appellant  sought  to
    appeal in October 2001, submitting an appeal form to the Home Office as
    was then the practice.

3.   The appellant subsequently applied for a  certificate  of  approval  to
    marry but this application was withdrawn  as  the  relationship  ended.
    The appellant's passport had been given to  the  Home  Office  at  that
    point and had not been returned.  The appellant had made a human rights
    claim which was refused and was the subject of a judicial review.   The
    Secretary of State decided to refuse to grant leave  to  remain  on  28
    October 2013.  The appellant  lodged an appeal.

4.   The appeal came before a First-tier Judge on 9 October  2015.   At  the
    hearing the  appellant  sought  to  develop  the  appeal  on  different
    grounds.  The appellant had appealed the  decision  in  2001  and  this
    appeal  had  never  been  determined.   Accordingly  she  had  remained
    lawfully in the UK under Section 3C  of  the  1971  Act  and  had  been
    lawfully residing in the UK for  over  fourteen  years.   She  met  the
    requirements of paragraph 276B of the Rules, read with paragraphs 276A1
    and 276A2 for the grant of an extension of stay on  the  basis  of  her
    continuous lawful long residence.  It was accepted that  the  appellant
    did not qualify for the grant of indefinite leave to remain as she  had
    not passed the "life in the UK" test.   She  had  not  taken  the  test
    because to do so she had to produce her passport but this was  retained
    by the Home Office.  The Presenting Officer at the hearing objected  to
    the application to vary the grounds and commented  that  there  was  no
    right of appeal against the 2013 decision.  It was however pointed  out
    that the proposal to amend the grounds had been set  out  in  a  letter
    dated 16 October 2014, a year before the appeal hearing.  It was argued
    that the appeal should be progressed on the basis that the 2001  appeal
    was still alive and that the original grounds had  been  "overtaken  by
    time".  The appeal should now be amended to  include  over  ten  years'
    lawful residence.  If necessary the appellant could rely on  Article  8
    private life and succeed on that basis.

5.   The judge found that the Home Office had had a year to  deal  with  the
    arguments advanced in the 16 October  2014  letter  and  had  taken  no
    action.  Moreover the appeal lodged in 2001 had not been progressed for
    fifteen years.  The judge referred to  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    276A1 and 276A2 but acknowledged that the appellant had not  been  able
    to pass the KoLL test.  This  was  because  the  Home  Office  had  not
    returned her passport.

6.   The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant and  her  cousin  with
    whom she lived.  He accepted their  evidence.   The  appellant  was  an
    integral  part  of  the  family  unit  over  some  fifteen  years.   In
    conclusion the  judge  found  that  the  appellant  complied  with  the
    relevant requirements of the Rules for the following reasons:

         "51. I allow the amendment to plead 10 years' lawful residence. The
             2000 appeal has not been dealt with and must be at some point.
             I deal with it today. The  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer's
             file is many inches  thick  and  has  all  the  papers  in  it
             relating to the appellant's immigration applications over  the
             years (save the appellant's passport).


         52.  The appellant has over  10  years  lawful  residence,  as  the
             submissions of her Counsel are correct. The appellant  arrived
             with a visa. She applied to extend it before it expired.   She
             appealed that in time. That appeal has  not  been  dealt  with
             until today. She is lawfully  present  until  that  appeal  is
             determined. That period of lawful residence exceeds  10  years
             (in fact it exceeds 15 years).


         53.  That the appellant has not taken and passed the KoLL  test  is
             because the Home Office have  retained  her  passport  without
             which she cannot take it. The appellant speaks English as  her
             mother tongue, and as a Jamaican is exempt from  the  language
             part of that appendix. I am satisfied that she has  sufficient
             knowledge about the language and life in the UK. Sub paragraph
             (iv) of paragraph 276B requires that this is  demonstrated  in
             accordance with appendix KoLL. She has lived  in  the  UK  for
             over 15 years and is fully assimilated into  the  UK.  She  is
             unable to take the Life in the UK test  without  the  passport
             retained by the Home Office and it  would  be  Kafkaesque  for
             that to be a reason to refuse her appeal. There  are  multiple
             exceptions for those who have been present for 15  years,  and
             there is no reason in principle  why  someone  with  15  years
             lawful residence has to take the "Life in the UK" test. I find
             that she satisfies paragraphs 276A1 and 276A2. The history  of
             this file does not give me confidence that if I remitted  the
             matter to the Home Office that the outcome would be  swift  or
             accurate, given the failure to deal with the 2000 appeal,  the
             non return of the passport, and the letter of a year ago  from
             the appellant's solicitors not being addressed."

7.   The judge found that while  that  was  sufficient  to  dispose  of  the
    appeal he would consider Article 8 issues.  He considered the impact of
    delay in the light of EB (Kosovo) v Secretary of State [2008] UKHL  41,
    he took into account the amendments made by the  Immigration  Act  2014
    but found the fifteen year delay was compelling in the circumstances of
    this case and the appellant was able to satisfy the tests  set  out  in
    Razgar v Secretary of State [2004] UKHL 27.  The  judge  concluded  his
    decision as follows:

         "55. The Home Office has sat on an appeal for nearly 15  years.  It
             has not returned the appellant's passport since  she  withdrew
             her application concerning marriage some years ago. It has not
             dealt with the letter setting out the position, in full,  from
             solicitors from a year ago.


         56.  I  allow  the  appeal  under  the  Rules.  The  appellant  has
             satisfied the 10 years plus lawful residence provisions of the
             Rules. In so far as the KoLL test has not been passed, this is
             because the Home  Office  has  prevented  the  appellant  from
             sitting it. It is apparent that the  appellant  not  a  person
             whom the test  is  designed  to  detect  as  not  sufficiently
             assimilated.


         57.  The Article 8 claim also succeeds. This is a family unit of 4,
             of 15 years stability,  of  mutual  interdependence.  That  is
             either a family or private life right. Interference with it is
             not proportionate. There  has  been  no  dependence  on  state
             benefits - quite the reverse as the presence of the appellant
             has assisted the appellant's cousin  in  the  raising  of  her
             children, in a family of which the appellant  is  an  integral
             part.


         Notice of Decision


         The appeal is allowed under the  immigration  rules  and  on  human
         rights grounds.


         The appellant is entitled to  the  grant  of  indefinite  leave  to
         remain under paragraph 276B.


         For the avoidance of doubt, the appellant has more  than  10  years
         lawful residence in the UK and should  be  issued  with  indefinite
         leave to remain on that basis, and on the basis of Article 8 of the
         European Convention on Human Rights."

8.   The respondent appealed and permission to  appeal  was  granted  on  26
    April 2016.  It was submitted that the judge allowed the appeal against
    the 2001 decision by reference to Immigration Rules not in force at the
    time of the decision and that there was procedural  unfairness  to  the
    respondent in permitting the amendment, the respondent having  attended
    the hearing in the expectation of hearing a  purported  appeal  against
    the 2013 decision.  The appellant filed a reply to the grounds on 9 May
    2016.  It was pointed out inter alia that the  appellant  had  been  on
    notice about the jurisdictional issue for twelve months and nothing had
    been done.  The grounds had not been varied on the day as claimed.  The
    finding that the appellant had been on Section 3C  leave  for  fourteen
    years was not disputed by the respondent's representative.  Although it
    had been argued that the appeal should be remitted to the Secretary  of
    State, the judge had given proper reasons for not doing so.

9.   I heard submissions from the parties.  However it turned out  that  the
    gap between them was  not  as  unbridgeable  as  might  have  at  first
    appeared.  Mr Khosla acknowledged that there had been an error  of  law
    on the part of the judge in stating that the appellant was entitled  to
    the grant of indefinite leave to remain under the Rules in the light of
    the fact that she had not passed the KoLL test.   The  judge  had  also
    erred in stating that the appellant should be  issued  with  indefinite
    leave to remain on human rights grounds.  The correct position  it  was
    submitted was that the appellant should be granted an extension of stay
    on the grounds of long residence under paragraph 276A1 and 276A2 of the
    Rules.  The period would not exceed two years.  In relation to  Article
    8 the appellant would expect to receive 30 months' discretionary  leave
    to remain.

10.  Both parties were content that I  identify  an  error  of  law  in  the
    judge's decision on this basis.  The judge erred in deciding  that  the
    appellant was entitled to indefinite leave to remain  under  the  Rules
    and on human rights grounds.  The appellant was  not  entitled  to  the
    grant of indefinite leave to remain under the  Rules  he  referred  to.
    I was invited not to specify a period of leave to remain but simply to
    allow the appeal under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  on  human  rights
    grounds.  Accordingly and  by  agreement  of  the  parties  I  find  as
    follows: the First-tier Judge materially erred in law in the concluding
    paragraphs of his  decision  and  I  substitute  a  fresh  decision  as
    follows: the appeal is allowed under the Immigration Rules  (paragraphs
    276A1 and 276A2).


    The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.

   Anonymity
   The First-tier Judge made no anonymity direction and I make none.


   Fee Award
   The judge made no fee award because of  the  history  of  the  case:  the
   appeal had been lodged fifteen years previously when there were no  fees.
   I make no fee award.






Signed                                  Date 8 June 2016
G Warr
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
