
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                 Appeal
Number: IA/42934/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 January 2016                             |On 20 January 2016            |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART

                                   Between

                              mr md abdul aZIZ
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Makol
For the Respondent:    Mr Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh.  He was  born  on  8  October
    1983.  He appealed against the respondent's refusal dated 22  September
    2014 to grant him leave to remain as a Tier 1  (Entrepreneur)  Migrant.
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Rodger (the judge) in a decision  promulgated
    on 24 June  2015,  allowed  the  appeal  because  she  found  that  the
    appellant met the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

 2. The respondent  claimed  that  the  judge  had  materially  misdirected
    herself in law in terms of the points-based system and materially erred
    in making a full fee award:

Ground 1.  Material Misdirection in Law

 3. The grounds claimed the judge failed to give  herself  the  appropriate
    self direction about the limitation of evidence  she  could  take  into
    account  under  the  points-based  system.   She  could  only  consider
    evidence adduced by the appellant if it was submitted in support of and
    at the time of making the  application.   The  respondent's  three  key
    reasons for refusal were not adequately addressed by the judge:

    (a)  the respondent "...... accepted that he had submitted  a  copy  of
         the Gumtree advert and a copy of an advert on Twitter  but  he  had
         not provided any evidence that these adverts were placed  prior  to
         11 July 2014 and it did not cover a  continuous  period  commencing
         before 11 July 2014, up to no earlier than three months before  the
         date of application." See [7](iii) of the decision.

    (b)  and that "...... the evidence submitted in relation  to  marketing
         material/advertising  material/article  in   newspaper   or   other
         publication at a trade fair/personal registration  with  a  trading
         body linked to his occupation was not  acceptable  as  it  did  not
         cover a continuous period commencing before 11 July 2014, up to  no
         earlier than three months before the date of his application."  See
         [7](iv) of the decision.

    (c)  and that "...... the contract was not acceptable  as  it  did  not
         have a quantifiable period on it, that is, the proper dates of  the
         duration  of  the  contract.   There  was  no  clear  duration   of
         contract."  See [7](v) of the decision.

 4. There were other issues. At [13] of the  decision  the  judge  recorded
    that  she  had  accepted  documents  from   the   appellant's   counsel
    ".....originals of two leaflets  (one  dated  22/06/14  and  one  dated
    07/07/14) and a colour copy of an advert for an event being held by the
    appellant on 27 and 28 June 2014 without addressing  her  mind  to  the
    admissibility of those documents, given the  respondent's  reasons  for
    refusal".

 5. It was not open to the judge  to  accept  the  appellant's  unsupported
    claims in evidence-in-chief (see  [15]  of  the  decision)  that  those
    advertising materials were submitted with the application,  given  that
    the respondent Presenting Officer's submissions specifically  contested
    that as a material  fact  in  issue  in  the  appeal,  maintaining  the
    respondent's position that  the  advertising  materials  had  not  been
    submitted with the application as claimed as they were not on the  Home
    Office file.  See [18] of the decision.

 6. Whilst the judge properly applied her mind  to  whether  the  appellant
    could provide proof of posting, delivery and receipt by the  respondent
    of the amended contract with the missing information, before  the  date
    of the respondent's decision ([21] of the decision), it was clear  that
    the judge allowed herself to become  sidetracked  from  the  key  issue
    which was that even accepting that  the  appellant  had  submitted  the
    amended contract complete  with  the  missing  information  before  the
    respondent's date of decision, the appellant's appeal still  failed  to
    meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  That was  because  the
    judge erred in failing to address her mind as to whether the  appellant
    could properly discharge the burden of proof to the requisite standard,
    to show that he had indeed, as claimed, sent the two leaflets  and  his
    workshop  advert  with  his  application  by  way  of   producing   the
    appropriate proof of posting and delivery  normally  expected  in  such
    circumstances.   Moreover,  the  judge  further  failed   to   properly
    determine whether any such advertising material  covered  the  relevant
    period as contested by the respondent.  In  finding  that  "......  for
    some unknown reason the respondent does not have them on file  and  did
    not consider such documentation" ([21] of the decision), the respondent
    submitted that it was not properly open to  the  judge  to  effectively
    reverse the burden of proof to the respondent.

 7. The respondent submitted that the judge made a material misdirection of
    law in considering evidence that she was prevented from considering and
    erred in allowing the appellant's appeal on the  basis  that  he  could
    meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

Ground 2. Fee award

 8. The judge erred in making a full fee award against the respondent given
    she failed to provide any reasons why it was appropriate for her to  do
    so.

Permission to Appeal

 9. Judge J M Holmes granted permission to appeal on 29 October  2015.   He
    considered it was arguable that the judge failed to confine herself  to
    the evidence submitted with the application and  failed  to  adequately
    engage with the specified evidence required of the applicant in support
    of his application by paragraph  41-SD.   Even  if  the  appellant  had
    submitted with his application the evidence of advertisements  that  he
    claimed to have submitted with it, that did not meet  the  requirements
    of the Rules because of the deficiencies in the document relied upon as
    the "contract" with Maldon Catering that had been  supplied  with  that
    application.   Those  deficiencies  could  not  be  cured  by  evidence
    subsequently produced.  Thus  the  judge's  approach  to  the  "amended
    contract" was arguably flawed and amounted to a material error  of  law
    since the appellant did not in fact meet the requirements of the  Rules
    so that his appeal should have been dismissed.

Submissions on Error of Law

10. Mr Nath relied upon the grounds.

11. Mr Makol conceded that  certain  documentation  was  omitted  from  the
    application in error, however, that was remedied prior to the  date  of
    the respondent's decision.  He relied upon Nasim [2013] UKUT 610  (IAC)
    nor did Mr Nath take any issue with its relevance.

Conclusion on Error of Law

12. Mr Nath conceded that the respondent had a discretion to  consider  any
    documents submitted by the appellant prior to the date of the decision,
    however, he argued such consideration was not obligatory.

13. The appellant produced evidence found by the judge to be credible  that
    he had posted the documentation and that it had been  received  by  the
    respondent  but  the  Presenting  Officer  at  the  hearing  said   the
    documentation was not on the file.  The judge found the appellant to be
    "...... an honest and entirely credible  person".   She  found  he  had
    worked hard to set up his business, that it was a genuine business  and
    that his advertising was also genuine.  She accepted his evidence as to
    the dates of the leaflets and also that he had sent  the  two  leaflets
    and his workshop advert with his  application.   She  found  there  was
    documentation sent by the appellant and received by the respondent that
    was missing from the respondent's file.  Those were findings  that  the
    judge was entitled to come to on the evidence before her.

14. The judge found that there was inadequate documentation  provided  with
    the application but which was remedied  by  the  appellant  before  the
    respondent's decision.

15. The judge went on to find  that  the  amended  contract  reflected  the
    situation as it was at the time of the application and did not indicate
    a change in position or new circumstances.  See [22] of the decision.

16. As regards the leaflets and advert, the judge set out the  evidence  in
    that regard at [15].  She found at [23] that the leaflets  and  Gumtree
    advert were placed prior to 11 July 2014, such that (and  I  find)  the
    appellant had provided sufficient evidence which covered  a  continuous
    period commencing prior to 11 July 2014 up to  no  earlier  than  three
    months before the date of his application.

17. Leaving aside the  issue  of  the  advertisements  said  to  have  been
    submitted as of the date of the  application,  the  appellant  had  not
    submitted the evidence specified at paragraph 41-SD(c) of  Appendix  A.
    The head note to  Nasim provides that as held in Khatel  &  Ors  (S85A:
    effect of continuing application) [2013] UKUT 44 (IAC) a Tribunal in  a
    points-based appeal  is  precluded  from  considering  evidence  as  to
    compliance with points-based rules where that evidence was  not  before
    the Secretary of State when she took her decision, but the section does
    not prevent the Tribunal from considering evidence that was before  the
    Secretary of State when she took the  decision,  whether  or  not  that
    evidence reached her  only  after  the  date  of  application  for  the
    purposes of paragraph 34F of the Immigration Rules.

18. I find that there was no obligation, merely a discretion on the part of
    the Secretary of State to take into account the amended contract.   The
    issue for me must be whether  the  Secretary  of  State  was  under  an
    obligation to at least consider the exercise of her discretion.

19. The fact that the Presenting Officer  at  the  hearing  confirmed  that
    there was no amended contract on the file, notwithstanding the evidence
    that it had been posted and received, was in my view, credible evidence
    that such documentation had been received by  the  respondent,  but  in
    some way had been overlooked  or  misplaced,  such  that  she  did  not
    proceed to consider whether she should exercise her discretion.

20. I find there was an obligation on the Secretary of State  to  at  least
    consider  the  exercise  of   her   discretion.   In   the   particular
    circumstances of this case, in terms of the findings made by the judge,
    I do not accept that the Secretary of State can rely upon the fact that
    the documentation was not supplied with the application, such that  the
    claimed error on the part of the judge in that regard is not made  out.



21. As to the fee award, given the  judge's  findings,  she  gave  adequate
    reasons for making the fee award.

22. In summary, I conclude that the decision does not  contain  a  material
    error of law, such that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  should
    be set aside.

Decision

23. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error  of  law  and
    shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date   8 January 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart








