
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/42570/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 15th May 2014                                |On 8 July 2014             |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                         Merrick Cleveland Sinclair

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Cole, Solicitor, Parker Rhodes Hickmotts
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Birkby), who in a determination  promulgated
    on 13th January 2014 allowed the appeal of the Respondent  against  the
    decision of the Secretary of State to refuse leave to remain under  the
    provisions of Appendix FM  and  paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

 2. Whilst this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, for  convenience  I
    will refer to the parties in the determination as they appeared  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The history of the appeal is as follows.  The Appellant is a citizen of
    Jamaica born on 7th February 1973.  He entered the United Kingdom as  a
    visitor on 6th October 1999 with leave to enter until 5th April of that
    year.  On 22nd September 2000 he married  his  partner  Kim  Karen  Ann
    Browne and on 26th June 2004 he applied for leave to remain as a spouse
    of a settled person.   It  took  the  Secretary  of  State  until  10th
    February 2009  to  consider  that  application.   By  which  stage  the
    Appellant became the father of three children with his partner, P  born
    on 4th August 2001, M born on 31st August 2003 and S born on  7th  July
    2006.  That application was subsequently refused on the basis  that  he
    had not provided adequate  evidence  to  show  that  the  marriage  was
    subsisting.  It is also right that at that time  he  had  two  children
    that he stated were born in Jamaica living in Birmingham then  aged  14
    and 11.  It appears that he had not seen his son since he was 3 as  his
    partner would not let him have contact with the children without making
    financial contributions to their  welfare.   The  Appellant  lodged  an
    appeal against that decision and on 23rd  June  2009  the  appeal  came
    before First-tier Designated Judge Shaerf who dismissed the  appeal  on
    the basis that the marriage was  not  subsisting.   Therefore  by  25th
    August 2009 the Appellant was appeal rights exhausted.

 4. On 19th August 2013 further representations were made in respect of  an
    application to remain in the United Kingdom on  human  rights  grounds.
    In a letter of 4th October 2013 the Respondent set out the reasons  for
    refusing  those  representations  by  reference  to  Appendix  FM   and
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.   The  letter  set  out  the
    Appellant's immigration history and accepted that in the  circumstances
    he met the suitability requirements for family and private life  to  be
    considered under Appendix FM, the new Rules.   As  to  the  eligibility
    grounds as a partner, the letter  noted  that  the  Appellant  had  not
    provided evidence of cohabitation and at paragraphs 14 to 16 took  into
    account the past determination of Judge Shaerf noting that in  2009  he
    was not in a subsisting relationship with  his  partner  and  therefore
    could not meet the requirements for the partner route.  As to the route
    as a parent, at paragraph 12 it set out  the  eligibility  requirements
    and at [19] whilst it had been established that he was the father of at
    least two children, P and M, it was indicated that the  children  lived
    with her and therefore he failed to satisfy E-LTR2.3  of  Appendix  FM.
    It was also stated that there was little evidence  to  show  an  active
    role in their upbringing at [20].  It was also stated that  regard  had
    been given to Section EX under Appendix FM but it was noted that  there
    was no evidence to suggest he had children in the  United  Kingdom  for
    whom he had parental responsibility nor was it accepted that he was  in
    a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with  a  British  citizen  and
    therefore failed to meet EX1(a) and (b).  As to paragraph 276ADE of the
    Immigration Rules, the Respondent set out the reasons why the Appellant
    could not meet those requirements either.

 5. The Appellant exercised his right to appeal that decision and the  case
    came before the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Birkby) at Bradford on  23rd
    December 2013.  The judge had the advantage of  hearing  the  Appellant
    give evidence and for that to be the subject of  cross-examination  and
    he  set  out  his  findings  and  conclusions  at  [23]-[31]   of   the
    determination.

 6.   The findings of fact can be summarised as follows.   In  relation  to
    his application on the basis as  a  partner  which  was  based  on  his
    relationship with Kimberley the judge considered his  claim  that  they
    lived together in Sheffield and that they  were  the  parents  of  four
    children now, P born 4th August 2001, M born 31st  August  2003  and  S
    born on 7th July 2005 and L born on  7th  October  2012.   At  [28]  he
    accepted that the Appellant was the biological father  of  two  of  the
    four children as he had seen birth certificates relating to two of them
    but found on the basis of the overall evidence before him that  he  was
    satisfied that he was the biological father of all four  children.   He
    noted that his partner had a child from a previous relationship (B) who
    was now living in London independently.  At  [23]  the  judge  was  not
    satisfied that the Appellant had demonstrated that he lived at the home
    of his wife on a regular basis and from the evidence  found  it  to  be
    inconsistent and lacking in credibility.  The example given was that he
    could not name the children's school at  the  mitigating  circumstances
    interview despite an assertion that he  picked  the  children  up  from
    school.  Therefore the finding made by the judge was that he  sees  his
    wife and children in Sheffield  but  does  not  live  with  them  on  a
    permanent basis.  He  reached  the  conclusion  that  this  was  not  a
    subsisting relationship "akin to marriage".

 7. As to the relationship with the children, the judge was satisfied  that
    he was the father of the four children in Sheffield  set  out  earlier.
    At [24] the judge accepted that he had an ongoing relationship with the
    four children in Sheffield.   He  made  findings  in  relation  to  the
    evidence.  Firstly, he paid regard and weight to the photographs of the
    Appellant with the children (see [22] and [24]) that had been  provided
    before him which he accepted.  Secondly, he placed weight upon  letters
    from three of the children which he described as  being  in  "different
    handwriting" and therefore found them to be  "clearly  written  by  the
    children".  From those letters he  reached  the  conclusion  that  they
    indicated  an  ongoing  relationship  between  the  Appellant  and  his
    children.  At [24] the judge said this:-

         "I believe that the Appellant goes to the house of the children and
         his wife on a relatively regular basis and I  have  concluded  that
         were he to  return  to  Jamaica  the  children  are  likely  to  be
         seriously upset about the fact that they are not able to  see  him.
         I am not satisfied that they would  be  able  to  visit  him  on  a
         regular basis in Jamaica and no  doubt  the  Appellant  would  have
         difficulties bearing in mind his immigration history, being able to
         return to the UK from Jamaica to visit the four children."

    As to the children in Sheffield and his wife, at [27] the judge was not
    satisfied that he assisted his wife to the extent claimed and  did  not
    accept he assisted the children in their  travel  to  and  from  school
    although he did accept that he will have assisted on occasions and that
    "there was a degree of plausibility and consistency within the evidence
    that the Appellant generally did assist although that was exaggerated".



 8. Other findings that were made by the judge include the  following.   At
    [28] that the Appellant  had  to  an  extent  an  active  role  in  the
    children's  upbringing  and  concluded  that  although   his   parental
    responsibility to his children had been largely that of  his  wife,  he
    had a degree of parental responsibility.  At [30] the judge found  that
    the Appellant enjoyed family life in the UK with four of  his  children
    although he did not live with them but that he saw  them  and  assisted
    them to the extent on a relatively regular basis.  He found their  best
    interests were that they were to continue to have a  relationship  with
    their father and that there was no evidence to show that their  father,
    the Appellant, had not shown interest in them over the years  and  that
    the evidence in fact was the opposite in this case.  At [30] the  judge
    reached the conclusion that he provided some financial  assistance  but
    it was limited.  At [31] he found the best interests  of  the  children
    were that they maintained a relationship with the  Appellant  which  he
    found to be "currently ongoing".  He placed  weight  upon  the  letters
    that  had  been  placed  before  the  Tribunal  and  found   that   the
    relationship was expressed in those letters.   He  found  that  if  the
    Appellant were to be removed there was a likelihood  that  all  contact
    would  be  severely  limited.   The  Appellant  would  have  difficulty
    obtaining a visa to return, even if he could afford the expense and the
    children, who were British citizens, would have difficulty  financially
    in visiting the Appellant in  Jamaica.   The  judge  considered  modern
    methods of communication but found:-

         "Bearing in mind I accept that there is  a  significant  degree  of
         face-to-face contact currently the Appellant's removal  to  Jamaica
         would, I believe, seriously affect the emotional wellbeing  of  the
         children if they could not see him on a regular basis."

    He did not consider that it was reasonable for the children to move  to
    Jamaica as they were British citizens and lived all their life  in  the
    United Kingdom and that there would be obstacles for them  to  live  in
    Jamaica which were too great to be acceptable.   He  found  that  their
    lives would be in turmoil.  Thus he also found it was unreasonable  for
    the Appellant to return to Jamaica with  the  consequences  that  there
    would be for the wellbeing of the four children.

 9. As to other children in the UK, MS born in 2004 and LS  born  in  1997,
    the judge found at [25] as to the two children living in Birmingham  he
    believed the Appellant to have some contact over the years but this was
    on a "casual and infrequent basis" (see [25]).

10. The judge, when applying the law at [28] under Appendix FM  found  that
    the Appellant had an active role in the child's upbringing  and  stated
    that he was "not satisfied that  the  Respondent  assertions  that  the
    Appellant has not met the requirements of Section EX(a) with regard  to
    a parental relationship with the child, pursuant to Appendix FM of  the
    Immigration Rules".  He later went on to say "I do not accept that  the
    Respondent has established that the Appellant has failed to satisfy the
    requirements of E-LTR2.3 of Appendix FM of the Rules".  He then  stated
    at [29]:-

         "Mr Cole did not however, specifically  detail  how  the  Appellant
         would meet the requirements  of  Appendix  FM.   I  have  therefore
         considered the Appellant's case  in  the  light  of  the  case  law
         generally, in particular the case of Razgar [2004] UKHL 27  and  in
         the light of Article 8 under the Convention."

    He then undertook a "classic Article 8 assessment" and at [32]  allowed
    the appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR.

11. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal  that  decision  and
    permission was granted by the First-tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett on 1st
    April 2014.

12.   Thus the appeal  came  before  the  Upper  Tribunal.   Mr  Cole,  who
    appeared in the court below for Mr Sinclair, appeared before the  Upper
    Tribunal and the Secretary of State was represented by Mr Diwnycz.   Mr
    Diwnycz stated that he relied upon  the  grounds  which  asserted  that
    firstly the judge erred in its approach to  the  Article  8  assessment
    that MF Nigeria [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 confirmed  the  Immigration  Rules
    are a complete code and form the starting point of the  decision  maker
    and  that  any  Article  8  assessment  should  only  be   made   after
    consideration under the Rules.  That was not done in this case and thus
    the Tribunal erred in law by not having regard to the  Rules  and  thus
    the subsequent proportionality assessment was  unsustainable.   It  was
    also stated at paragraph 3 of the grounds that the decision of  Gulshan
    [2013] UKUT 00640, that the Article 8 assessment should only be carried
    out where  there  are  compelling  circumstances,  the  judge  did  not
    identify any such compelling circumstances and therefore  the  findings
    are unsustainable.  And at paragraph 4 of the grounds it  was  asserted
    that the Tribunal had not followed the approach in  Gulshan  or  Nagre.
    As to ground 5 in which it was submitted that the Tribunal  had  failed
    to provide adequate reasons as to why it was accepted by the judge that
    the Appellant had  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  his
    children, Mr Diwnycz said that he did not strongly rely on that  as  it
    was not a particularly strong ground.

13. Mr Cole on behalf of the  Appellant  made  reference  to  his  Rule  24
    response and submitted that the way the determination had been set out,
    and the grounds in which it was suggested that the judge did not  apply
    the Immigration Rules, was not  an  accurate  assessment.   He  further
    submitted that the suggestion in the grounds that the  judge  erred  in
    law by not having regard to the Rules was incorrect as as at  paragraph
    28 the judge did have regard to the Rules and he accepted that he could
    meet them.  He  highlighted  the  difficulty  with  a  case  where  the
    Appellant had  relied  upon  the  partner  route  and  that  under  the
    construction of the Rules you cannot succeed under the parent route  if
    you have a partner.  However the judge rejected  the  claim  under  the
    partner route thus it was the findings under the  "parent  route"  that
    were important.  He conceded  that  the  judge  at  paragraph  28  when
    dealing with the Rules did not perhaps put it in the clearest  way  but
    when reading the determination  as  a  whole  it  was  clear  what  the
    conclusion was.  He submitted by going  through  the  Rules,  he  could
    satisfy the Immigration Rules and where looking at access  rights,  all
    that meant was that he was having contact to the children and that  was
    a finding of fact that was clearly made by  the  judge  throughout  the
    determination.  As to taking an active role, the findings at  [24]  and
    [28] when read together demonstrate that he was playing an active  role
    in the upbringing of the children and therefore he  had  met  EX1(a)(i)
    that the Appellant had a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with  a
    child and also (ii) that it would not be reasonable to expect the child
    to leave the UK.  The judge found that to be the position at  paragraph
    [30] and [31] of the determination.  Thus he could meet the Rules.

14.   Mr Cole conceded that it was not the  best  structured  determination
    and it was not clear  what  Rule  had  been  relied  on  but  when  the
    determination was read as a whole and referred back to the issues  that
    he decided, his findings of fact were  clear  about  the  role  of  the
    Appellant, that there was a significant degree of face-to-face contact,
    that there was a genuine and subsisting relationship with children  who
    were British citizens where it was not reasonable for them to leave the
    United Kingdom.  The findings did demonstrate that he  was  undertaking
    an active role in the child's upbringing and overall, the judge applied
    the general principles under the  Rules  and  therefore  there  was  no
    material error of law.  Thus it was a sustainable decision.

15.   As to ground 5, whilst Mr Diwnycz did not place  much  reliance  upon
    it, ground 5 gave some appearance of a perversity  challenge  but  that
    could not be right because the judge had heard the evidence and it  was
    open for him to put weight upon the evidence of the  children  detailed
    at an age appropriate level and to reach the conclusion  there  was  an
    ongoing involvement in their upbringing.  Those letters  were  at  page
    13, page 15 and page 16.  Thus there was sufficient  evidence  for  the
    judge to reach those conclusions.

16. Mr Diwnycz by way of reply posed the question as to how you defined  an
    active role with a child, and if it was  described  that  you  see  the
    children and you undertake their care during those periods, that  would
    fit the definition.

17. At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision.

Discussion

18. The grounds at paragraphs 1 to 4 advanced by the Secretary of State are
    that the  judge  erred  in  law  in  its  approach  to  the  Article  8
    assessment.  There is no doubt in my judgment  that  the  determination
    does not follow the structured approach that is  now  settled  law  (in
    accordance with the guidance set out in MF (Nigeria)  [2013]  EWCA  Civ
    1192, the High Court in Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) and by the  Upper
    Tribunal in Gulshan [2013] UKUT 640, as confirmed by  Shahzad  (Article
    8: legitimate aim) [2014] UKUT 00085 (IAC)).  These judgments have made
    it clear that the question of proportionality must be looked at in  the
    context of the Immigration Rules with no need to go on  to  a  specific
    assessment under Article 8 if it is clear from the facts that there are
    no particular compelling or exceptional  circumstances  requiring  that
    course to be taken.  That is an approach consistent with the  Court  of
    Appeal in MF (Nigeria) and Huang.  In Shahzad it was found  that  where
    an area of the Rules does not have an express mechanism, such as  found
    in deportation appeals, the approach of Nagre  and  Gulshan  should  be
    followed that after applying the requirements of  the  Rules,  only  if
    there may be arguably good grounds for granting leave to remain outside
    them is it necessary for Article  8  purposes  to  go  on  to  consider
    whether there are compelling circumstances not sufficiently  recognised
    under them.  Thus the starting point of the judge was to  look  at  the
    Rules and to see if the Appellant could meet those  requirements.   The
    judge began his consideration of the issue by considering  Appendix  FM
    of the Immigration Rules at [28].  It is  necessary  to  set  out  this
    paragraph in full:-

         "28. I have concluded, considering Appendix FM of  the  Immigration
             Rules, the Appellant has shown that he has to  extent  had  an
             active  role  in  the  children's  upbringing.   I  have  also
             concluded that although his parental  responsibility  for  his
             children has been largely that of  his  wife,  he  has  had  a
             degree of parental responsibility.  His  children  furthermore
             are British citizens.  Although the Respondent stated that  it
             was not accepted that the  Appellant  was  in  a  genuine  and
             subsisting relationship with  a  British  citizen,  I  do  not
             accept that that is the case.  I am not satisfied  as  to  the
             Respondent's assertions that the Appellant  has  not  met  the
             requirements of  Section  EX(a)  with  regard  to  a  parental
             relationship with a child, pursuant  to  Appendix  FM  of  the
             Immigration Rules.  The Appellant does not  meet  the  private
             life criteria under  paragraph  276ADE(iii)  to  (vi)  of  the
             Immigration Rules.  However, I accept that  the  Appellant  is
             the biological father of his four children in Sheffield, birth
             certificates have been shown for two of them,  and  I  do  not
             believe there is any reason why the Appellant will fail to  be
             credible with  regard  to  the  paternity  of  the  other  two
             children.  I do not accept that the Respondent has established
             that the Appellant had failed to satisfy the requirement of E-
             LTR2.3 of Appendix FM of the Rules.

         29.   Mr  Cole  did  not,  however,  specifically  detail  how  the
             Appellant would meet the requirements of Appendix FM.  I  have
             therefore considered the Appellant's case in light of the case
             law generally, in particular the case of Razgar [2004] UKHL 27
             and in light of Article 8 under the Convention."

19. Paragraph 28 appears to give the appearance that  on  the  findings  of
    fact made by the judge that he was satisfied that the Appellant had met
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  However  at  [29]  recorded
    above, and further in the light of what  was  said  at  [22]  that  the
    submissions were made "in general terms with regard to Article  8.   He
    did not  go  into  details  about  the  Respondent's  analysis  of  the
    Appellant's position under the Immigration  Rules  in  particular  with
    regard to paragraph 276ADE or Appendix FM".  Thus  at  paragraphs  [22]
    and [29] it does not appear that he was directed to the  provisions  of
    the Immigration Rules either under Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE  and
    therefore the judge found it necessary to consider the case  "in  light
    of Article 8 of the Convention".

20. In the light of the settled case law, and as set out above, that was  a
    legal error.  It was incumbent upon the judge to apply the Rules and if
    he could not meet the Rules only if there may be arguably good  grounds
    for granting leave to remain outside the Rules,  is  it  necessary  for
    Article 8 purposes to go on to consider whether there  are  "compelling
    circumstances not sufficiently recognised under  the  Rules".   On  the
    facts of this appeal, the case is being advanced on the  basis  of  his
    relationship with the children (the judge having found  that  he  could
    not satisfy the partner route) and therefore the Immigration  Rules  as
    they stand have specific provisions to deal with limited leave  as  the
    parent of a child.  It is therefore important as the cases  demonstrate
    that a careful analysis is made by considering the requirement  of  the
    Rules.  Whilst Mr Cole submits the judge did allow the appeal under the
    Rules by reason of his conclusion at [28], that cannot be right.  If he
    had done so, he would not have gone on to consider Article  8  "outside
    the Rules" or in the judge's terminology "in the light of the case  law
    generally as to Article 8", as this would have been unnecessary.  It is
    also claimed that there was some confusion when he referred to the Rule
    as E-LTR2.3 rather than E-LTRPT2.2 which contains the eligibility route
    for limited leave to remain as a parent, and made no reference  to  the
    other relevant paragraphs of the Rule including EX1.

21. However the question is whether the error is  material,  in  the  sense
    that does it contain an error of law justifying the Upper  Tribunal  to
    set it aside?  In this context, Mr Cole submits that on the findings of
    the judge and properly applying the Immigration  Rules,  the  Appellant
    would have succeeded under the Rules and the decision under  Article  8
    and the Immigration Rules effectively would be the same.

22.   This of course relies on the findings of fact  being  properly  made.
    The Secretary of State's grounds at  (5)  appear  to  make  a  "reasons
    challenge" where it is  asserted  that  the  judge  failed  to  provide
    adequate reasons as to why it was accepted the Appellant had a  genuine
    relationship with his children.  Mr Diwnycz in his submissions did  not
    rely heavily on paragraph 5 of  the  grounds.   In  any  event,  having
    considered the findings of fact which I have set out earlier, I do  not
    consider that that ground is made out.  The judge had  the  opportunity
    to hear the oral evidence of the Appellant  and  for  this  to  be  the
    subject of cross-examination.  He had the advantage also of considering
    that  evidence  in  the  light  of  the  substantial  history  and  the
    documentary evidence provided before him.  Contrary to the assertion in
    the grounds, the findings of fact set out earlier in the  determination
    demonstrate  that  the  judge  made  careful  findings  of   fact   and
    credibility.  It cannot be said that all the findings were in favour of
    the Appellant.  Indeed, some findings were positively adverse  to  him.
    This  in  my  judgment  demonstrates  that  the  judge   gave   careful
    consideration  to  the  evidence  before  him  and  gave  adequate  and
    sustainable evidenced based reasons for reaching the  conclusions  that
    he did on the evidence before him.  Whilst it could be said that he had
    reached generous conclusions relating to the children, it could be said
    that it falls in the category referred to by Carnwath LJ in Mukarkar  v
    SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1045 because such an assessment concerning Article
    8 rights is  such  that  different  Tribunals,  without  illegality  or
    irrationality, may reach different conclusions on the same case and the
    mere fact that one Tribunal has reached what may seem to another as  an
    unduly generous view of the facts does not mean that  it  has  made  an
    error of law.  Furthermore I  remind  myself  of  the  guidance  in  MA
    (Somalia) v SSHD [2010] UKSC 49 at [43] referring to AH (Sudan)  as  to
    reasoning and having done so I am satisfied that  the  judge  did  give
    adequate reasons for reaching the view that he did.  Consequently I  am
    satisfied that the findings of fact made, both  adverse  and  positive,
    were properly made by the judge on the evidence.

23. Therefore it is necessary to  apply  those  findings  of  fact  to  the
    relevant Rules.  The material provisions of Appendix FM are R-LTRPT and
    contain the requirements for limited leave as a parent.   The  decision
    letter makes it plain that it was accepted by the  Secretary  of  State
    that he met the suitability requirements of the Rules (see paragraph 10
    of the decision).

24.   E-LTRPT2.2 contains the eligibility requirements for limited leave to
    remain as a parent.  The child must be under 18, living in the UK as  a
    British citizen or settled in the UK, or to have lived continuously for
    at least seven years immediately preceding the date of the  application
    and therefore to qualify for limited leave as a parent all requirements
    of E-LTRPT2.2-2.5 must be met.  On the facts found  by  the  judge,  E-
    LTRPT2.2 is met, as the relevant children are under 18, living  in  the
    UK and are British citizens.  As to E-LTRPT2.3 either (a) or (b) has to
    be met.  In this case, the Appellant fell for consideration under (b):-

         "(b) The parent or carer with whom the child normally lives must be
             -

             (i)  a British citizen in the UK or settled in the UK; or

             (ii) not the partner of the applicant; and

             (iii)    the applicant must not be eligible to apply for leave
                  to remain as a partner under this Appendix."

    The facts demonstrate that the parent  with  whom  the  child  normally
    lived with, namely K, was a British citizen and on the findings made by
    the judge was not the partner of the applicant as it  was  found  there
    was no subsisting relationship and thus (iii) also was satisfied,  that
    the applicant was not eligible to  apply  for  leave  to  remain  as  a
    partner.  As to E-LTRPT2.4(a) the applicant must provide evidence  that
    they have (i) sole parental responsibility for the child  or  that  the
    child normally lives with them or (ii) access rights to the child.   In
    this case on the  facts  found  by  the  judge  the  applicant  met  E-
    LTRPT2.4(a)(ii).  There was some discussion by the advocates as to what
    constituted "access rights to the child" and Mr Diwnycz did  not  demur
    from Mr Cole's submission that that in effect was met  by  the  judge's
    findings that the children had a  significant  degree  of  face-to-face
    contact with the father and thus it was not necessary for there  to  be
    any order of the court.  It is also plain  that  E-LTRPT2.4(a)(ii)  has
    the word "and" and therefore (b) the Appellant  must  provide  evidence
    that they are "taking and intend to continue to take, an active role in
    the child's upbringing".

      On the basis of the findings of fact by the judge which  I  have  set
    out earlier, the judge found that whilst  he  did  not  live  with  the
    children there  was  significant  face-to-face  contact  between  them.
    Whilst the judge did not accept that he assisted  the  children  as  to
    their travel to and from school to the extent that he said, he found  a
    degree of plausibility and consistency that he did make some assistance
    in this regard [27] and at [28] that he  had  an  active  role  in  the
    children's upbringing and that whilst the parental  responsibility  was
    largely that of his wife, he had a degree  of  parental  responsibility
    and [30] he had contact and assisted them to an extent on a  relatively
    regular basis.  The judge also took into account their  best  interests
    and they were set out at [30] and [31.  The judge found that they  were
    maintaining a relationship  with  the  Appellant  which  was  currently
    ongoing and that was firmly expressed in the nature of the letters that
    were set out before the Tribunal at pages 15, 16 and 17.  He found that
    the removal of the  Appellant  would  seriously  affect  the  emotional
    wellbeing of the children if the role that he played with the  children
    was to be disrupted.  In those circumstances, on the  findings  of  the
    judge paragraph 2.4 was met.  As to the immigration status requirements
    at LTRP2.3.1 the applicant must not be in the UK  as  a  visitor,  with
    valid leave granted for a period of six  months  or  less  (unless  the
    leave was granted pending  the  outcome  of  family  court  or  divorce
    proceedings) or on temporary admission or release unless paragraph  EX1
    applies.  The same  is  said  for  the  financial  requirements  at  E-
    LTRPT4.1.  As Mr Cole submitted, EX1 applies (a) if the applicant has a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship with the child and (ii) it
    would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the  UK.   On  the
    findings of the judge, which I am satisfied were  properly  reached  on
    the evidence before him, he did find that the Appellant had  a  genuine
    and subsisting parental relationship with the children for the  reasons
    that he gave and also that it would not be reasonable to  expect  those
    children to leave the UK for the reasons that he amply  gave  at  [31].
    Therefore in those circumstances, I accept the submission  made  by  Mr
    Cole that the Appellant met the Rules for limited  leave  as  a  parent
    based on the findings of fact that were made by the judge and in  those
    circumstances, whilst the judge did  not  set  out  the  law  with  any
    clarity, it has not been demonstrated by the Secretary  of  State  that
    that error was material for the reasons set out and therefore have  not
    demonstrated that the Tribunal should set aside the  determination  for
    error of law.

Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is not set aside and  therefore
the decision stands.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

