
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
        (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
                                                               IA/42057/2014
                                                               IA/42060/2014
                                                               IA/42061/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 22 February 2016                 |On 23 March 2016                  |
|                                    |                                  |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUAL JUDGE BIRRELL
                                   Between
                                     MA
                                     SM
                                     HM
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr J Nicholson counsel instructed by GMIAU
For the Respondent: Mr G Harrison Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were  in
   the First-tier Tribunal.

3. The Appellants are a father and mother born  on  3  August  1957  and  25
   November 1971 and their daughter born on 3 April 2005.

4. The first Appellant came to the United Kingdom in September 2005 and  had
   leave to remain in the United Kingdom initially as a visitor and then  as
   a worker. In  May  2006  the  Appellant  brought  the  second  and  third
   Appellants to the UK together with two other children  who  are  not  the
   subjects of this appeal as they live independent lives.

5. The first Appellant's leave expired on 30 November  2007  and  the  first
   Appellant did nothing to regularise his status until 30 January 2012 when
   he applied for leave to remain on the basis of family and  private  life.
   This application was refused on 18 February 2012. On 17 August  2012  the
   first Appellant made an application for asylum  which  was  refused.  The
   Appellant appealed that decision and his appeal  came  before  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Nicholson on  19  April  2013  in  Manchester.  The  Judge
   dismissed the appeal on asylum grounds and under Article 8. Permission to
   appeal that decision was refused on 24 May  2013.  The  second  Appellant
   made an application for asylum on 16 January 2013 and  that  was  refused
   and the appeal dismissed on 7 May 2013.  The  Appellant  made  a  further
   application for leave to remain on the basis of family and  private  life
   on 31 July 2013 and this  was  also  refused  on  2  January  2014.  This
   decision was the subject of  a  Judicial  Review  and  the  decision  was
   reconsidered and the reasons for refusal set out in the  letter  dated  6
   October 2014 which were accompanied by removal decisions.  That  decision
   was appealed and allowed under Article 8. I found errors of law  in  that
   decision in that the Article 8 assessment was inadequate and set it aside
   for re hearing and that is how the matter came before me.




The Law



6. The burden of proof in this case is upon the Appellants and the  standard
   of proof is upon the balance of probability.

7. As the Appellants are in the United Kingdom,  I  can  take  into  account
   evidence that concerns a matter arising after the date of the decision in
   accordance with Section 85(4) Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
   2002 .

8. The Appellants appeals are pursuant to Section 82 of the 2002 Act.

9. In relation to claims under Article 8 these are addressed by Appendix  FM
   and paragraph 276ADE of the Rules and the Secretary of State's  Guidance.
   If an applicant does not meet the criteria set  out  in  the  Rules  then
   guidance issued by the Secretary of State in  the  form  of  instructions
   provides in effect, that leave to  remain  outside  the  rules  could  be
   granted  in  the  exercise  of  residual   discretion   in   'exceptional
   circumstances' which are defined in the guidance and must be exercised on
   the basis of  Article  8  considerations,  in  particular  assessing  all
   relevant factors in determining whether a decision is proportionate under
   Article 8.2.

10. It is now generally accepted that the new IRs do not provide in  advance
   for every nuance in the application of Article 8 in individual cases.  At
   para 30 of Nagre, Sales J said:




   "30.     ... if, after the process of applying the new rules and  finding
       that the claim for leave to remain under them  fails,  the  relevant
       official  or  tribunal  judge  considers  it  is  clear   that   the
       consideration under the Rules has fully addressed any family life or
       private life issues arising under Article 8, it would be  sufficient
       simply to say that; they would not have to go on,  in  addition,  to
       consider the case separately from the Rules. If there is no arguable
       case that there may be good grounds for  granting  leave  to  remain
       outside the Rules by reference to Article 8, there would be no point
       in introducing full separate consideration of Article 8 again  after
       having reached a decision on application of the Rules."

11. More recently the Court of Appeal  in  SS  Congo  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387
   stated in paragraph 33:

   "In our judgment, even though a test of exceptionality does not apply  in
   every case falling within the scope of Appendix FM, it is accurate to say
   that the general position outside the sorts of special contexts  referred
   to above is that compelling circumstances would need to be identified  to
   support a claim for grant of LTR outside the new Rules in Appendix FM. In
   our view, that is a formulation which is not  as  strict  as  a  test  of
   exceptionality or a requirement of "very compelling reasons" (as referred
   to in MF (Nigeria) in the context of  the  Rules  applicable  to  foreign
   criminals),  but  which  gives  appropriate   weight   to   the   focused
   consideration of public interest  factors  as  finds  expression  in  the
   Secretary of State's formulation of the new Rules in Appendix FM. It also
   reflects the formulation in Nagre at para. [29], which  has  been  tested
   and has survived scrutiny in this court: see, e.g., Haleemudeen at  [44],
   per Beatson LJ. "

12. Section 117A (2) of the 2002 Act  provides  that  where  a  Tribunal  is
   required to determine whether a decision made under the Immigration  Acts
   would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998  it  must,
   in considering 'the public interest question', have regard in  all  cases
   to  the  considerations  listed  in  section117B  of   the   Nationality,
   Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended by the Immigration Act 2014).
   Section 117 (3) provides that the 'public interest  question'  means  the
   question of whether an interference with a person's right to respect  for
   private and family life is justified under Article 8(2).

13. The S117B considerations are as follows:

         "(1)     The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in
             the public interest.

         (2)      It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English-

             (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)      It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-

             (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)      Little weight should be given to-

             (a) a private life, or

             (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,  that  is
                  established by a person at a time when the  person  is  in
                  the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)       Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a   private   life
             established  by  a  person  at  a  time  when   the   person's
             immigration status is precarious.

         (6)      In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,
             the public interest does  not  require  the  person's  removal
             where-

             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom."



14. In relation to the assessment of issues in a case involving  children  I
   have taken into account  Azimi-Moayed  and  others  (decisions  affecting
   children;  onward  appeals)[2013]  UKUT  197(IAC)  (Blake  J)  where  the
   Tribunal held that

     i)      The case  law  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  has  identified  the
        following principles to assist in  the  determination  of  appeals
        where children are affected by the appealed decisions:  (a)  As  a
        starting point it is in the best interests of children to be  with
        both their parents and if both parents are being removed from  the
        United Kingdom then the starting point  suggests  that  so  should
        dependent children who form part of their household  unless  there
        are reasons to the contrary;

    ii)       It is generally in the interests of children  to  have  both
        stability and continuity of social and educational  provision  and
        the benefit of growing up in the cultural norms of the society  to
        which they belong;

   iii)       Lengthy residence in a  country  other  than  the  state  of
        origin can lead to development of social cultural and  educational
        ties that it would be inappropriate to disrupt, in the absence  of
        compelling  reason  to  the  contrary.  What  amounts  to  lengthy
        residence is not clear cut but  past  and  present  policies  have
        identified seven years as a relevant period;

    iv)      Apart from the terms of published  policies  and  rules,  the
        Tribunal notes that seven years from age four is likely to be more
        significant to a child that the first seven years  of  life.  Very
        young children are focussed on their  parents  rather  than  their
        peers and are adaptable;

     v)      Short periods of residence, particularly ones  without  leave
        or the reasonable expectation of leave to enter or  remain,  while
        claims are promptly considered,  are  unlikely  to  give  rise  to
        private life deserving of respect in the  absence  of  exceptional
        factors. In any event, protection of the  economic  well-being  of
        society amply justifies removal in such cases.

Evidence

15. On the file I had the Respondents bundle. I had a  copy  of  the  reason
   for refusal letter. The Appellant put in an  appeal  and  a  consolidated
   bundle of documents numbered1-148 and an additional statement from  Wendy
   Humphrey Taylor.

16. Mr Nicholson also produced copies of two cases: Zermani v  Secretary  of
   State for the Home  Department  [2015]  EWHC  1226  which  addresses  the
   relevance of the applicants role in the community in the  proportionality
   exercise and Treebhawon and others (section 117B(6) UKUT 674 (IAC)  which
   confirms that where the provisions  of  that  section  are  satisfied  in
   relation to a qualifying child  the  public  interest  does  not  require
   removal of the parent from the UK.

17. There were a number of witnesses who attended court and  were  ready  to
   give evidence. After some discussion between the parties  it  was  agreed
   that not all of the  witnesses  who  were  present  would  give  evidence
   although I would, of course, take their written statements into account.

18. I heard evidence from the first Appellant who adopted  the  contents  of
   his written statement and was then cross examined. He confirmed  that  he
   had come to the UK legally to work in the hotel industry. His application
   to renew his visa was refused in 2007/2008 and had  remained  in  the  UK
   with his family albeit he knew he had no right  to  remain.  He  accepted
   that he worked illegally. He eventually applied in 2012 to regularise his
   families stay on the basis that it was then a good time to apply.

19. I then heard evidence from Ewan Roberts the Manager of  Asylum  Link  in
   Merseyside. He adopted the contents of his witness statement at  page  44
   of the bundle. He confirmed that the third  Appellant  was  well  settled
   into the local community and he was aware she was about to start at  High
   School. She followed the example of her parents and was very  helpful  at
   the centre. In answer to Mr Harrison's questions he  confirmed  that  the
   first Appellant was very  helpful  at  Asylum  Link  and  worked  at  the
   reception desk and had done so for 2 years. He had a number of duties and
   worked 5 days a week. He was the first one in the  centre  and  last  one
   out. He was not paid other than expenses for travel and food. He had  not
   been aware of the Appellant s particular immigration history in  view  of
   the numbers at the centre but he nevertheless considered  him  an  honest
   man someone he relied on as a key volunteer. In answer to a  question  of
   mine he confirmed that this case was  the  only  occasion  he  had  given
   evidence in court on behalf of an Appellant although  he  had  previously
   provided statements.

20. I also heard evidence from Sister Kathleen Ashurst a founder  member  of
   Asylum Link who adopted the statement at  page  46  of  the  bundle.  She
   confirmed that she was fully supportive of the Appellant and  his  family
   who showed real care for other asylum seekers. She became  aware  of  the
   Appellant s lack of status at the last hearing but it did not change  her
   opinion of him. She confirmed that she had never refused to give evidence
   on because of any Appellant at court and had given evidence 3-4 times.

21. I heard evidence from Peter Tregulgas who adopted his statement at  page
   58 of the bundle. He is a retired Social Work Manager . He had known  the
   Appellants since they started volunteering at Asylum Link in 2013  as  he
   was also a volunteer. They had become friends.  He  had  not  provided  a
   report in his professional capacity in this case as the Appellants  legal
   representatives had obtained an independent report.

22. I heard evidence from Durani Rapozo who adopted his  statement  at  page
   54 . He was a complex needs Social  Worker.  He  confirmed  that  he  had
   facilitated the provision  of  a  short  statement  by  the  third  child
   Appellant: it contained her words but he assisted her in writing  it.  He
   accepted that he was not independent as he was a supporter of the family.
   The third Appellant was well settled in Liverpool in  his  view  and  had
   strong connections to the city of Liverpool including a Liverpool accent.
   She had a strong network of friends and it would be  very  upsetting  for
   her to leave. In cross examination he accepted that he worked for  Assyum
   Link as a Social Worker and for GMIAU as a  supervisor  in  their  social
   work team. In relation to the suggestion that there  was  a  conflict  of
   interest he stated that this was  why  an  independent  report  had  been
   obtained he had merely facilitated the taking of  a  statement  from  the
   third Appellant as she is only 10 years old.

23. I heard evidence from Wendy Humphrey Taylor  who  provided  a  statement
   who also works as a volunteer at Asylum Link. She adopted the contents of
   her witness statement. She expressed the view that the whole family  were
   well integrated into UK society and mixed well with people  of  differing
   religions and cultures. In cross examination she confirmed that  she  had
   known the Appellants for 3 years and that their paths crossed regularly

Final Submissions

24. On behalf of the Respondent Mr Harrison made the following submissions

   a) He relied on the reasons for refusal letter.

   b) The issue was whether it was  reasonable  and  proportionate  for  the
      family to leave the UK and he accepted that the Article 8 claim relied
      on the case of the child.

   c) He categorised this as a 'Daily Mail' case  in  that  there  might  be
      those who suggested that those who contrive to remain long after  they
      should have left and delayed regularising  their  status  until  their
      child had been in the UK over 7 years should not succeed.

25.  On  behalf  of  the  Appellants  Mr  Nicholson   made   the   following
   submissions:

   a) He relied on his skeleton argument.

   b) The issue in this case was whether it was  reasonable  to  expect  the
      third Appellant, the child, to leave the UK. He suggested that section
      117B(6) applied and the provision was freestanding. If  that  applied,
      then it was not in the public interest to remove the parents.

   c) In respect of whether it was reasonable for  the  third  Appellant  to
      leave the UK he pointed to the evidence of the  child  herself;  there
      was the evidence of the independent social worker  whose  professional
      opinion was that that the child was so well entrenched into the  local
      community that it would unreasonable now for her to be removed: if  it
      was to be done it should have been done sooner;  the  third  Appellant
      had spent her most formative year in the UK in that she had lived  her
      from when she was 1 until nearly 11.

   d) There had to be strong countervailing arguments to justify removal  in
      these circumstances according  to  the  case  of  ZH  (Tanzania)  (FC)
      (Appellant) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  (Respondent)
      [2011] UKSC 4. The Respondents own policy was that  there  had  to  be
      strong circumstances to justify the  removal  of  a  child,  in  these
      circumstancesThe only factor he identified  was  the  long  period  of
      overstaying by the third Appellants parents but  then  suggested  that
      the immigration history of the mother in  ZH  was  appalling  but  her
      appeal succeeded. By contrast he suggested that the first  and  second
      Appellants had made a valuable contribution to the community and I was
      entitled to attach weight to that .

Findings



26. On balance and taking the evidence  as  a  whole,  I  have  reached  the
   following findings

27. The Appellants are a father, mother and their child the third  Appellant
   who is 10 years old and she will be 11 next month.  The  first  Appellant
   has been in the UK since  September  2005  when  he  came  as  a  visitor
   switching to a work permit visa returning to Pakistan to bring  back  the
   second Appellant his wife and the third Appellant on 26 May 2006 when she
   was just over 1 year old. Therefore, the third Appellant has lived in the
   UK with her parents for 10 years.

28.  Mr Nicholson did seek to argue that in fact  the  third  Appellant  met
   the provisions of paragraph 276ADE(iv) of the  Immigration  Rules  but  I
   reminded him that the Respondent had appealed the decision in relation to
   Article 8 only and there had been no cross appeal in this case. Therefore
   in this case I am considering only whether the  Appellants  rights  under
   Article 8 of the Convention are engaged although I accept that it may  be
   a relevant factor in  the  proportionality  exercise  whether  the  third
   Appellant did meet the Rules and that the test of reasonableness  applied
   both under the Rule relied on by Mr Nicholson and under  section  117B(6)
   of the 2002 act..

29. I have determined the issue on the basis of the questions posed by  Lord
   Bingham in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27

Will the proposed removal be an interference by a public authority with  the
exercise of the applicants right to respect for their  private  (or  as  the
case may be) family life?

30. I am satisfied that the Appellants enjoy  both  a  family  life  in  the
   United Kingdom and a private life.

If  so,  will  such  interference  have  consequences  of  such  gravity  as
potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?

31. I am satisfied that removal would have consequences of such  gravity  as
   potentially to engage the operation of Article 8.

If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

32. I am satisfied that there is in place the legislative framework for  the
   decision giving rise to the interference with Article 8 rights  which  is
   precise and accessible  enough  for  the  Appellants  to  regulate  their
   conduct by reference to it.

If so, is such  interference  necessary  in  a  democratic  society  in  the
interests of national security, public safety or the economic well-being  of
the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection  of
health or morals, or for  the  protection  of  the  rights  and  freedom  of
others?

33. The interference does have legitimate aims since it  is  in  pursuit  of
   one of the legitimate aims set out in Article 8 (2) necessary in  pursuit
   of the economic well being of the country through the maintenance of  the
   requirements of a policy of immigration control. The state has the  right
   to control the entry of non nationals into its territory  and  Article  8
   does not mean that an individual can choose where  she  wishes  to  enjoy
   their private and family life.

If so, is such interference  proportionate  to  the  legitimate  public  end
sought to be achieved?

34. In making the assessment I have also taken into  account  ZH  (Tanzania)
   (FC)  (Appellant)  v  Secretary  of  State  for   the   Home   Department
   (Respondent) [2011] UKSC 4 where Lady Hale  noted  Article  3(1)  of  the
   UNCRC which states that "in  all  actions  concerning  children,  whether
   undertaken  by  ...  courts  of  law,   administrative   authorities   or
   legislative bodies, the best interests of the child shall  be  a  primary
   consideration."

35. Article 3 is now reflected in section 55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship
   and Immigration Act 2009 which provides that, in  relation,  among  other
   things, to immigration, asylum or nationality,  the  Secretary  of  State
   must make arrangements for ensuring that those functions "are  discharged
   having regard to the  need  to  safeguard  and  promote  the  welfare  of
   children who are in the United Kingdom".   Lady  Hale  stated  that  "any
   decision which is taken without having regard to the  need  to  safeguard
   and promote the  welfare  of  any  children  involved  will  not  be  "in
   accordance with the law" for the purpose of article 8(2)".  Although  she
   noted that national authorities were expected to treat the best interests
   of a child as "a primary consideration", she added  "Of  course,  despite
   the looseness with which these  terms  are  sometimes  used,  "a  primary
   consideration" is not the same as "the primary consideration", still less
   as "the paramount consideration".

36. I am satisfied that the issue against which I  must  consider  the  best
   interests of the third Appellant is whether the provisions of  s  117B(6)
   of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  apply. I accept that
   given that the third Appellant meets the definition of 'qualifying child'
   as set out in the Rules in that she has been in the UK for  more  than  7
   years the public interest as reflected by paragraph 117B(6) (1)-(3)  does
   not require the parent's removal if "it would not be reasonable to expect
   the  child  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom."  I  am  satisfied  that   a
   determination of what is in the reasonable in  these  circumstances  also
   incorporates what is in the best interests of the child.

37. The starting point for my assessment of whether it would  be  reasonable
   for the third Appellant to return with her parents (because they have  no
   right to remain) to their country of origin is  that  she  is  nearly  11
   years old and has lived in the UK for  10  years,  and  those  years  now
   include the 7 years after age 4 identified as being of more  significance
   in caselaw. I note and accept what Mr  Nicholson  says  in  his  skeleton
   argument that for this child the word 'return' can  only  be  used  in  a
   strict sense in that while her parents lived  there  for  most  of  their
   adult lives she would be returning to a country where she lived only  for
   a year as an infant. Lady Hale also said  "Acknowledging  that  the  best
   interests of the child must be a primary  consideration  in  these  cases
   immediately raises the question of how these are  to  be  discovered.  An
   important part of this is discovering the child's own views". I  have  in
   this case not heard oral evidence from the third Appellant but I  have  a
   short statement provided with the help of Mr Repozo. I am  not  surprised
   to read that she does not want to live in Pakistan given  that  it  is  a
   country with which she is unfamiliar as she apparently feels English  and
   this is confirmed in the report of Ms  Brown  addressed  in  more  detail
   below: she has never been there having spent the  vast  majority  of  her
   life in the UK and she is fearful of the violence she  has  seen  on  the
   television and claims not to speak the language.

38. I accept that her first language is now English as she spends more  time
   speaking it on a daily basis than she speaks any other language.  Indeed,
   such is her competence in English that I note she represented her primary
   school in an inter school  public  speaking  competition.  However  I  am
   unable to accept her  claim  not  to  speak  Urdu  and  treat  it  as  an
   unsurprising, if regrettable, exaggeration from a ten year old  child  on
   an important issue: no evidence was provided to me that her mother speaks
   English and while I may be prepared to accept  that  she  speaks  to  her
   father in English and  may  well  be  far  more  fluent  and  comfortable
   speaking English, and may indeed have a Liverpool accent which may impact
   of her spoken Urdu, I cannot accept that she does not speak to her mother
   and if she does, that must involve her speaking and understanding Urdu. I
   also note that  in  the  previous  asylum  decision  made  by  First-tier
   Immigration Judge Nicholson in 2013 (paragraph 82)  he  made  a  positive
   finding to this effect based on school reports referring  to  English  as
   her 'first' language and the fact that she spoke little English when  she
   started nursery.

39. There is no doubt that she enjoys school and has friends  there  and  in
   the local area where she lives and  therefore  both  through  school  and
   these wider friendships she is well integrated into  the  community.  The
   statement I note does not reflect the fact that she has already while  in
   the UK moved schools from one in Burnley to Liverpool  and  therefore  is
   sufficiently robust to cope with such a significant change to  her  life.
   There is no positive evidence of close family ties Pakistan although  the
   report of Ms Brown refers to family there but given  I  accept  that  the
   third Appellant's Urdu is limited her meaningful  interaction  with  them
   must also be limited.

40. I also have a report from an independent social worker  Christine  Brown
   dated 23 February 2015 and in so far as it relates to third Appellant  it
   is based in an hour long  meeting  with  her.  She  describes  the  third
   Appellant as a confident, articulate child in westernised clothing with a
   Liverpool accent whose musical tastes, book choices  and  choice  of  pop
   star idols is entirely  westernised.  She  has  already  demonstrated  an
   ability to cope with change and challenge as the family moved from Burney
   to Liverpool taking her from a school where she felt well settled and had
   been for a number of years to a Catholic School where  she  is  the  only
   Muslim child although she stated that the change was  from  one  familiar
   English environment to another English  environment  rather  than  to  an
   alien environment like Pakistan. She hopes to  move  onto  senior  school
   with her school friends and friends that that she  has  met  through  her
   parent's friends. She confirmed to Ms Brown that she  was  frightened  of
   returning to Pakistan as she had no memories of it and had  only  limited
   contact with her maternal grandmother there and the fact that  she  would
   return with her parents would be of little comfort.

41. I note that Ms Brown speculates about the negative impact  that  'arrest
   and detention' would have on the third Appellant but she  does  not  make
   clear on what basis that risk would arise nor  does  she  make  it  clear
   whether this is a matter that concerns her or whether the third Appellant
   believes this is a fate that awaits her. I am satisfied that those  fears
   are unfounded given  the  decision  of  First-tier  Judge  Nicholson  who
   rejected the mother's asylum appeal and the facts that underpinned.

42. The conclusion of the report provides a very helpful summary and  states
   that :

   "A return to Pakistan at this stage in her life and her development  will
   place an expectation on H to make an adjustment  from  all  that  is  now
   familiar , predictable and safe to her to that which  is  unfamiliar  and
   disorientating and that will have the potential to impact  adversely  and
   harshly on H, should she struggle to come to terms with what has occurred
   , which I do not doubt will be  the  case,  because   there  is  no  easy
   transition from one country to another when this is against a child or  a
   young person's wishes, regardless of where that country may be. H is  now
   too far entrenched and attached in her life to make such a transition. If
   this was to have taken place, it should have been much sooner, when H did
   not have the awareness that she does now with all the ramifications  that
   this will have for her."

43. I am satisfied therefore that in  the  fact  specific  circumstances  of
   this case in March 2016 taking into account the professional  opinion  of
   Ms Brown and the views of the third Appellant herself, given  the  length
   of time that the third Appellant  has  lived  in  the  UK  and  how  well
   integrated she is  not  only  into  UK  society  and  culture  but  quite
   specifically northern culture and society, the inevitable limitations  of
   her Urdu, her own apparent lack of close family ties to Pakistan and  her
   genuine fears about returning there  it  is,  on  balance,  in  her  best
   interests to remain in the UK. While I accept  that  the  requirement  to
   move schools cannot be elevated to an unreasonable and harsh  requirement
   I am satisfied that for this Appellant as part of the overall  assessment
   it must be considered against the background facts that it would  not  be
   her choice or indeed the choice of her  parents  and  she  would  not  be
   changing schools from one familiar cultural  and  social  environment  to
   another. I agree with Ms Brown that if this decision had taken place much
   sooner a removal, even in the case of the third Appellant, would not have
   been unreasonable but that time has passed.

44.  Where the best interests of the child clearly favour a certain  course,
   that  course  should  be  followed  unless  countervailing   reasons   of
   considerable force displace them and this is not only the position in law
   but is confirmed by Home Office Policy that refers  to  'strong  reasons'
   where the child has been in the UK for more than 7 years.  What  are  the
   strong countervailing factors that might militate against a  decision  in
   favour of all of the Appellants remaining in the UK together given that I
   accept that it would be in the best interests of the third  Appellant  to
   remain with her parents?

45. In a case such as this an obvious countervailing feature for  the  first
   two Appellants relates to the  flouting  of  the  system  of  immigration
   control in that all  parties  are  not  UK  citizens  and  therefore  not
   entitled to all the benefits in terms of health and education  that  this
   brings. I may also have taken into account the poor  immigration  history
   of the parents who have been overstayers since  their  leave  expired  in
   2007 and who thereafter  made  no  attempt  to  regularise  their  status
   supporting themselves by working illegally. However given that the  third
   Appellant should not suffer for the  behaviour  of  her  parents  and  my
   finding that section 117B(6) applies, those factors identified in section
   117B (1)-(3) do not apply and therefore these are not factors that  I  am
   permitted to take into account as countervailing  features.  I  would  in
   fact have accepted that while the Appellants may  only  have  achieved  a
   measure of self sufficiency by  working  illegally  that  this  situation
   would in my judgement be unlikely to continue. Both. the first and second
   Appellant are well educated and had good  jobs  in  Pakistan.  Both  have
   demonstrated albeit through their voluntary assistance in Asylum  Link  a
   strong work ethic. The first Appellant worked until his visa expired  and
   in my view would be likely to try hard to find paid  employment  when  he
   was permitted to do so and would be  self  sufficient.  I  note  that  Mr
   Harrison was unable to articulate for me any other strong  countervailing
   feature that might outweigh the best interests of the child  that  I  was
   entitled to take into account.

46. The only other factors that remain for me to consider for  the  sake  of
   completeness under section 117B that assists  the  Appellants  cases  are
   subsections (4) and (5). I must give little weight to the  private  lived
   established while the Appellants  status  was  precarious  which  was  in
   essence between 2005-2007, and when it was  unlawful  which  was  between
   2007-2012. I acknowledge that the adult  Appellants  have  marshalled  an
   impressive array of witnesses who attest  to  the  valuable  contribution
   that they have made to the work of Asylum Link since 2013 .While  I  note
   that this work appears  to  have  coincided  with  their  application  to
   regularise their status it is nevertheless noted  that  once  begun  they
   have continued to devote most of their days to working and  assisting  at
   Asylum Link and their contribution has been acknowledged and  praised  by
   all of those who attended and gave evidence on their behalf.  It  is  one
   thing to make a statement but not attend court but I note that  a  number
   of these witnesses have attended court and been willing to  provide  oral
   evidence on each occasion that this has been required. The witnesses were
   all credible  and  I  accept  without  hesitation  their  evidence  which
   appeared constant even when they were  aware  that  the  Appellants  were
   overstayers.  The evidence reflects some engagement and integration  into
   the community that I take into account although I nevertheless note  that
   the  evidence  largely  demonstrates  an  engagement  with  the   migrant
   community that is reflected by those seeking the services of Asylum  Link
   but does not reflect friendships and engagement with the wider community.

47. Looking at the evidence in  this  case  in  the  round  therefore  I  am
   satisfied that while it is in the best interests of the  third  Appellant
   to continue to be brought up by her parents who have no right  to  remain
   in the UK it is also in her best interests for the reasons I have set out
   above  to  remain  in  the  UK.  I  am  satisfied  that  there   are   no
   countervailing features of any force that I  am  entitled  to  take  into
   account that outweigh the third Appellants best interests and therefore I
   am satisfied that the removal of the Appellants in  this  case  would  be
   disproportionate to the legitimate public end sought to be achieved.

Conclusion

48. On the facts as  established  in  this  appeal,  there  are  substantial
   grounds for  believing  that  the  Appellants  removal  would  result  in
   treatment in breach of ECHR.

DECISION

49. I allow the appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR.

50. Under Rule 14(1) the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) rules 2008  9as
   amended)  the  Appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout   these
   proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise.  An
   order for anonymity was made in the First-tier and shall continue.






Signed                                                              Date
9.3.2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

