
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
           Appeal: IA/42120/2014
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 1 March 2016                          |On 8 April 2016                   |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                          THE HONOURABLE LORD BURNS

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                             Secretary of State

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MD HAMIDUL HAQUE

                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Alam (Londinium Solicitors)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This is the appeal of the Secretary of State but we will refer to  the
      original appellant, a citizen of Bangladesh, born on 20 February 1982,
      as the appellant herein.

   2. The appellant studied in the United Kingdom from 2005 and successfully
      applied for a Tier 1 Entrepreneur  Visa.  On  arrival  in  the  United
      Kingdom on 9 August 2015 he presented his passport and  the  visa  but
      his leave was suspended and on 13 October 2014 his leave to remain was
      cancelled on the basis that he had made false representations in  that
      he  had  submitted  a  fraudulently  obtained  Test  of  English   for
      International  Communication  (TOEIC)  certificate  from   Educational
      Testing Services (ETS). The scores from the  test  the  applicant  had
      taken on 17 July 2012  at  London  College  of  Social  Sciences  were
      cancelled by ETS. The applicant, it was said, had  obtained  the  test
      result by using a proxy  test  taker.  The  Secretary  of  State  also
      considered the appellant's account of taking the test  was  vague  and
      lacked detailed recollection.

   3. The appellant appealed the decision and his appeal came before  First-
      tier Judge Clarke on 4 June 2015. The appellant  was  represented  but
      the Secretary of State was not.

   4. The judge reminded himself  that  the  burden  of  proof  lay  on  the
      respondent to make good the allegation of deception, making  reference
      to  AA  (Nigeria)  [2010]  EWCA  Civ  773.  The  judge  sets  out  the
      documentary evidence before him, referring to the Secretary of State's
      bundle which included witness statements  from  Rebecca  Collings  and
      Peter Millington both dated 23rd June 2014. The judge stated  that  he
      had taken all the evidence into account. He reminded  himself  of  the
      widespread fraud that had been uncovered in  the  conduct  of  English
      language tests.

   5. The judge noted that the Secretary of State had not sent a  Presenting
      Officer to advance her case and neither of the border  force  officers
      who had interviewed the appellant had provided witness statements  nor
      had they attended. No request had been  made  for  the  appeal  to  be
      adjourned and the Secretary of State was aware the  appeal  was  being
      heard without representation.

   6. The judge observed that the respondent had failed to produce the voice
      recording of the appellant's test and accordingly the primary evidence
      relied on by the Secretary of State was not before him. The failure to
      disclose the material was unfair and the  witness  statements  Rebecca
      Collings and Peter Millington lacked specificity.

   7. The judge ruled the Secretary of State had  failed  to  discharge  the
      burden  of  proof  and  that  the  appellant  had  not  made  a  false
      representation in his application for leave to remain.

   8. The judge went on to make further findings having had the  benefit  of
      hearing from the appellant. He noted the appellant had  given  details
      of the test and his evidence satisfied the judge that his account  was
      credible. He rejected the claim that the applicant's account had  been
      vague or lacking in detail.


   9. He considered that the appellant had been speaking English for 7 or  8
      years and on the balance of probabilities would  not  have  needed  to
      resort to having to take a test by proxy.

  10. The judge also took  into  account  the  circumstances  in  which  the
      appellant's interview had been conducted. He had had a 20 hour journey
      from Bangladesh with limited sleep  and  had  been  detained  and  the
      interview had been conducted after a wait of 10 hours. The judge found
      the appellant was "sleep deprived, hungry,  nervous,  upset  at  being
      accused of being a liar and was  feeling  unwell."  He  placed  little
      weight on the interview in the circumstances.


  11. Accordingly the judge concluded the Secretary of State  had  not  made
      out her case and found the appellant had sat the English language test
      himself and had made no false representations. He allowed the appeal.

  12. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal. Permission to
      appeal was refused by the First-tier Tribunal but the application  was
      renewed and permission was granted by the Upper Tribunal on 15 January
      2016. The representatives agreed that  the  second  paragraph  of  the
      grant of  permission  did  not  relate  to  the  case.  The  grant  of
      permission appears to have been on the  footing  that  the  judge  had
      given inadequate reasons for his findings.

  13. Mr Whitwell relied on the Secretary of State's grounds and pointed out
      that a spreadsheet had been provided and the appellants test had  been
      described as invalid rather than questionable. This  showed  that  the
      appellant's voice recording was not the one  tested.  The  tests  were
      verified by two analysts. The  determination  was  not  satisfactorily
      reasoned and the appellant's account had  been  uncorroborated.  There
      might be many reasons why a person who was able to speak English would
      nevertheless use a proxy candidate to undertake a test on his  behalf.
      He argued that the Secretary of State had not been provided with voice
      recordings.

  14. Mr Alam submitted that the First-tier Judge had  applied  the  correct
      burden and standard of  proof  and  had  plainly  had  regard  to  the
      material supplied by the Secretary of State. The witness statements of
      Rebecca Collings and Peter Millington were of a  generic  nature.  The
      judge was entitled to find that no deception had been proved. In reply
      Mr Whitwell said the voice recordings were not the main  part  of  the
      Secretary of State's case and relied on the  evidence  that  had  been
      lodged.

  15. At the conclusion of the submissions we reserved our determination. We
      remind ourselves that we can only interfere with the decision  of  the
      judge if it was materially flawed in law.

  16. The judge clearly considered the evidence  lodged  on  behalf  of  the
      Secretary of State and reminded himself that the burden lay on her  to
      prove her case. Plainly the judge  considered  that  voice  recordings
      should have been produced. In refusing permission to appeal the First-
      tier Judge commented that the Secretary of State had not  taken  issue
      in the grounds with the judge's finding that the  Secretary  of  State
      had retained a copy of the appellant's voice  recording.  The  renewed
      grounds did not take up the matter either.

  17. It appears to us that the determination was properly reasoned and  the
      judge came to conclusions on the facts that  were  open  to  him.  The
      Secretary of State chose not to  be  represented  at  the  hearing  or
      produce witnesses in a case where the burden of proof lay on her.  The
      judge heard  oral  evidence  from  the  appellant  and  accepted  that
      evidence.

  18. The grounds do not disclose a material error of law and we dismiss the
      Secretary of State's appeal.

      Appeal dismissed.



G Warr
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
2 March 2016


Fee Award
The judge made a fee award in favour of the appellant which stands.


Anonymity Order
No anonymity order was made and we make none.




