
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/42062/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 2nd June 2014                                |On 16th June 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                           mr Muhammad Naeem habib
                          (Anonymity not retained)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Sadiq
For the Respondent:    Miss Johnstone


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. The Appellant born in 18th October 1987 is a citizen of Pakistan.   The
    Appellant who was present was represented by Mr Sadiq.  The  Respondent
    was represented by Miss Johnstone a Home Office Presenting Officer.

Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant had made application for leave to remain on 18th December
    2012 under paragraph 284 of the Immigration Rules.  The Respondent  had
    refused that application on 2nd October  2013  and  the  Appellant  had
    appealed, such appeal being heard by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Pickup
    at Manchester  on  27th  March  2014.   The  judge  had  dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal.  Permission to appeal was sought on 10th April 2014
    and granted by Designated Judge Dearden on  24th  April  2014.   Whilst
    noting that it was open to the judge to dismiss the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules it was said that it was incumbent upon the  judge  to
    embark on a detailed analysis of Article 8 in all the circumstances  of
    this case given what was said  to  be  a  fairly  technical  basis  for
    refusal and on that basis an appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted.
    Directions were issued and the matter comes  before  me  in  accordance
    with those directions.

Submissions on Behalf of the Appellant

 3. Mr Sadiq referred me to the  Grounds  of  Appeal.   It  was  said  that
    firstly there had been no  proper  proportionality  assessment  of  the
    Appellant's situation.  Secondly I was  referred  to  the  Home  Office
    policy in  a  published  IDI  dated  in  April  2013  relevant  to  the
    Appellant's case and  it  was  said  that  the  Appellant  should  have
    succeeded within the terms of the Home Office's own policy.

Submissions on behalf of the Respondent

 4. It was submitted that the Appellant did not fall within the Rules.   In
    respect of the IDI  I  was  referred  to  page  13  and  the  terms  of
    paragraphs 3.6 and 3.7 of the IDI.  It was said there was no  error  of
    law.

 5. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision to consider the
    documents and evidence submitted.  I now provide that decision with  my
    reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 6. The Appellant falls  within  what  may  now  be  a  small  category  of
    individuals.  The Appellant had entered the United Kingdom lawfully  as
    the spouse of a person present and settled in  the  United  Kingdom  on
    12th October 2010.  That  was  at  a  time  shortly  before  the  entry
    requirement included the need to pass an approved English language test
    to the appropriate standard which was introduced in November 2010.

 7. The Appellant made  application  on  18th  December  2012  for  further
    limited leave to  remain  as  a  spouse  under  paragraph  284  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  A requirement of paragraph 284 of  the  Immigration
    Rules from November 2010 is  the  English  language  requirement.   The
    evidence discloses that the Appellant met all requirements of paragraph
    284 of the Immigration Rules save the language requirement.  Whilst the
    Appellant had  taken  and  passed  an  English  language  test  to  the
    requisite standard it was not according to  the  Home  Office  from  an
    approved provider and therefore it could not be said that the Appellant
    had fulfilled each and every requirement of that  aspect  of  paragraph
    284.

 8. The judge in the First-tier  Tribunal  had  found  that  the  Appellant
    therefore did not meet all the requirements of  paragraph  284  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  He had also considered the Appellant's  family  and
    private life within the terms of Appendix FM and  paragraph  276ADE  of
    the Rules.  He found the Appellant did not  fall  within  those  Rules.
    Whilst accepting the single reason for failing to meet  the  Rules  the
    judge nevertheless concluded that a near miss  was  still  a  miss  and
    therefore he failed within the Rules.

 9. The judge thereafter had correctly identified the recent  case  law  in
    consideration of Article 8 and had concluded that  the  Respondent  had
    given proper consideration to the Appellant's circumstances within  the
    Immigration  Rules  including  a  consideration  of   the   exceptional
    circumstances.  He did not find that the Appellant's circumstances were
    so compelling as to justify an examination of Article 8 outside of  the
    Rules  or  that  the  Respondent's  decision   in   like   manner   was
    unjustifiably harsh.

10. The judge had been referred to  the  Home  Office  IDI  April  2013  in
    respect of this case  and  had  concluded  that  to  read  the  IDI  as
    suggested by Mr Sadiq would essentially be a nonsense as it would  seem
    to remove the need for passing an English language test essentially  in
    all cases.

11. An IDI is published  Home  Office  guidance  for  use  by  Home  Office
    decision makers amongst others.  It would  be  unlawful  for  the  Home
    Office not to follow its own published guidance when  dealing  with  an
    individual case.

12. In one sense the use and publication of IDIs is questionable.  One  can
    understand two circumstances where they may have a use.  Firstly if the
    legislation is sufficiently complex and difficult to understand then  a
    simpler explanatory guidance within an IDI may be useful  for  decision
    makers.  Secondly  if  the  Respondent  has  the  ability  to  exercise
    discretion in a particular field then guidance on the exercise of  such
    discretion may also have a use for decision makers not least to try and
    achieve a parity within cases.  Paragraph 284 of the Immigration  Rules
    is written in reasonably clear language however and on the face  of  it
    the requirements of the Rules are mandatory.

13. The IDI of April 2013 Chapter 8 applies to this Appellant in  terms  of
    the second category noted in the heading namely "Applications  made  by
    persons who were granted entry clearance or  limited  leave  to  remain
    under part 8 of the Rules before 9th July 2012 and that leave is  still
    extant where there is a requirement at part  8".   The  Appellant  then
    falls within part 3 of Chapter 8 of the IDI namely "Leave to remain  as
    a spouse of a person present and settled in the United Kingdom".  After
    that heading there is reference to the requirements  of  paragraph  284
    and a reminder of the English language requirement from  29th  November
    2010.

14. Thereafter the IDI is headed 3.1 Key  Points.   It  states  "As  stated
    above  all  of  the  relevant  provisions  must  be  referred  to  when
    considering applications for leave to remain in this  category  but  in
    general case workers need to be satisfied: ...".

15. A number of Key  Points  are  then  listed  that  deal  with  differing
    circumstances.  Following the Key Points  Section,  there  are  further
    short Sections headed:

    3.2  Making further enquiries

    3.3  Further guidance

    3.4  Interview/home visits

    3.5  Maintenance and accommodation

    3.6  English language requirement

16. Finally there is importantly the heading 3.7 Granting leave to  remain.
    This states "If there is no  reason  to  doubt  that  the  marriage  is
    genuine then provided the Key Points  are  satisfied  leave  to  remain
    should be granted for two years on code 1".

17. In this case there has never been a suggestion that the marriage is not
    genuine.  The reference to Key Points in Section 3.7 Granting leave  to
    remain, is clearly a reference to Section 3.1 Key Points.   It  is  not
    obviously and on a normal  interpretation  a  reference  to  any  other
    Sections.   Section  3.1  Key  Points  whilst  referring  to  essential
    requirements contained within paragraph 284 makes no reference  to  the
    English language requirement.

18. It is understandable that the judge in the First-tier Tribunal may  not
    have found the argument concerning the IDI  placed  before  him  by  Mr
    Sadiq particularly attractive.  It would, as he says, appear  to  be  a
    little difficult to interpret 3.7 in the manner suggested because  that
    would seem to remove the need for a language requirement.

19. The Immigration Rules are placed before Parliament by the Secretary  of
    State for Parliament's approval and thereafter if approved become  part
    of the legislation that is then applied by the  judiciary.   The  Rules
    within paragraph 284  are  mandatory  in  terms  of  language  and  the
    judiciary are bound to uphold the Rules and there is no  interpretation
    of the Rules seemingly in any  other  way.   What  therefore  in  those
    circumstances is the purpose of the IDI.  Two potential  purposes  have
    been suggested above.   However,  whatever  the  purpose  or  rationale
    behind the production and publication of IDIs  it  nevertheless  exists
    and is clearly guidance used by the  Home  Office  in  such  cases.   A
    proper reading of that IDI, as indicated above, suggests that the  Home
    Office guidance given to  decision  makers  focuses  on  those  matters
    referred to as Key Points within Section 3.1 and to grant leave if such
    Key Points are met (3.7 Grant of leave).

20. If the Home Office seek to given themselves elasticity in the  use  and
    consideration of paragraph 284 that is a  matter  for  them.   However,
    having taken that approach it would be unjust and potentially  unlawful
    to refuse to grant an Appellant leave to remain in circumstances  where
    he does meet the Key Points of their own  policy  for  granting  leave,
    notwithstanding a difficulty in meeting the language requirements.

21. Alternatively  if  it  is  maintained  that  language  is  a  mandatory
    requirement of paragraph 284 and the  IDI  however  interpreted  cannot
    cure a language requirement deficit then the  IDI  could  certainly  be
    regarded as clear evidence as to how the Home  Office  expect  decision
    makers to exercise discretion when looking at a case either within  the
    Immigration Rules under EX.1 or outside of  the  Immigration  Rules  in
    order to be compliant with Strasbourg jurisprudence.  If there own  IDI
    indicates that a language requirement is not a Key  Point  and  is  not
    necessary prior to the granting of leave to remain  then  it  would  be
    both logical and fair to consider that an individual who meets the  Key
    Points but fails to meet other matters could be regarded  as  a  person
    within exceptional circumstances either under EX.1 or  outside  of  the
    Rules.

22. Alternatively even if the IDI provided no foundation for looking at the
    Appellant's case exceptionally outside of the Rules the specific  facts
    of this case do suggest such consideration.

23. Firstly the Appellant, as indicated, is part  of  a  narrow  group  not
    required to take an English language test prior to admission to the  UK
    but now requiring to take such test for further leave to  remain.   The
    Appellant had on the documentary evidence taken and passed such a  test
    but merely failed on the somewhat technical basis that the provider was
    not allegedly one recognised  by  the  Home  Office.   The  documentary
    evidence notes that the Appellant had passed an English  language  test
    by the provider EDEXCEL and the certificate on the face of  it  appears
    to have approval or  at  least  the  logos  of  OFQUAL  and  the  Welsh
    Government.  The Appellant is in employment and his wife  is  in  full-
    time education at university.  A removal of the Appellant  to  Pakistan
    would potentially end his employment.  His wife would have  the  choice
    of either giving up her university course in which she is in the  final
    year or being separated from her husband.  It is also very difficult to
    see how the Appellant  could  then  having  been  removed  to  Pakistan
    necessarily meet the financial requirements of the Immigration Rules as
    he would no longer be a wage earner and his wife (the UK Sponsor) is  a
    student.  In  order  to  meet  the  financial  requirements  presumably
    therefore it would be necessary for her to give up  her  studies,  find
    employment and progress to the point where her income  level  was  such
    that the Rules were met.  That would by necessity involve a  period  of
    separation of uncertain length from her husband.

24. It is in those circumstances that, ignoring  the  impact  of  the  IDI,
    whilst a near miss is just that there is nevertheless a requirement  to
    look at the circumstances of each case either exceptionally within  the
    Rules or outside of the Rules.  The circumstances of this case  can  in
    my view for reasons  provided  be  described  as  falling  within  that
    category even perhaps leaving aside any potential impact  the  IDI  may
    have.

25. In summary, the Home Office  own  IDI  indicates  that  this  Appellant
    should be granted leave  to  remain  within  the  terms  of  their  own
    guidance policy for the reasons outlined above and not to have done  so
    would  be  both  unfair  and  potentially   unlawful.    Secondly   and
    alternatively the IDI could on a different interpretation be taken as a
    guide for decision  makers  on  a  question  of  exceptionality  and  a
    conclusion that the Appellant falls to be considered  exceptionally  in
    that he meets the Key Points within Section  3.1.   Thirdly  and  again
    alternatively, leaving aside the IDI, the circumstances of this case do
    place the Appellant within an exceptional basis such  that  removal  in
    all the circumstances would be disproportionate.

26. The judge in this  case  made  an  error  of  law  in  his  conclusions
    (understandably) of the impact of  the  IDI  and/or  alternatively  not
    having greater regard  to  the  circumstances  that  could  render  the
    Appellant's case exceptional such that it needed careful  consideration
    outside of the Rules.

Decision

27. I find that an error of law was made by the  judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal such that I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

    No anonymity order is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever

