
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/42765/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                      |   Decision and Reasons          |
|                                           |Promulgated                      |
|On: 24 September 2015                      |   On: 30 September 2015         |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA

                                   Between

                             MR OUFOWOBI ODUKOYA
                        (No anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:    Mr A Gilbert of Counsel
For the Respondent: Mr D Clarke, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1.   The appellant before the Upper Tribunal is the  Secretary  of  State
      for the Home Department and the respondent is  a  citizen  of  Nigeria
      born on 18 September 1974.  However, for the sake  of  convenience,  I
      shall refer to the latter as the "appellant" and to the  Secretary  of
      the State as the "respondent", which are the designations they had  in
      the proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal.




   2.   The appellant's appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  was  against  the
      decision of the respondent dated 25 September 2014 refusing  to  issue
      him with a Residence Card as confirmation of his right to live in  the
      United Kingdom pursuant to the Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
      Regulations  2006  (hereinafter  the  2006  regulations).   First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Butler allowed the appellant's appeal pursuant to  "the
      Immigration Rules".




   3.   Permission to appeal was granted by the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Fisher who stated that it was arguable  that  the  Judge  allowed  the
      appeal outright on the bases that it was not in  accordance  with  the
      law, after finding that the appellant was extended  family  member  of
      the sponsor, instead of remitting the  appeal  to  the  respondent  to
      exercise her discretion.



   4.    At the hearing it was agreed between the parties  that  the  First-
      tier Tribunal by allowing the appeal on the basis  that  the  decision
      was not in accordance with the law, essentially  left  the  matter  of
      discretion to the respondent. It was also accepted that the  Judge  by
      allowing the appeal pursuant to the Immigration Rules, made  an  error
      but it was not material.



   5.   The Judge found that the appellant and his sponsor were in a durable
      relationship which is demonstrated by the fact that they  have  a  son
      together. The Judge stated that the appellant had satisfied the burden
      of proof upon him that he is an extended family member of his sponsor,
      an EEA national and allowed the appeal under the "Immigration Rules".



   6.   By allowing the appeal under the Immigration Rules is a clear  error
      of law, but it is not material. It is  clear  from  the  determination
      that, although put in an opaque way, that the Judge allowed the appeal
      on the basis that the decision was not in  accordance  with  the  law.
      Therefore the respondent's discretion is not interfered with.



   7.   I therefore find that there is no  material  error  of  law  in  the
      determination and that the upshot is  that  the  decision  is  not  in
      accordance with the law  and  that  the  appeal  be  remitted  to  the
      Secretary of State awaiting the exercise of her discretion.




      DECISION

         Appeal dismissed


        Signed
        Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
        Mrs S Chana

                       This 29th day of September 2015




