
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number IA/42180/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House   Decision & Reasons promulgated
On 12 December 2014    On 15 December 2014


                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Francis Kofi Arthur
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr. L. Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr. O. Jibowu of Counsel instructed by MJ  Solomon  &
                    Partners.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Hague promulgated on 30 May 2014, allowing Mr Arthur's  appeal  against
    the Secretary of State's decision dated 23 September 2013 to refuse  to
    issue a residence card under the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006.

 2. Although before me the Secretary of  State  is  the  appellant  and  Mr
    Arthur is  the  respondent,  for  the  sake  of  consistency  with  the
    proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal I shall hereafter  refer  to
    Mr  Arthur  as  the  Appellant  and  the  Secretary  of  State  as  the
    Respondent.


Background

 3. The Appellant is a national of Ghana born on 17 July 1965. On 11  April
    2013 an application for a residence card as confirmation of a right  to
    reside in the United Kingdom was made on his  behalf.  The  application
    was based on a Ghanaian customary marriage by proxy to Ms Marisol Nfono
    Eyama, a Spanish national, said to have taken place in  Ghana,  in  the
    absence of the parties to the marriage, on 28 December 2012.

 4. The Appellant's application was  refused  for  reasons  set  out  in  a
    'reasons for refusal' letter dated 23 September 2013, and a  Notice  of
    Immigration Decision was issued on the same date.  The  Respondent  was
    not satisfied that the  marriage  was  valid,  and  was  not  otherwise
    satisfied that the Appellant was in a 'durable relationship'.

 5. The Appellant appealed to the IAC. He  requested  that  his  appeal  be
    dealt with 'on the papers'.

 6. The Appellant's appeal was  first  determined  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge V A Cox. In a determination promulgated on 28  January  2014  the
    appeal was  allowed.  However,  the  Respondent  sought  permission  to
    appeal, which was granted with reference to the case of  Kareem  (Proxy
    marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT 00024 (IAC). By way of a  determination
    promulgated on 2 April 2013 Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge  Shaerf  found
    that there had been an error of law, set  aside  the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Cox, and remitted the case for hearing afresh
    in the First-tier Tribunal before a judge other than Judge Cox.

 7. The appeal was next  considered  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hague
    without a hearing 'on the papers'. Judge Hague allowed the  Appellant's
    appeal for reasons set out in his determination.

 8. The Respondent  again  sought  permission  to  appeal,  but  made  that
    application 'out-of-time'. Permission to appeal was  initially  refused
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Davies on 4 August 2014 on the basis  that
    he refused to extend time for the Respondent to appeal. However, on  31
    October 2014 Upper Tribunal Judge Storey  extended  time,  and  granted
    permission to appeal.


Consideration

 9. The First-tier Tribunal Judge allowed the  Appellant's  appeal  on  the
    basis that he was satisfied that  the  Appellant's  marriage  was  duly
    registered and valid.

10. The Respondent's grounds of appeal seek to  challenge  that  conclusion
    with particular reference to the decision in Kareem. In this context  I
    have also had regard to TA and others (Kareem explained)  Ghana  [2014]
    UKUT 00316 (IAC).

11. I accept  the  substance  of  the  Respondent's  challenge.  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Hague misdirected himself by not having proper regard to
    the relevant case law, pursuant to which he should have considered as a
    starting point the  question  of  whether  a  marriage  was  contracted
    between the Appellant and Ms Eyama according to  the  national  law  of
    Spain. The Judge did not do so.

12. Judge Hague adopted an  approach  to  the  case  of  Kareem  which  was
    essentially the same as that advanced in the submission  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal in TA (see paragraphs 9and 10), and roundly  rejected  by  the
    Upper Tribunal.

13. I agree with the reasoning in Kareem and TA and find  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge was in error in failing to consider the validity of
    the Appellant's marriage in Spanish law.

14. I note that Mr Jibowu was quick to recognise the  difficulty  presented
    to the Appellant in light of Kareem, and TA, and acknowledged that  any
    challenge to those cases would need to be taken at a  higher  level.  I
    also note that whilst he sought to argue that the  decision  in  Kareem
    was incongruous with the decision in CB (validity  of  marriage:  proxy
    marriage) Brazil [2008] UKAIT 00080, that case was in fact  plainly  in
    the contemplation of the Tribunal deciding Kareem (see paragraphs 5 and
    64). In any event CB relates to how UK  domestic  law  perceives  proxy
    marriages, and does not thereby assist in an understanding of  how  the
    laws  of  other  countries  approach  such  marriages.  I   detect   no
    incongruity.

15. In all such circumstances I find that the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge was flawed for material error of law and I set it aside.

16. The decision in the appeal accordingly needs to be remade.

17. No relevant material has been provided,  and  no  submission  made,  in
    respect of the validity of the Appellant's marriage under Spanish  law.
    In such circumstances I find that the Appellant has failed to discharge
    the burden of proof in establishing that he has contracted  a  marriage
    with Ms Eyama in accordance with the law of Spain.

18. Moreover, no material has  been  filed  either  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal or the Upper Tribunal to demonstrate that the Appellant is  in
    a durable relationship with Ms Eyama. In this context I note  that  the
    Respondent did not accept the  limited  supporting  material  submitted
    with the application to have established a  durable  relationship  (see
    page 4 of the RFRL). Before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  there  were  no
    witness statements from either the Appellant or  his  partner,  and  no
    further supporting materials relevant to the  issue  of  durability  of
    relationship. Nothing further has been filed before the Upper Tribunal,
    notwithstanding the Directions  issued  with  the  Notice  of  Hearing.
    Although the Appellant attended the hearing today, Ms Eyama did not. In
    such circumstances there is insufficient before the  Tribunal  for  the
    Appellant to be able to discharge the burden of proof in this regard.

19. For essentially the same reasons, I am unable to  conclude  that  there
    would be any interference in the Appellant's private and/or family life
    if he were to be removed in consequence of the  Respondent's  decision.
    No relevant evidence has been filed - not even a  witness  statement  -
    detailing the nature of any private and/or family life.

20. Accordingly I remake the decision by dismissing the appeal.


Notice of Decision

21. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  contained  a  material
    error of law and is set aside.

22. I remake the decision in the appeal. The appeal is dismissed.



Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     12 December 2014
