
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43068/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4th December 2015                 |On 5th January 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

                            MUKUBUR RAHMAN NAYMEE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Hussain, Counsel, instructed by Zahra & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a  citizen  of  Bangladesh  whose  date  of  birth  is
    recorded as 10th March 1979.  He first entered the  United  Kingdom  on
    23rd September 2006 as a student with valid leave to 31st January 2010.
     His visa was extended and on 8th August 2012 he was granted  leave  to
    remain on the basis of post-study work valid until 8th August 2014.  On
    that date, in time, he made application for  leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom outside of the Immigration Rules. The grounds of  appeal
    do not challenge the contention that the application was  made  outside
    the rules.

 2. On 14th October 2014 a decision was made to refuse the application  and
    I note specifically at paragraph 2 of the Decision and Reasons that the
    judge observed that there was no request for the Respondent to consider
    the application either under Appendix FM or  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules. Again there is no challenge to that.   I  also  note
    from the judge's notes that the very first note  that  he  has  on  his
    Record of Proceedings is that it was agreed  on  both  sides  that  the
    issue for him was Article 8 outside the Rules, being the only issue.

 3. The judge therefore looked, as he was required to do, given  the  basis
    upon which the appeal had come before him, to the wider application  of
    Article 8.  He noted that the Appellant had been educated to university
    level in Bangladesh, obtaining a law degree, and in the United  Kingdom
    had obtained a level 7 diploma in strategic management and  an  MBA  in
    innovative management. Although in unskilled employment, the  Appellant
    was noted to be working.

 4. Whilst the Appellant relied on an established private life,  the  judge
    attached considerable weight to the absence of evidence other than that
    of the Appellant.   He specifically refers to no letters of support and
    no  witness  statements  from  others.  That  there  were  no   witness
    statements and no letters of support from others is not in issue; there
    were none.

 5. Having regard  to  the  various  factors  which  the  judge  considered
    relevant in respect of which there is an issue, the judge came  to  the
    view that the Appellant had simply not made out his case and  that  the
    public interest in the Appellant leaving the United Kingdom  outweighed
    the individual circumstances of the case.

 6. Not content with that decision, by  notice  dated  22nd  May  2015  the
    Appellant, through his solicitors, made application for  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal. There are seven subparagraphs relied upon
    in support of the contention that  the  judge  erred  in  law  but  the
    principal factors, and I do not ignore the others, is that   the  judge
    gave undue weight, it is said, to the precariousness of the Appellant's
    status in the United Kingdom, I refer to paragraph 2(iv), and  further,
    that in making the proportionality assessment the judge  did  not  have
    sufficient regard, it is submitted,  to  all  of  those  factors  which
    weighed  in  the  Appellant's  favour;  those  are  set  out  at   (v).
    Importantly  it  is  further  submitted  that  there   was   procedural
    unfairness on the part of the judge in attaching weight to the  absence
    of witnesses when if the judge was  going  to  attach  such  weight  he
    should have alerted the Appellant and his representatives to give  them
    the opportunity to address the deficit.

 7. On 10th August 2015  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Hollingworth
    granted permission.  He noted that the weight which had  been  attached
    by the judge to the absence of supporting evidence by way of additional
    witnesses and documents, and also found that it was at  least  arguable
    that there was insufficient analysis of the Appellant's own case,  that
    is to say  the  individual  factors  relied  upon  in  the  Appellant's
    contention which would outweigh the public interest considerations.

 8. I have listened with care to Mr Hussain.  He submits that  it  was  not
    open to the judge to come to the  conclusion  that  he  did  given  the
    eventual finding, and it is Mr Hussain's  submission  that  absent  the
    failure on the part of the judge to analyse sufficiently those factors,
    there would have been a different outcome.

 9. Mr Hussain further invited me to find, although it was not clear to  me
    whether he maintained that position, that in looking at Section 117B of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 there were factors set
    out there which in fact weighed in the Appellant's favour.   I  observe
    at this stage that that is a point which was considered in the case  of
    AM  (Section  117B)  Malawi  [2015]  UKUT  0260.   That  case  provides
    authority for the proposition that an Appellant can obtain no  positive
    right to a grant of leave to remain from either Section 117B(2) or  (3)
    whatever the degree of fluency  in  English  or  the  strength  of  his
    financial resources.  And in fact it is clear to  me  that  117B  is  a
    provision directed towards determining the weight that is to  be  given
    to the public interest considerations. When  one  looks  to  the  wider
    application of Article 8, the starting point, and this is trite law, is
    the Immigration Rules and whether or not they  have  been  met.  It  is
    common ground in this case that they have not been  met.  That  is  the
    starting point.  If, and only if, there is a sufficient gap between the
    Immigration Rules and the  factors  relied  upon  to  take  the  matter
    outside of the Immigration Rules, ought a Tribunal in fact to go on  to
    consider the wider application of Article 8 although  in this case  the
    judge did so.

10. In the case of VW (Sri Lanka) [2013] EWCA Civ 522 McCombe  LJ  said  at
    paragraph 12:

         "Regrettably, there is an increasing tendency in immigration cases,
         when a First-tier Tribunal has given a judgment explaining the  why
         he has reached a particular decision,  of  seeking  to  burrow  out
         industriously areas of evidence that have  been  less  fully  dealt
         with than others and then to use this as a  basis  for  saying  the
         judge's decision is legally flawed because it did not deal  with  a
         particular matter more fully. In my judgement, with  respect,  that
         is no basis on which to sustain a proper  challenge  to  a  judge's
         finding of fact."

11. So far as the judge attaching weight to the absence of  the  additional
    evidence by way of witness statements or documents, I  am  assisted  by
    the guidance in the case of TK (Burundi) -v- Secretary of State for the
    Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 40 in which the Court  of  Appeal  said
    that where there were circumstances in which evidence corroborating the
    Appellant's evidence was clearly or easily obtainable the lack of  such
    evidence must affect the assessment of the Appellant's credibility.  It
    followed that where a judge in assessing credibility relied on the fact
    that there was no independent supporting evidence  where  there  should
    be, and there was no credible account for its absence, he committed  no
    error of law when he relied on that fact for rejecting the  account  of
    the Appellant.

12. In this case it is clear from the judge's notes that in the  course  of
    cross-examination it was put to the Appellant whether there were  other
    people at court.  He said that  there  were  not.   In  the  course  of
    closing submissions the Home Office Presenting Officer took the  point,
    yet no  application  was  made  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant  by  his
    representatives to adduce any further evidence. I cannot  know  whether
    the application would have been successful but the failure to make that
    application renders the point that the judge acted  unfairly,  a  point
    without substance.

13. I turn then to whether the findings of the  judge  were  open  to  him.
    Quite properly the judge had regard  to  paragraph  117B.   The  public
    interest considerations did lead to a view  that  the  public  interest
    required removal.  As I have already said, factors which are not met do
    not weigh to the advantage of the Appellant, it is simply that they did
    not weigh against him.  The lesser of the factors  in  117B,  the  fact
    that an Appellant offends the less evidence he would need to  bring  in
    support of the individual circumstances.

14.  In  this  case  the  judge  took  the  view  that  the  evidence   was
    insufficient.  It is suggested that the judge did not  have  regard  to
    all of the factors.  I disagree.  It was perfectly proper for the judge
    to  find  on  the  basis  of  the  evidence   being   the   Appellant's
    qualifications that he would be able to  earn  a  living  in  his  home
    country, indeed the evidence was  that  he  was  working  in  unskilled
    employment in the United Kingdom.  It was also open  to  the  judge  to
    have regard to the fact that the  Appellant  had  family  in  his  home
    country.

15. The starting point more generally as I said at the outset would  be  to
    start with the Immigration Rules and look for additional  factors  that
    would weigh in the Appellant's favour. In this  case  the  judge  found
    that they were insufficient. I find nothing perverse or  irrational  in
    the approach taken by the judge and that is  the  test.  Put  in  other
    words, were the findings  made  by  this  judge  open  to  him?  In  my
    judgement they were and this case turns on its facts.

Notice of Decision

16. I detect no error of law in this case, certainly none that is material,
    and in  those  circumstances  the  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is affirmed.

17. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker

