
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number IA/43182/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House   Determination promulgated
On 2 September 2014     On 15 January 2015


                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Peter Muigai Kibue
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms. A. Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr. S. Osifeso of Lannex Immigration &  Legal  Advice
Services.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Newberry promulgated on  13  June  2014,  allowing  Mr  Kibue's  appeal
    against the Secretary of State's decision dated 13  September  2013  to
    remove  him  from  the  UK  in  consequence  of  having  rejected   his
    application for leave to remain.

 2. Although in the proceedings before me the Secretary  of  State  is  the
    appellant, and Mr Kibue is the respondent, for the sake of  consistency
    with the proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal I  shall  hereafter
    refer to Mr Kibue as the Appellant and the Secretary of  State  as  the
    Respondent.

Background

 3. The Appellant is a national of Kenya born on  11  September  1982.  His
    immigration history is a matter of record and is summarised at  section
    2 of the cover sheet to the Respondent's bundle before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. It is unnecessary to reproduce that history here. The salient
    features are that he was granted leave to enter the United Kingdom as a
    visitor on 24 April 2001, valid for six months. On 25 October 2001  the
    Appellant applied for further leave to remain as a dependent  relative,
    but was refused. A further application culminated in  an  appeal  which
    was dismissed on 19 August  2004.  There  then  followed  a  series  of
    further applications for indefinite leave  to  remain  that  were  each
    rejected or refused  with  no  right  of  appeal.  Most  recently,  the
    Appellant applied for indefinite leave to remain on 11  February  2013.
    The Respondent refused the Appellant's application for reasons set  out
    in a 'reasons for refusal letter' dated 13 September 2013, and a Notice
    of Immigration Decision of the same date was issued  communicating  the
    removal decision.

 4. The Appellant appealed to the IAC.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge allowed the appeal for reasons set out in
    his determination.

 6. The Respondent sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  which
    was granted on 10 July 2014 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Cheales.

Consideration

 7. The Respondent's challenge before  me  is  brought  with  reference  to
    paragraph 276ADE(vi) of the Immigration Rules.

 8. In this context I note that at paragraph 8  of  his  determination  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge identified  the  issue  in  respect  of  this
    aspect of the appeal by reference to the RFRL in the  following  terms:
    "Furthermore it was not accepted  that  [the  Appellant]  had  no  ties
    (including social cultural or family) with  the  country  to  which  he
    would go if required to leave the UK".

 9. Relevant to this issue were the following aspects  of  the  Appellant's
    evidence, as identified by the Judge: the Appellant  "has  never  known
    his father, and that his grandparents in Kenya have  passed  away.  All
    his mother's relatives live either in America or  the  UK.  He  has  no
    siblings or relatives in  Kenya"  (paragraph  10);  see  similarly  the
    supporting evidence of the Appellant's mother set out at paragraph  12,
    including "She confirms that  the  Appellant's  father  died  when  the
    Appellant was two months old"; the Appellant had been residing  in  the
    UK since April 2001.

10. The Judge stated his conclusion is in this regard at  paragraph  21  in
    the following terms:

   "In  my  view  the  Appellant  meets  the  requirements   of   paragraph
         276ADE(vi). It is clear in my view that the Appellant has no "ties"
         in Kenya within  a  reasonable  interpretation  of  that  word.  Mr
         Osifesu drew attention to Ogundimu (Article  8  new  rules)  [2013]
         UKUT 60 (IAC) which indicates that the word imports more than  mere
         remote or abstract  links.  In  this  case  the  Appellant  has  no
         relatives in Kenya. His mother and extended family members  are  in
         the UK. His siblings are in America. His family  and  private  life
         are clearly rooted in the UK. The welfare  of  the  child  [of  the
         Appellant's girlfriend] and her relationship with the Appellant  is
         a weighty material consideration.  The  removal  of  the  Appellant
         would have a highly damaging effect on the child who has known only
         the Appellant as a father figure."


11. I accept that there is scope for criticism of the Judge's  approach  to
    this issue - and more generally as to the confused manner in which  the
    discrete requirements of different aspects of the Immigration Rules and
    of Article 8 of the ECHR appear to have been elided. In particular, the
    introduction  of  references  to  the  welfare   of   the   Appellant's
    girlfriend's child as  being  'a  weighty  material  consideration'  is
    misplaced in circumstances of a consideration of the unrelated question
    of the Appellant's own ties to Kenya.

12. However, on the very particular facts of this case I am persuaded  that
    a generous  view  should  be  taken  of  a  decision  which  lacks  the
    discipline of careful analysis of discreet aspects of the Rules and  of
    Article 8, and thereby lacks clarity and rigour in its reasoning.

13. The First-tier Tribunal's decision must be seen in the context  of  the
    Respondent's decision that was the subject of the appeal. On the  issue
    of 'ties' the RFRL says no more than this: "[W]hilst you may  have  not
    lived in Kenya. For the past 12 years, it is considered that  you  have
    resided there for the majority of your life. It is  not  accepted  that
    you will have severed all ties including social, cultural and family in
    Kenya". It is not apparent that  any  further  submission  or  argument
    beyond the fact that the Appellant had lived in Kenya up until a little
    over 12 years ago was advanced before the First-tier Tribunal Judge  to
    counter the Appellant's assertion that he had lost any meaningful  ties
    with Kenya.

14. Even now, in the context of the challenge to the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal, the Respondent only  raises  the  following  potentially
    relevant matters: "The Appellant has grown up within a family that  has
    a prior Kenyan nexus: the Appellant's mother is a Kenya national and it
    is not unreasonable to suppose that she has taught her son cultural and
    social values that would assist his reintegration" (Grounds in  support
    of the application for permission to appeal at paragraph (e)); and "The
    official language of Kenya is English. The Secretary of  State  submits
    that linguistics form a powerful social tie that will invariably assist
    with the forging of further social  ties  including  securing  housing,
    employment and making/developing friendships" (Grounds at (f)).

15. I pause to note that the recent changes to the Rules that now  seek  to
    emphasise obstacles to reintegration rather  than  ties,  was  not  the
    version of the Rules that fell for consideration before the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

16. The reference to the  Appellant's  mother's  nationality  and  cultural
    background in reality adds nothing of substance  to  the  fact  of  the
    Appellant's own nationality and own exposure to life  in  Kenya  before
    coming to the UK. Further, I do not accept that the Appellant  speaking
    English in any way demonstrates a  continuing  connection  to  life  in
    Kenya. The commonality of language does not in itself represent  a  tie
    to Kenya, any more than it does to, say, Canada.

17. In this latter context, I acknowledge that  in  Ogundimu  language  was
    identified as being potentially relevant  to  a  consideration  of  the
    question of 'ties'. However, it seems to me that it is  generally  only
    of any weight where an applicant does not speak  the  language  of  the
    country of proposed return - wherein it will likely denote weak or non-
    existent cultural ties. In a situation where a person  does  speak  the
    language, this  will  not  generally  be  demonstrative  in  itself  of
    cultural ties.

18. Accordingly, there  is  little  substance,  in  my  judgement,  in  the
    Respondent's  invocation  of  paragraph  276ADE(vi)  as  defeating  the
    Appellant's case under the Immigration Rules. The First-tier Tribunal's
    consideration of the issues must be seen in such a context.

19. I accept Mr Osiefesu's submission that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    effectively  subsumed  his  consideration  of  social   ties   in   his
    consideration of the absence of any continuing family  connection  with
    Kenya.  It  is  plain  that  the  Judge  approached   the   Appellant's
    circumstances on the basis that in the 13 years preceding  the  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal  the  Appellant  had  made  a  life  for
    himself as an adult in the UK to the  exclusion  of  any  life  he  had
    hitherto  experienced  as  a  child  in  Kenya.  Further,  whilst   his
    experience of life in Kenya as a child  growing  up  would  necessarily
    remain with him, it was not in itself evidence of a continuing cultural
    connection with life in Kenya.

20. In all such circumstances, and  fully  acknowledging  the  unclear  and
    unhelpful manner in which the First-tier Tribunal Judge has set out his
    analysis of the case, and bearing in mind the provisions of section  12
    (2)(a) of the Tribunal's, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 I do not  set
    aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

Notice of Decision

21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  contained  no  material
    error of law and stands.

22. The Secretary of State's challenge  is  dismissed.  Mr  Kibue's  appeal
    remains allowed.



Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     14 January 2015

