
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43517/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 28th March 2014                            |On 22nd April 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         DOORBIBI D/O ABDUL HUSSAIN

                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mrs T White, Counsel, instructed by Ali Sinclair
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   On 3rd February 2012 the claimant, through her  legal  representatives,
    sought leave to remain in the United Kingdom in order to help care  for
    her grandchildren following the death of their  mother.   The  claimant
    had initially entered the United Kingdom  lawfully  as  a  visitor  and
    sought a variation of her leave accordingly.

2.   The Secretary of State for the Home Department  refused  to  vary  such
    leave in a decision dated 8th October 2013.  It was contended that  the
    claimant did not have family life as set out  in  Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules and did not meet paragraph  276ADE  of  those  Rules.
    It was not considered that the circumstances were  exceptional  because
    alternative arrangements could be  made  for  the  care  of  her  son's
    children.

3.   Thus it was that leave was refused and directions for her removal  from
    the United Kingdom were made  under  Section  47  of  the  Immigration,
    Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

4.   The matter came for hearing before First-tier Tribunal Judge Molloy  on
    16th January 2014.  He considered in detail  the  family  and  domestic
    situation, hearing evidence not only from the claimant herself but from
    her son and members of the family.  The appeal was allowed  in  respect
    of Article 8 of the ECHR.

5.   The Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department  sought  to  appeal
    against that decision, essentially on the basis that the  reasoning  in
    MF (Nigeria)  was  not  followed  by  the  Judge  and  that  inadequate
    consideration had been given to the public  interest  in  the  analysis
    that was conducted and in the findings that were made.

6.   Leave to appeal was granted on the basis of whether Appendix FM of  the
    Immigration  Rules  was  exhaustive  of  the   categories   of   family
    relationship that potentially engaged the operation of  Article  8,  or
    whether it is confined to  the  weight  that  attaches  to  the  public
    interest in those particular cases.

7.   Thus the matter comes before me in pursuance  of  that  grant.   I  was
    presented with a skeleton argument on behalf of the claimant.  A number
    of legal authorities were relied upon by both representatives.

8.   Mr Wilding,  who  represents  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department, relied upon the grounds as drafted.  It was significant  in
    this matter that the claimant could not  meet  the  Immigration  Rules.
    Although it may be said that the claimant  had  a  subsisting  parental
    relationship with the children such as required in EX.1 she was a class
    of person excluded by Appendix FF because she had entered as a visitor.
     That was significant given that it defined her expectation.   She  had
    property and family in Afghanistan and had lived in  that  country  for
    most of her years.  There was therefore no reason  why  she  could  not
    return.

9.   Mr Wilding  submitted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  not
    engaged with the fact that generally speaking the Rules  not  only  are
    relevant in themselves but also informed the approach to Article 8.  He
    relied upon the decision of MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA  Civ  1192.   That
    was in its own terms a decision concerning deportation but my attention
    was drawn to paragraphs 44 and 46 of that decision.  The Tribunal  held
    that the new Rules were  a  complete  code  and  that  the  exceptional
    circumstances to be considered in the balancing exercise  involved  the
    application of a proportionality test as  required  by  the  Strasbourg
    jurisprudence.  I noted the debate as to whether there was a one  stage
    or two stage test in relation to the Rules and to the relevant  Article
    8 criteria.  What was set out is if the  claimant  does  not  meet  the
    Rules it is necessary to consider whether there are circumstances which
    are sufficiently compelling (and therefore exceptional) to outweigh the
    public interest in deportation.

10.  Mr Wilding  submitted  that  the  Judge  at  no  stage  had  explicitly
    recognised  that  jurisprudence,  nor  had  he  identified   what   was
    exceptional in the circumstances of the claimant so as to  depart  from
    the general consequence of the Rules.

11.  Mr Wilding indicated, so far as the grant of permission was  concerned,
    that he was not relying upon paragraph 3 of that  grant.   He  did  not
    seek  to  argue  as  to  whether  or  not  the  categories  of   family
    relationship were such as to come within the Rules.  It was  recognised
    that it was a family who had been in crisis following the death of  the
    children's mother.  It was understandable that reliance was placed upon
    the  good  offices  of  the  children's  grandmother,   the   claimant.
    Nonetheless, as the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  had
    indicated in the reasons for refusal, there was no reason at  all  with
    the elapse of time since the events that alternative arrangements could
    not be made to look after the  children  and  to  run  the  home.   The
    circumstances of the case he submits fell well below that  strong  test
    of compelling or exceptional.

12.  My attention was drawn to the decision of FK and OK (Botswana)  v  SSHD
    [2013] EWCA Civ 238, a case which cited the importance  of  maintenance
    of a generally applicable immigration policy.

13.  Ms White, who represents the claimant,  invited  my  attention  to  her
    detailed skeleton argument.  She submits that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge did repeatedly refer to the importance of maintaining immigration
    control and had, for perfectly legitimate reasons, chosen to find  that
    this was a case in such compelling circumstances as  to  call  for  the
    appeal to be allowed.  She invited me to find that there was  no  error
    of approach and that the findings were entirely proper and  sustainable
    in all the circumstances.

14.  The central issue in this appeal  is  whether  or  not  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge failed to give adequate consideration to  the  Secretary
    of State's interest in maintaining an effective immigration policy.  In
    other words in recognising that if the claimant does not succeed  under
    the Immigration Rules it will only be in most exceptional or compelling
    circumstances that she will succeed under Article 8 of the ECHR.

15.  It seems to me clear, from looking at the  determination  as  a  whole,
    that that was a principle which the Judge had in mind  throughout.   In
    paragraph 74 it was conceded by the Home Office Presenting Officer that
    compassionate circumstances  existed  but  it  was  contended  that  on
    balance these did not displace immigration control "that is the crux of
    the case".  At paragraph 101 of the  determination  it  was  recognised
    that the major issue to be  determined  under  Article  8  was  one  of
    proportionality  where  the  interference  was  proportionate  to   the
    legitimate public end sought to be achieved.

16.  At paragraph 122 it was noted that the Tribunal appreciates  and  gives
    due deference to the democratic  will  of  the  people  of  the  United
    Kingdom as expressed through the Immigration Rules which have not  been
    the subject of any negative resolution in Parliament.

17.  Finally at paragraph 131 the Judge  recognised  the  interface  between
    Article 8 and the new Immigration Rules and the authority  of  Gulshan,
    MF and Ogundimu.  The Judge found that this was a rare case in which it
    would be both unreasonable and disproportionate for the appellant to be
    removed from the United Kingdom.

18.   At  paragraph  126  the  Judge  cited  Gulshan  and  other   competent
    authorities speaking  as to  compelling  circumstances  which  are  not
    significantly or sufficiently recognised under the Immigration Rules.

19.  Looking at the matter as a whole it is clear  that  the  Judge  has  in
    mind that it is in the most compelling  situation,  and  circumstances,
    arguments under Article 8 would succeed.

20.  Although it might have been of greater assistance if  those  principles
    had been stated in one place with particular clarity nevertheless it is
    clear that throughout the lengthy  determination  the  Judge  has  that
    matter well in mind.  I do not find therefore that there is  any  error
    of law in the understanding by the Judge as to what is required.

21.  The Judge looks at the matter also on its merits.   The  argument  that
    is addressed on the merits by the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department is noted at paragraph 72 in particular.  It is the  position
    of the Secretary of State for the Home Department that there were other
    family members in the United Kingdom who could take the  responsibility
    thus allowing the appellant to return.

22.  The Judge however did not find in  favour  of  that  proposition.   The
    Judge having heard witnesses, evidence and argument, concluded that  it
    was not possible for the uncles to step in and help with  the  children
    and reasons were given for that.  He noted that the  children's  father
    worked but it was not practical for any other member of the  family  to
    help, given their responsibilities of the children.   In  paragraph  95
    the issue of family  life  was  very  much  before  the  Judge  in  the
    consideration of the case of Kugathas.   It  noted  that  there  is  an
    element of dependency of the children upon their grandmother  and  that
    there existed family life for the reasons that were set out  in  detail
    in the determination.

23.  It was noted that the children were all British  citizens  entitled  to
    be  present  and  settled  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The   ages   and
    vulnerability of the children were noted in paragraph 119.  The  family
    ties would have been strengthened during the passage of time since  the
    application was made.  The Judge recognised that there may come a  time
    when the necessity of the appellant's presence in  the  United  Kingdom
    would lessen but that time had not come.  The  Judge's  view  was  that
    there were some cases where it "literally leaps from the page  that  an
    appeal ought to be allowed".  The Judge found  that  the  compassionate
    circumstances were so compelling in this particular case as to outweigh
    the public interest of enforcing the Immigration Rules.   I  detect  no
    error in that approach.

24.  It is said in the grounds of appeal  that  the  Immigration  Judge  has
    failed to give adequate reasons for his findings.  I do not agree.  The
    first ground of appeal seeks in reality to raise the  merits  argument.
    The second ground the jurisdictional one.

25.  I find that the Judge has properly focussed the issues  as  to  how  to
    assess proportionality in the light of the Immigration Rules.   It  was
    perfectly properly open to the Immigration Judge on the facts that  was
    presented to come to the  conclusion  which  he  did  that  there  were
    compelling circumstances for allowing the appeal.

26.  Having read the skeleton argument filed on behalf of  the  claimant  in
    some detail I find that the arguments set out therein have considerable
    weight.

27.  In the circumstances I find  there  to  be  no  error  of  law  in  the
    approach taken by the Judge in this case.  Consequently the  appeal  by
    the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  is  dismissed.   The
    findings  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge   that   it   will   be
    disproportionate to remove the appellant and that to do so would be  in
    breach of her fundamental human rights are to stand.

28.  Thus the decision in respect of Article 8 of the ECHR  stands  and  the
    appellant's appeal is allowed.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

