

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/43674/2014
                                                               IA/43675/2014
                                                               IA/43678/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre|Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 28 April 2015                     |On 29 April 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY


                                   Between

                          sohil sirajbhai vhora (1)
                          saniyaben sohil vhora (2)
                       nainishaben sohilbhai vhora (3)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Brooks, instructed by Malik Law Chambers,
Birmingham
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Given what the Upper Tribunal has reported in MR (permission to appeal:
    Tribunal's  approach)  Brazil  [2015]  UKUT  00029  (IAC)   and   Nixon
    (permission to appeal: grounds) [2014] UKUT 368 (IAC), as  I  indicated
    at the hearing, I am totally surprised that permission  to  appeal  was
    granted in these three linked appeals.  The grounds disclose  no  legal
    error whatsoever for the following reasons.

Background to the appeals

 2. The appellants are a family group comprising  father,  mother  and  six
    year old daughter respectively.   All  are  nationals  of  India.   The
    family group includes another child, born in the UK on 14 August  2014.
    On 13 August 2014, the first appellant applied for leave to remain as a
    tier 1 (entrepreneur) migrant.  The second and third appellants  sought
    leave in line as his dependents.  There was no application  in  respect
    of  the  youngest  child  although  she  was  mentioned  in  the  other
    applications.  On 15 October 2014 the three applications were  refused.



 3. Detailed reasons for refusal letters were provided.  The  Secretary  of
    State did not find that the first appellant met the requirements  under
    tier 1 and refused  his  application.   That  decision  predicated  the
    decisions relating to the other  two  appellants.   When  reaching  her
    decisions, the Secretary of State had regard to her s.55 duty under the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009, but concluded that:

         "The duty to have regard to the need to safeguard and  promote  the
         welfare of children requires the Home Office to consider the effect
         on any children of a decision to refuse leave, or  remove,  against
         the need to maintain the integrity of immigration control.  Our aim
         is always to carry out enforcement of the  Immigration  Rules  with
         the minimum possible interference with a family's private life, and
         in particular to enable a family to maintain continuity of care and
         development of the children in ways that are  compatible  with  the
         immigration laws.  In the particular circumstances of your case, it
         has been concluded that the need to maintain the integrity  of  the
         immigration laws outweighs the possible  effect  on  your  children
         that might result from you and your children having to re-establish
         family life outside the United Kingdom."

 4. Although this is clearly  a  stock  paragraph  it  is  clear  that  the
    Secretary of State considered her s.55 duty.  It is also  evident  from
    the fact that the appellants brought appeals against the  decisions  of
    15 October 2014 that they were aware of the decisions.

 5. The grounds of appeal included in the notices of appeal that the First-
    tier Tribunal received on 31  October  2014  do  not  raise  any  issue
    relating to the Secretary of State's  decision  in  relation  to  s.55.
    Neither is there a statement of additional grounds.  I  am  aware  that
    there is no mention anywhere in the grounds of  appeal  to  private  or
    family life rights.  It is also clear that  the  appellants  sought  to
    have their appeals determined  without  a  hearing,  paying  the  lower
    appeal fees.

 6. The above  summarises  the  position  when  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    O'Rourke was seized of the papers.  He had full regard to  the  grounds
    of appeal  and  found  that  the  first  appellant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of the points based system.  As a  result  the  other  two
    appellants could not succeed in their appeals as his dependents.  Judge
    O'Rourke identified at paragraph 15 that the appellants did not seek to
    rely on any protected rights and  found  that  even  if  they  had  the
    immigration decisions would be proportionate.

Grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 7. The grounds of application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal that were considered by First-tier Tribunal Judge Shimmin (and
    upon which he granted permission) relied solely on issues that had  not
    been raised before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   The  appellants
    argued that Judge O'Rourke had failed to take account of Article 8  and
    s.55.  Judge Shimmin thought there  might  be  something  in  the  s.55
    issue.  It is clear that Judge Shimmin failed to take  account  of  the
    fact that the issues  were  not  pursued  before  Judge  O'Rourke.   In
    addition, it is clear that the appellants had not produced any evidence
    whatsoever to show how the immigration decisions interfered with  their
    private or family lives, individually or  collectively,  or  how  those
    decisions were contrary to the wellbeing of the child  appellant  given
    she was to be remain in the care of her parents.

 8. However, permission to appeal was granted, and as  Mr  Brooks  reminded
    me, I had to decide whether the decision and reasons statement of Judge
    O'Rourke contained an error on a point of law.  He maintained that  the
    statement was fundamentally flawed because it failed to engage with the
    issues upon  which  permission  to  appeal  was  granted.   Mr  Brook's
    skeleton argument did not deal with the issue of whether  the  decision
    and reasons statement contained legal error.  It  is  presented  as  if
    that is an inevitable finding  and  therefore  merely  argues  the  new
    issues.

 9. Mr Brooks admitted that he had not had sight of the grounds  of  appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal; his instructing solicitors  had  failed  to
    supply them.  He acknowledged that the points now relied  on  were  not
    pursued before the First-tier Tribunal.  He admitted that he knew of no
    authorities that would support his case that those issues should now be
    considered even though they could have been  raised  earlier  and  were
    not.

10. I add for completeness that the Secretary of State submitted a rule  24
    response to the grounds of appeal and opposed the appeal to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that the issues now being pursued were  not  ones
    pursued in the First-tier Tribunal.

My decision

11. As I have indicated, and as should be clear from the  comments  I  have
    already made, there is no error of law in Judge O'Rourke's decision and
    reasons statement.  This is not a case where it was Robinson obvious to
    consider Article 8 or  the  wellbeing  of  the  child  appellant.   The
    wellbeing of the child had been addressed by the Secretary of State and
    there was  no  challenge  to  that  decision  and  reasoning  when  the
    appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.   It  is  too  late  to
    raise that matter now.

12. With regard to the private and family life rights, Judge  O'Rourke  did
    engage with that issue even though it had not been raised.  There  were
    no cogent arguments  or  evidence  to  indicate  that  the  immigration
    decisions were not proportionate.  That  decision  was  open  to  Judge
    O'Rourke and cannot be faulted given the failure of the  appellants  to
    provide any evidence or argument.

13. As I have indicated, this is a case where there never was  an  arguable
    legal error.  It is unfortunate that permission to appeal  was  granted
    as that has wasted considerable time and resources for the parties  and
    the Upper Tribunal, and probably gave false hope to the appellants.  It
    is not clear why an experienced firm of immigration  lawyers  submitted
    the applications for permission to appeal in the first place given what
    I have  said  above.   But  I  recognise  the  time  for  lodging  such
    permissions is short and such practitioners are under a great  deal  of
    pressure.

Costs

14. Mr Smart indicated that he would not be recommending that the Secretary
    of State applies for a cost order given that permission to  appeal  was
    granted.  That, of course, is a matter for the Secretary of State.   As
    no application has been made, I need make no decision on it.

Decision

The decision and reasons statement of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  O'Rourke
does not contain any legal error and the decision is upheld.






                               Signed   Date 28 April 2015


                               John McCarthy
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
