
[pic]
IAC-AH-sc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43026/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 September 2015                 |On 16 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                             Raheem Ahmed Ameeq
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Hussain, instructed by Whitefield Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and to the  respondent
    as the appellant (as they appeared respectively before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).  The appellant is a male citizen of Pakistan who was born on
    5 May 1983.  He was refused leave to remain as the spouse of a  British
    citizen, the subject of a decision to make  removal  directions  on  12
    October 2014.  He appealed against those decisions  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Myers) which, in a decision promulgated on 17  February
    2015 allowed his appeal.  The Secretary  of  State  now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2.  The  respondent  asserted  that  the  appellant  could  not  meet  the
    suitability requirements for leave to remain as a spouse because he had
    used deception in a language test which he had undertaken in June 2012.
     Suspicions had been raised regarding  test  results  produced  testing
    service, ETS, following a BBC  Panorama  programme  in  February  2014.
    That programme had revealed instances of proxies  sitting  examinations
    on behalf of applicants  together  with  other  abuses.   None  of  the
    evidence put before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  in  this  appeal
    related specifically to the appellant.  The judge noted that  fact  and
    also noted that:

         "Whilst recognising there may be situations  where  a  person  uses
         deception without needing to do so, I nevertheless place weight  on
         the fact that the appellant passed an English language  test  prior
         to obtaining his visa to enter the UK [and] he subsequently  passed
         another test in March 2014 and he was able to give his evidence and
         respond to cross-examination [before the  First-tier  Tribunal]  in
         English. [20]."

 3. The judge was aware of the fact that the appellant  may  have  improved
    his English language skills  since  2012  but  she  concluded,  on  the
    standard of proof of a balance of probabilities,  that  the  respondent
    (upon whom the burden of proof rested) had failed  to  prove  that  the
    appellant had used deception.

 4. The grounds of appeal take issue with the judge's findings.  The  judge
    considered that voice recognition technology could have  been  used  by
    the respondent to link  this  particular  appellant  with  the  alleged
    deception and that the Secretary of State is arguably right  to  submit
    that it was unnecessary for her to produce such evidence  in  each  and
    every ETS refusal.  Having said that, the respondent's evidence in this
    particular appellant's appeal was entirely generic whilst I have  noted
    above an instance where the judge has identified evidence which favours
    the appellant; the judge has not simply, as the grounds assert, allowed
    the appeal because the respondent has failed to perfect her evidence to
    the Tribunal's satisfaction.

 5. It may well be the case that,  faced  with  similar  evidence,  another
    judge may have found in favour of the  Secretary  of  State.   However,
    that is not the point.  Judge Myers has not fallen  into  the  trap  of
    allowing the appeal because evidence  which  ideally  could  have  been
    before her was not adduced.  Had she done so, she may have fallen  into
    legal error.  Her observation regarding voice recognition technology is
    no more than that; it was not the reason she allowed  the  appeal.   On
    the other hand, she has evaluated such evidence as she did have  before
    her and has reached a conclusion which was plainly  available  to  her.
    The respondent may rely on generic evidence but that  evidence  may  be
    outweighed by evidence in favour  of  an  appellant  in  an  assessment
    determined according to the standard of the balance  of  probabilities.
    Moreover, the Upper Tribunal should hesitate before  tinkering  with  a
    judge's reasoned analysis conducted in accordance with  relevant  legal
    principles.  In the circumstances, this appeal is dismissed.



Notice of Decision

 6. The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

 7. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 20 November 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

