

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: ia/43529/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decisions and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 2 February 2016                       |On 18 April 2016                  |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY

                                   Between

                                MUHAMMAD OMER
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Appellant in person
For the Respondent:    Mr Wild, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the First-Tier Tribunal. I find that no
particular issues arise on the facts of this case that give rise to the
need for a direction. For this reason no anonymity direction is made.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan. On 26 July 2014 he  applied  for
   leave to remain on the basis of his private  life.  His  application  was
   refused by the Respondent on 14 October 2014 and a decision was  made  to
   refuse to vary his leave to remain. The Appellant appealed  against  that
   decision and the appeal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Gurung-
   Thapa in a decision promulgated on 2 March  2015.  The  Appellant  sought
   permission appeal against that decision and  permission  was  granted  by
   First-tier Tribunal Judge Page on 6 May 2015 on the basis that  he  found
   it difficult to understand how the First-tier Tribunal could have reached
   the  conclusion  that  it  would  cause  the  Appellant  no   more   than
   inconvenience to conduct complex litigation from Pakistan.


   The Grounds


2. The Grounds assert that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  overlooked  important
   evidence and made a decision that was not open to it on the evidence. The
   Appellant contends that his claim to whistleblowing is in jeopardy if  he
   is not given leave to remain and that it is in the public  interest  that
   he remain in the UK. It is asserted that the  First-tier  overlooked  the
   nature of a whistleblowing case  and  that  the  Appellant  was  unfairly
   dismissed from his employment. It is said that there is a public interest
   because a decision in his favour would have  a  profound  effect  on  his
   former employer, the damages that were recovered for clients and  on  the
   insurance industry and public.  It  is  further  argued  that  since  his
   representative was acting pro bono he could not spend  the  time  on  the
   case that a paid representative would and it would not  be  possible  for
   him to deal with all of the witnesses and issues. The  Appellant  asserts
   that he would only require a short period of leave to remain.


   The Rule 24 Response


3. The Respondent submits  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  directed  itself
   appropriately and that he would have modern  means  of  communication  to
   enable him to instruct representatives to act on his behalf.  Further  it
   was open to him  to  seek  entry  clearance  to  appear  in  person.  The
   conclusion was sustainable on the evidence.


   The Hearing

4. The Appellant sought to rely on the assistance of a MacKenzie friend,  Mr
   Bryan Slater. Mr Wild had no objection and I explained the role  to  him.
   The Appellant sought to admit evidence in relation to his  litigation  in
   the Employment Tribunal which post-dated the hearing  before  the  First-
   tier Tribunal. I refused to admit that evidence in relation to the  issue
   of whether there was an error of law in the decision  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal as it was not in existence nor before the First-tier Tribunal at
   the date of the decision.


5. Neither party produced any authorities. The Appellant argued  that  there
   was an error of law in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  He
   asserted that his removal would lead to unjustifiably harsh consequences.
   He said that there was no decided case on this matter.   He  referred  me
   to a number of pages in the bundle before the First-tier  Tribunal  which
   he said the Judge should have taken into account which showed how complex
   the case was. He said  it  would  be  impossible  for  him  to  interview
   consultants and witnesses from abroad.


6. Mr Mills submitted that in child contact cases there was  authority  that
   discretionary leave should be granted  when  an  appellant  was  pursuing
   contact proceedings. However, if an applicant won custody or contact with
   child it had a direct bearing  on  whether  he  qualified  for  leave  to
   remain. In this case the litigation made no difference to whether he  was
   allowed to remain in the UK and  there  was  no  causal  connection.  The
   exceptional circumstances policy covered all different cases. It  was  an
   effective remedy to pursue an  appeal  outside  the  UK.  The  First-tier
   Tribunal in this case  had  considered  whether  there  were  exceptional
   circumstances and  concluded  that  it  was  not  impossible  to  conduct
   proceedings. There was no irrationality in this conclusion. The Judge had
   in mind the key issue which was based on the opinion of  Mr  Slater  that
   the Appellant had to be in UK to conduct the claim and whether  that  was
   sufficient for grant outside the Rules. He reached the conclusion that it
   was not impossible for him to conduct proceedings. Perversity was a  very
   high threshold and was not reached. The Respondent had no specific policy
   outside the Rules other than specifically in relation  to  child  contact
   proceedings. The Appellant had  not  shown  that  he  could  not  conduct
   proceedings from outside the UK.


   Discussion and Findings


7. The Appellant entered the UK on 18  September  2006  as  a  student  with
   entry clearance valid until 31 December  2009  and  was  granted  further
   leave until 8 October 2012. He was then granted leave to remain as a Post-
   Study Worker on 27  July  2012  until  27  July  2014  when  he  made  an
   application for further leave to remain on the basis of his private life.
   The First-tier Tribunal found that  his  private  life  claim  could  not
   succeed under the Immigration Rules and there is no  argument  with  that
   finding. The Appellant argued that his removal would be a breach  of  his
   private life ties under Article 8 ECHR because  he  would  be  unable  to
   pursue his claim to  have  been  unfairly  dismissed  in  the  Employment
   Tribunal.


8. The First-tier Tribunal set out the evidence in relation  to  that  claim
   at paragraphs 18 to 24 of the decision. It is clear  from  paragraphs  18
   and 19 that the Judge properly apprehended the nature of that  claim.  It
   is also clear from paragraphs 20 to 24 that  the  Judge  apprehended  the
   arguments  as  to  why  the  Appellant  considered  that  he  could   not
   effectively pursue that litigation from abroad. The  First-tier  Tribunal
   accepted at paragraph 29 that the Appellant  had  established  a  limited
   private life in the United Kingdom.  She  found  that  he  did  not  have
   significant ties in the UK and that, in relation to  his  litigation,  at
   paragraph 33:


       "..I find that while it would be  inconvenient  for  him  to  conduct
       proceedings from Pakistan it would not be impossible to do so. He has
       legal help, albeit currently this is on a pro  bono  basis,  from  Mr
       Slater. It also remains open to the appellant to make representations
       to the respondent requesting a short period  of  leave  in  order  to
       continue with his litigation. The Appellant's concern that he and his
       family  might  be  harmed  in  order  to  silence  him,  I  find   is
       speculative."

9. It is instructive, at this juncture, to  consider  what  the  Appellant's
   protected rights were under  Article  8  ECHR.  In  Patel  and  Others  v
   Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]  UKSC  72  the  Supreme
   Court considered the ambit of private life claims and  held at [57] that:


       It is  important  to  remember  that  article  8  is  not  a  general
       dispensing power. It is to be distinguished  from  the  Secretary  of
       State's discretion to allow leave to remain outside the rules,  which
       may be unrelated to any  protected  human  right.  The  merits  of  a
       decision not to depart from the rules are not reviewable  on  appeal:
       section 86(6). One may sympathise with Sedley LJ's  call  in  Pankina
       for "common sense" in the application of the rules to  graduates  who
       have been studying in the UK for some  years  (see  para  47  above).
       However, such considerations do not by themselves provide grounds  of
       appeal under article 8, which is concerned  with  private  or  family
       life, not education as such. The opportunity for a promising  student
       to complete his course in this country, however desirable in  general
       terms, is not in itself a right protected under article 8.


10. In Nasim and others (Article 8) [2014] UKUT 25 (IAC) it  was  held  that
   the judgments of the Supreme Court in Patel and  Others  v  Secretary  of
   State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC 72 serve to re-focus  attention
   on the nature and purpose of Article 8 of the ECHR and, in particular, to
   recognise that Article's limited utility in private life cases  that  are
   far removed from the protection of an  individual's  moral  and  physical
   integrity.


11. The Appellant in  this  case  had  not  been  granted  leave  to  pursue
   litigation. Whilst there are cases, notably RS  (immigration  and  family
   court proceedings) India [2012] UKUT 00218, where the  courts  have  held
   that a breach of Article 8 may occur when a claimant is unable to  pursue
   contact proceedings before removal, those cases relate to a breach of the
   right to family life which it said would occur as a result of removal.  I
   have not been referred to any authority in relation to a right to  remain
   to pursue litigation unrelated to the immigration decision to remove.


12. The Appellant is not relying on any other aspect  of  his  private  life
   ties save for to pursue litigation.  He is  effectively  saying  that  he
   should not be removed because of the litigation.  Part and parcel of that
   is an argument that he should be allowed to remain  to  defend  his  name
   because he has been unfairly dismissed. Arguably, this is  an  aspect  of
   moral rather than physical integrity. The courts have  consistently  held
   that there is a very high threshold for the engagement of  Article  8  in
   physical and moral integrity cases (Razgar [2003] EWCA Civ 840, KR (Iraq)
   v SSHD 2007 EWCA Civ 514) amounting to a flagrant or  fundamental  breach
   of the right.


13. In the circumstances, I do not consider  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   misdirected itself in concluding that there would be no breach of Article
   8 because it would be inconvenient but not impossible for  the  Appellant
   to conduct litigation from Pakistan. I also find that this conclusion was
   open to the First-tier Tribunal on the evidence before it.  The  evidence
   of Mr Slater  who  was  representing  the  Appellant  in  his  employment
   litigation is recorded at paragraph 23 of the decision and he  said  that
   it would not be impossible to proceed but would be prejudicial given  the
   nature of the case.  In the circumstances I find that the  conclusion  of
   the First-tier Tribunal that the  Respondent's  decision  to  remove  was
   proportionate was neither perverse nor inadequately reasoned.


Conclusions:

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Signed                                             Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray

