
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43689/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 15 April 2015                              |On 23 April 2015             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                               LORD BANNATYNE
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                           LOREDINE CASTRO LEONCIO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Collins, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   This is an appeal against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  made
    on 17 September 2014 refusing an  appeal  against  a  decision  of  the
    respondent refusing an application for leave to remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom based on the appellant having established family  life  in  the
    United Kingdom.




Background

 2. The findings of the First-tier Tribunal are helpfully summarised in  Mr
    Collins' grounds of appeal and are as follows:

        "(i) The Appellant is 42 years of age and has resided in the United
             Kingdom for some 14 years.


        (ii) The Appellant's partner, Lee Job is a British citizen


        iii) The couple have been trying to have a baby  for  the  past  two
             years and have been referred for IVF treatment cf paragraph  10
             of the Determination.


        (iv) The relationship is a genuine and subsisting one cf  paragraph
             25 of the Determination.


          v) ... the Appellant '... through her partner  meets  all  of  the
             maintenance and accommodation requirements as specified in  the
             Immigration Rules' cf paragraph 25 of the Determination.


         vi) The Appellant meets the requirements of s117B(2) and (3) of the
             Nationality, Asylum and Immigration Act 2002 as inserted by s19
             of  the  Immigration  Act  2014  cf   paragraph   28   of   the
             Determination.


        vii) In the past previous legal representatives,  not  apparently  a
             firm of  Solicitors,  submitted  documents  on  behalf  of  the
             Appellant which contained false  endorsements.   The  Appellant
             was unaware of this until she was notified by  the  authorities
             and thereafter she assisted the  authorities  in  bringing  the
             perpetrators to justice cf paragraph 32 of the Determination.


       viii) The Appellant's parents are present and settled in  the  United
             Kingdom and the Appellant 'substantially assists in caring  for
             them' cf paragraph 33 of the Determination.


        (ix) The Appellant's partner would face  numerous  problems  if  he
             moved to the Philippines and it was unreasonable to expect  him
             to do so cf paragraphs 18 and 19 of the Determination.


        (x)  That the instant case was one where there 'are  arguably  good
             grounds  for  considering  Article  8  outside  the  Rules'  cf
             paragraph 41 of the Determination".

 3. For the purpose of the appeal before us the following paragraphs of the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal were also of materiality:


         "48. The evidence of the relationship between the appellant and her
             partner is that they met on 22 February 2009.   They,  however,
             only started cohabiting in December 2010.  I reiterate that all
             the appellant's appeal rights had been exhausted by 4 May  2010
             and  the  appellant  and  her  partner  began  starting  living
             together in December 2010, becoming engaged in  December  2011.
             It was only almost three years  after  the  appellant's  appeal
             rights had become exhausted that the  current  application  was
             made.  The appellant was  clearly  in  a  relationship  with  a
             qualifying partner that was established by the appellant at the
             time the appellant was in the United Kingdom unlawfully.   This
             aspect is not disputed by the appellant's representative and it
             is common cause that  Section  117B(4)(b)  is  a  factor  which
             requires consideration.


         49.  I emphasise that this is a  specific  requirement  of  primary
             legislation.  It specifically states that little weight  should
             be given to a relationship formed  with  a  qualifying  partner
             that is established by a person at the time when the person  is
             in   the   United   Kingdom   unlawfully.    The    appellant's
             circumstances clearly fall within this provision.


         50.  I have already  stated  that  it  is  common  cause  that  the
             appellant's appeal turns solely on the relationship between the
             appellant and her partner.  In order for the appeal to  succeed
             it is clear that I  would  need  to  accord  very  considerable
             weight to  the  relationship  between  the  appellant  and  her
             partner.  In terms of the primary legislation to which  I  have
             referred I am specifically required to give  little  weight  to
             this consideration.


         51.  In giving  little  weight  to  this  consideration,  as  I  am
             specifically required to  by  primary  legislation,  I  do  not
             consider that it can be stated that  the  interference  in  the
             appellant's  family  life  caused  by  her  removal  would   be
             disproportionate to the  respondent's  legitimate  interest  in
             protecting the economic wellbeing  of  the  United  Kingdom  by
             maintaining a consistent and effective immigration  policy.   I
             reiterate that the key aspect in this decision  is  the  public
             interest consideration specified in Section 117B(4)(b).


         52.  I do not find it easy  to  make  such  a  decision,  as  on  a
             personal level I have considerable sympathy with the  appellant
             and her partner.  I could, however, only allow  the  appeal  by
             giving considerable and substantial weight to the  relationship
             between the appellant and her  partner  -  and  this  would  be
             contrary to the specific requirement of the primary legislation
             which I have referred to.


         53.  In these circumstances the appeal on Article 8 grounds must be
             dismissed".


Submissions on behalf of the Appellant

 4. Mr Collins' position was that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in  law
    in various respects.

 5. First, he referred to the following finding  at  paragraph  42  of  its
    determination where the First-tier Tribunal said this:

        "... applying the approach to Article 8 outside the Rules, that  it
        would be unreasonable to expect the appellant's partner  to  travel
        to the Philippines for family life to continue."


    Mr Collins submitted that it was from this point in  its  determination
    that the First-tier Tribunal had  erred.   It  was  his  position  that
    having  found  that  it  would  be  unreasonable  or  put  another  way
    disproportionate for the appellant's partner to have  to  move  to  the
    Philippines then logically the appeal would have to  be  allowed  under
    Article 8 ECHR.  However, what the First-tier Tribunal thereafter  went
    on  to  do  was  to  direct  its  attention  to  Section  117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  which  provided  among
    others that little weight should be accorded to a  relationship  formed
    when one party was  in  the  United  Kingdom  unlawfully,  as  was  the
    situation in the instant case.  He submitted that that was putting  the
    cart before the horse.   He  contended  that  the  foregoing  provision
    should  be  considered  first  and  then  having  given  the   relevant
    relationship little weight, findings made and on  the  basis  of  those
    findings an assessment of proportionality  should  be  made.   He  thus
    submitted that the First-tier Tribunal's approach was flawed.

 6. Secondly, Section 117B made it clear that little weight should be given
    to such a relationship,  what  it  did  not  say  was  that  no  weight
    whatsoever should be given to the relationship and it was his  position
    that when the determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  examined
    that was the approach which it had taken.

 7. Thirdly he argued this:  it  was  wrong  to  state  as  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did at paragraph 50 of its determination:  "In order  for  the
    appeal to succeed it  is  clear  that  I  would  need  to  accord  very
    considerable weight to the relationship between the appellant  and  her
    partner".  He went on to submit that if that was  correct  then  in  no
    case such as the instant one could  an  appellant  ever  be  successful
    under Article 8 ECHR no matter how compelling the facts.  He  submitted
    that on a proper construction that was not what the legislation said or
    intended.

 8. In development of his said third argument Mr Collins  went  on  to  say
    this:  It would be entirely open to the First-tier Tribunal to give the
    relationship little weight, as it must do, but  on  the  basis  of  the
    facts as found, in particular that  the  appellant  was  42,  had  been
    trying for children for  two  years  and  was  awaiting  IVF  treatment
    together with the accepted fact that it was unreasonable to expect  her
    partner to relocate to the Philippines it would be disproportionate  to
    remove the appellant and separate the couple.  That  he  submitted  was
    the heart of the appellant's case.

 9. Mr Collins found some support for the  position  he  was  advancing  in
    terms of his third argument in the case of Dube (SS.117A - 117D) [2015]
    UKUT 0090 (IAC).  In this case the Upper Tribunal considered the proper
    approach to Sections 117A - 117D of the said Act.  In particular, as we
    understood his submission, Mr Collins found support for the position he
    was advancing in what was said at paragraph (c) of the  headnote  which
    was as follows:

         "(c) Whilst expressed in mandatory  terms,  the  considerations  as
             specified are not expressed as being exhaustive:  note  use  of
             the phrase 'in particular' in Section 117A(2): 'in  considering
             the public interest question, the court or  Tribunal  must  (in
             particular) have regard - '."

Reply on behalf of the Secretary of State

10. Mr Avery's reply was brief, there was no error in  the  way  that  this
    matter had been approached by the First-tier Tribunal.  There were,  he
    submitted, no exceptional  features  in  this  case  which  would  have
    entitled the First-tier Tribunal to find in favour of the appellant  in
    terms of an Article 8 consideration outwith the Rules.

Discussion

11. We are satisfied that there is no error in the way that the  First-tier
    Tribunal has approached this matter.

12. In considering the  First-tier Tribunal's approach it is  essential  to
    have regard to the basis on which it was asked to  consider  Article  8
    outside the Rules and that is set out succinctly at paragraph 50 of its
    determination:

        "I have already stated that it is common cause that the appellant's
        appeal turns solely on the relationship between the  appellant  and
        her partner".


    Accordingly, where it was agreed that the appeal turned on this  single
    question the First-tier Tribunal must be correct when it goes on to say
    at paragraph 52:


        "I could, however, only allow the appeal by giving considerable and
        substantial weight to the relationship between  the  appellant  and
        her  partner  -  and  this  would  be  contrary  to  the   specific
        requirement of the primary legislation which I have referred to".


    This case it  is  clear  from  paragraph  50  entirely  turned  on  the
    relationship between the appellant and her partner and thus the  First-
    tier Tribunal was entitled to  decide  the  case  by  identifying  what
    weight it could give that factor and in doing so had to have regard  to
    the said provisions which stated that that factor should only be  given
    little weight.  It thereafter weighed that agreed sole  factor  against
    the respondent's legitimate interest.  There were no further factors in
    the circumstances of this case to be considered in the  proportionality
    assessment.  We do  not  find  that  the  case  of  Dube  advances  the
    appellant's position given the particular circumstances of this case as
    above  described,  namely:  the  appellant's  appeal  turned   on   the
    relationship between the appellant and her partner and that alone.


13. With  respect  to  whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal  gave  no  weight
    whatsoever to the relationship  we  are  satisfied  that  on  a  proper
    consideration of the determination as a whole  that  that  is  not  the
    case.  The First-tier Tribunal has clearly had at the forefront of  its
    mind the terms of the statutory provision, namely: that  little  rather
    than no weight should be attached to this factor.  When commencing  its
    consideration of this issue it refers to "little weight" being given to
    the relationship (see: paragraph 49).  The requirement of giving little
    weight to the relationship is expressly repeated at paragraph  50.   We
    are unable to identify any basis upon which it could be contended  that
    no weight was given to this factor by the First-tier Tribunal.

14. Moreover, there is nothing compelling in this case outwith  the  Rules.
    All that was relied on before the Tribunal was first that the appellant
    was awaiting (not undergoing) IVF  treatment  and  so  far  as  we  can
    identify there was no evidence as to whether this treatment  could  not
    equally well be undergone in the Philippines.  Secondly  reference  was
    made to the finding that it would be unreasonable for  the  appellant's
    partner to  relocate  to  the  Philippines.   Again  there  is  nothing
    compelling or exceptional in the above factor.  In any  event  both  of
    these factors are merely  elements  of  the  relationship  between  the
    appellant and her partner.

15. So far as the stage  in  its  determination  at  which  the  First-tier
    Tribunal looked at the above statutory provisions it is our clear  view
    that there was no error of law in relation  to  this.   The  provisions
    were looked at in terms of the proportionality exercise and on a proper
    understanding of the provisions that was the appropriate point at which
    the terms thereof should be considered.

16. For the foregoing reasons we find that there has been no error of  law.
    We accordingly dismiss the appeal.

17. No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                                  Date



Lord Bannatyne
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal
