
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/43337/2014
     ia/43344/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House (Taylor House)      |            Decision & Reasons      |
|                                         |Promulgated                         |
|On 21 October 2015                       |            On 3 November 2015      |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                     MRS BINAL BHAVSAR (FIRST APPELLANT)
              mr bhargavkumar kantilal patel (SECOND appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr H. Patel, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr I. Jarvis, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants appeal to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Handley sitting at Bradford on  9th  January
    2015) dismissing their appeals against the decision of  the  respondent
    to refuse to vary their leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  as,  in
    the case of the first appellant, a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur)  Migrant  and,
    in the case of the second appellant, as the dependant spouse of a  Tier
    1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant,  and  against  the  respondent's  concomitant
    decision to make directions for their removal  in  the  United  Kingdom
    under Section 47 of the 2006 Act.  The First-tier Tribunal did not make
    an anonymity direction in favour  of  the  appellants,  and  I  do  not
    consider that the appellants require to be accorded anonymity for these
    proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

Relevant Factual Background

 2. The first appellant, Mrs Bhavsar, is the main appellant in this appeal,
    and so I shall hereafter refer to her simply  as  the  appellant,  save
    where the context otherwise requires.

 3. The appellant and  her  husband  are  both  nationals  of  India.   The
    appellant first entered the United Kingdom as a student on 24 September
    2009, when she was granted leave to remain  as  a  Tier  1  (Post-Study
    Work) Migrant on 16 August 2012 until 16 August  2014.   On  15  August
    2014 she applied for  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)
    Migrant.  Her husband applied for  leave  to  remain  in  line  as  her
    dependant.

 4. The appellant's application was refused on 15 October  2014  on  points
    scoring grounds.  A third party declaration was not acceptable for  two
    reasons.  Firstly, her signature on the third party declaration had not
    been attested by her legal representative, and the third  party  funder
    had not declared his relationship to her.

 5. The respondent also raised an issue about compliance with the  criteria
    contained in paragraph 41-SD(e)(iii).   She  had  to  show  that  since
    before 11 July 2014 and up to a date no less than three  months  before
    the application, she had been  continuously  engaged  in  her  relevant
    business  activity.   The  evidence  she  submitted  in   relation   to
    advertising material  was  not  acceptable,  as  it  did  not  cover  a
    continuous period commencing before 11 July 2014 up to no earlier  than
    three months before the date of her application.

 6. The respondent went through the various items of evidence  provided  by
    the appellant, and explained in each case  why  the  evidence  was  not
    acceptable.  Some of the evidence provided was not  acceptable  because
    it was clearly dated after 11 July 2014.

 7. She had also submitted printouts from her website.  It  was  noted  the
    website was registered  on  23  May  2014,  but  the  website  was  not
    registered in her name.  It was registered in the name of her business,
    which was unacceptable.  She had to be the domain owner of her website.



 8. Finally, she had submitted  a  membership  card  and  letter  from  the
    Chartered Institute of Marketing (CIM).  Her membership was that of  an
    affiliate.  CIM's website clearly stated that an  affiliate  (studying)
    membership   was   for   those   currently   studying   for   marketing
    qualifications.  As she already had a business, which  appeared  to  be
    trading (judging by the contract she supplied), her level of membership
    with the CIM should be that of an affiliate  (professional).   She  had
    not been able to demonstrate that her membership was the latter.   Also
    the  Immigration  Rules  at  Appendix  A,  paragraph   41-SD(e)(iii)(4)
    required personal registration with the UK  Trade  Body  links  to  the
    applicant's occupation.  Her job title  and  services  offered  in  her
    contract had a very tenuous link to the CIM.   She  stated  she  was  a
    business development consultant, not a professional  in  the  field  of
    marketing.  So her membership of CIM was deemed to be irrelevant.

 9. Accordingly, she had not submitted the  specified  evidence  as  listed
    under paragraph 41-SD to establish that she had access to the funds she
    was claiming.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

10. The appellant was legally represented before the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    and she gave oral evidence.  She also produced a document which had not
    been before the Secretary of State which  confirmed  that  she  was  an
    affiliate  (professional)  member  of  the   Chartered   Institute   of
    Marketing.

11. In his subsequent decision, Judge Handley accepted that  the  appellant
    had addressed many of the issues raised in the refusal letter.  But  he
    dismissed  her  appeal  as  he  was  not  satisfied  she  had  met  the
    requirements of the Rules in regards to the production of the specified
    documents relating to advertising or marketing material.

12. The Judge's reasoning on this topic is to be found in  paragraphs  [13]
    to [15] of his decision, which I reproduced below:

    13.  The respondent was concerned because although the first  appellant
         had  provided  printouts  of  her  website,  the  website  was  not
         registered in her name but registered in the name of her  business.
         The respondent considered that the  first  appellant  must  be  the
         domain owner of the website.  However, my reading of  the  relevant
         paragraphs  of  the  Immigration  Rules  is  that  confirmation  of
         ownership of the domain is  only  required  when  the  business  is
         trading online.  The first appellant's position is that she is  not
         trading online and I  accept  her  suggestion  that  she  does  not
         therefore need to show that she was domain owner of the website.

    14.  The respondent also had concerns because  of  the  nature  of  the
         advertising material which had been presented  in  support  of  the
         application.  The first appellant is required to  submit  documents
         covering a continuous period commencing before 11 July 2014  up  to
         no earlier than three months before the date  of  her  application.
         The first appellant made her application on 15 August 2014 and  she
         produced a "Gumtree" printout dated 15 August 2014.  As  far  as  I
         understand,  the  first  appellant  does  not  dispute  that   this
         advertisement was published on Gumtree on 27 July 2014  and  it  is
         clear that this document does not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
         Immigration Rules.  The first appellant also presented evidence  in
         the form of a document from Facebook  in  support  of  evidence  of
         continued marketing.  Although the respondent  had  concerns  about
         this document, I accept the submission that the respondent has  not
         properly explained these  concerns.   In  any  event  the  Facebook
         documents show that the first appellant joined Facebook on 3 August
         2014 and again these documents do not comply with the  requirements
         of the Immigration Rules.

    15.   The  respondent  had  concerns  regarding  the  submission  of  a
         membership  card  and  letter  from  the  Chartered  Institute   of
         Marketing.  The first appellant has suggested that she has produced
         evidence of Personal Registration with a United Kingdom Trade  Body
         linked to her occupation (the Chartered  Institute  of  Marketing).
         The respondent had concerns because the membership card produced by
         the first appellant indicated that her relationship was that of  an
         "Affiliate".  She  suggests  that  the  membership  card  does  not
         indicate that she  is  studying  but  that  she  is  an  "Affiliate
         Professional  member".   The  respondent  clearly  conducted   some
         research into this issue by  viewing  the  Chartered  Institute  of
         Marketing's website.  I accept that responsibility is at all  times
         on the first appellant to ensure that she has provided the relevant
         information pursuant to the requirements of the Immigration  Rules.
         However she did provide documentary evidence to show that she was a
         member of  the  Chartered  Institute  of  Marketing  and  in  these
         circumstances the respondent should have sought clarification  from
         the first appellant in regard to this matter.  The first  appellant
         has now  presented  a  document  which  confirms  that  she  is  an
         Affiliate (Professional) member.  As far as I understand  Affiliate
         Professional membership is open to anyone who is  actively  engaged
         in or considering a career in marketing or has any active  interest
         in the marketing industry.   I  also  accept  that  "Marketing"  is
         likely to be of relevance to the role  of  a  Business  Development
         Consultant.  It is likely that the  role  would  include  assisting
         clients to grow their business by finding new channels and markets.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

13. Ms Samina Iqbal of Counsel, who  did  not  appear  below,  settled  the
    appellant's application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.
     Under sub-paragraph (e), if  the  applicant  was  applying  under  the
    provisions in (d) in Table 4, he must also provide:

    (iii)    one or more of  the  following  specified  documents  covering
         (either together or individually) a continuous period of commencing
         before 11 July 2014 up to no earlier than three months  before  the
         date of his application:

         (1)  advertising or  marketing  material,  including  printouts  of
             online  advertising,  that  has  been  published  locally   or
             nationally, showing  the applicant's name (and the name of the
             business if applicable) together with  the  business  activity
             or, where his business is trading online, confirmation of  his
             ownership of the domain name of the business's website,

         (2)  articles or online links to articles in a newspaper  or  other
             publication showing the applicant's name (and the name of  the
             business if applicable) together with the business activity,

         (3)  information from a trade fair ...; or

         (4)  personal registration with the UK Trade  Body  linked  to  the
             applicant's occupation.

14. Ms Iqbal submitted that under  paragraph  41-SD(e)(iii)  the  appellant
    only had to demonstrate that she had  one  or  more  of  the  specified
    documents in one  or  more  of  the  classes  (1)  to  (4)  covering  a
    continuous period commencing before 11 July up to no earlier than three
    months from the date of application.

15. The most pertinent document upon which the refusal  letter  took  issue
    was the membership card and letter  from  the  Chartered  Institute  of
    Marketing.  The evidence demonstrated that the  appellant's  membership
    of the CIM began on 27 June 2014, and this would  therefore  bring  her
    squarely within the terms of sub-paragraph (iii).  So she had  produced
    specified evidence covering a period  from  27  June  2014  (which  was
    before 11 July 2014), and which was no earlier than three months before
    the application made on 15 August 2014.  So the Judge erred in  law  in
    concluding that the appellant could not meet the  requirements  of  the
    Rules.

16. Also the Judge had overlooked the fact that he  had  rightly  found  at
    paragraph [13] of his decision that the appellant  provided  acceptable
    evidence predating 11 July 2014 in class (1) through evidence that  she
    had registered her website on 23 May 2014.   As  she  was  not  trading
    online, she did not need to confirm personal ownership  of  the  domain
    name of the business's website.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

17. At the hearing before me, I received extensive submissions  from  Mr  H
    Patel, who represented the appellant before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    and from Mr Jarvis, Senior Presenting  Officer.   There  was  extensive
    discussion of paragraph 245AA of the Rules, and Mr Patel submitted that
    the recent judgment of the Supreme Court in Mandalia [2015] UKSC 59 was
    relevant, which Mr Jarvis disputed.  I reserved my decision.

Discussion

18. I find that an error of law  is  made  out  insofar  as  Judge  Handley
    wrongly treated the appellant as having a  freestanding  obligation  to
    provide advertising material of the type discussed  in  paragraph  [14]
    which covered a period beginning earlier than 11 July 2014.

19. While it was relevant that the material discussed in paragraph [14] did
    not predate 11 July 2014, this was not determinative of the outcome  of
    the appeal.  Provided  that  at  least  one  document  in  one  of  the
    specified classes predated 11 July 2014, the appellant could  be  found
    to  satisfy  the  overarching  requirement  of  demonstrating  business
    activity which extended further back in time than 11 July 2014.

20. But there are also discernible errors in the reasoning which led to the
    judge making findings in favour of the appellant on the  topic  of  the
    appellant's website  and  on  the  topic  of  her  membership  of  CIM.
    Accordingly, Mr Jarvis submits that the Judge reached the right result,
    albeit for the wrong reason. Hence he submits that the error of law  is
    not material.

21. The Judge was wrong to find at paragraph [13] that  the  appellant  did
    not need to show that she was the domain owner  of  the  website.   She
    needed  to  do  so  if  she  was  going  to  rely  on  the  website  as
    demonstrating business activity prior to 11 July 2014.  The  mere  fact
    that the website was registered before 11 July 2014 does not show  that
    the appellant's business was trading before 11 July 2014.  On a  proper
    construction  of  sub-sub-paragraph  (1),  an  applicant  can  rely  on
    printouts of online advertising which have been posted on his  business
    website prior to 11 July 2014.  But  unless  his  business  is  trading
    online (which is not  the  case  with  the  appellant's  business)  the
    applicant cannot rely on confirmation of his ownership  of  the  domain
    name of the business's website, irrespective of when  the  confirmation
    is issued.  As the appellant's business was not trading online and  she
    was not able to provide confirmation of her personal ownership  of  the
    domain name of the business's website, she was doubly disqualified from
    relying on the printout from her website (and the accompanying evidence
    of the date of registration) as constituting a specified document which
    met the criteria in sub-sub-paragraph (1).

22. The evidence provided with  the  application  did  not  show  that  the
    appellant had become a member of the CIM before 11 July 2014.  The post-
    decision evidence referred to in paragraph [15] of the judge's decision
    was inadmissible. So the judge was wrong to find that the appellant had
    provided a specified  document  which  met  the  criteria  in  sub-sub-
    paragraph (4).

23. Earlier in the same paragraph, the Judge indicated that he was  of  the
    view that the respondent was under a duty to seek clarification of  the
    evidence which the appellant had  provided.   The  Judge  had  in  mind
    clarification of the significance of the appellant being  an  affiliate
    member. But it would also have been necessary  for  the  respondent  to
    clarify whether the affiliate membership had begun before 11 July 2014.
    The  evidence  provided  with  the  application  was   ambiguous.   The
    membership card indicated that her membership had begun  in  July,  but
    the accompanying correspondence indicated that she had become a  member
    at the beginning of August and her membership  had  been  backdated  to
    July.

24. On this issue, I do not consider that the case of Mandalia  is  of  any
    assistance to the appellant.  At the time of assessment, the duties  of
    the respondent were clearly delineated in paragraph 245AA of the Rules.
     Her discretion under the rules is permissive, not mandatory. The Rules
    did not engender an obligation on the part of the Secretary of State to
    investigate with either the appellant or with the  CIM  when  precisely
    the appellant had become a member so as  to  ascertain  whether,  other
    things being equal,  she  could  rely  on  her  membership  of  CIM  as
    evidencing business activity prior to 11 July 2014.

25. Although Judge Handley disagreed with the caseworker's view that  there
    was only a very tenuous link between the CIM and the  appellant's  role
    as a  business  development  consultant,  it  was  reasonable  for  the
    caseworker to take a different view.  As  a  matter  of  common  sense,
    joining a trade  organisation  which  is  aimed  at  those  whose  core
    activity is marketing is not evidence of  an  applicant  working  as  a
    business  development  consultant.  As  it  was  reasonable   for   the
    caseworker to treat the appellant's membership  of  the  CIM  as  being
    irrelevant to the question of whether she was operating as  a  business
    development consultant, there was no breach of the common law  duty  of
    fairness or evidential flexibility principles  in  the  caseworker  not
    making further enquiries about her membership of the CIM before  making
    a decision on the application.

26. For the above reasons, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal was  not
    vitiated by a material error  of  law,  and  accordingly  the  decision
    stands.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
























