
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
IA/43203/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 14 March 2016                    |On 5 April 2016                   |
|                                    |                                  |


                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    G I K
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr S Staunton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr M Goldborough, solicitor, of UK law

DECISION AND REASONS

1. I make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008, precluding publication of  any  information  regarding
the proceedings which would be likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
identify the appellant so that the anonymity direction deemed  necessary  by
the First-tier Tribunal is preserved.

2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal but  in
order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as  they  were  in  the
First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a
decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Thankie,  promulgated  on  5  August
2015, which allowed the Appellant's appeal on article 8 ECHR Grounds.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 19 June 1973 and is a national of Nigeria.

4. The appellant has three dependent children.  The  appellant  applied  for
leave to remain in the UK or 14 March  2012.  The  respondent  refused  that
application  of  2  July  2013.  The  appellant   appealed   that   decision
successfully. In a determination  dated  13  December  2013  an  Immigration
Judge found that the respondent's decision was not in  accordance  with  the
law. The case was remitted to the respondent to properly consider  the  best
interests of the appellant's dependent children.

5. The  respondent  reconsidered  the  original  decision  and  refused  the
application on 7 October 2014.


The Judge's Decision

6. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Thanki ("the Judge")  allowed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision on article 8 ECHR grounds.

7. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 4 January 2016 Judge  Grimmett  gave
permission to appeal stating inter alia

      "It is arguable that the Judge erred in failing to consider s.117A and
      s.117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002"

The Hearing

8. (a) Mr Staunton, for the respondent, moved  the  grounds  of  appeal.  He
explained to me that there are four grounds of  appeal;  the  fourth  ground
relates  to  the  appellant's  estranged  husband.  He  told  me  that   his
investigations reveal  that  the  appellant's  estranged  husband  has  been
granted leave to remain in the UK, so that he  would  not  move  the  fourth
ground of appeal. He did however rely on the first three grounds of  appeal.


(b) Mr Staunton told me that throughout the decision the  Judge  had  failed
to have regard to  the  immigration  rules,  the  relevant  legislation  and
established case law. He relied in particular of paragraph 33 of SS  (Congo)
and Others [2015] EWCA Civ 387. He told me that  the  judge  had  failed  to
take account of the public interest as required by section 117B of the  2002
Act, and that particularly at  [37]  the  Judge  had  failed  to  follow  EV
(Philippines) and others v SSHD 2014 EWCA Civ 874.
(c) Mr Staunton urged me to allow the appeal and set the decision aside.  He
told me that if I was to find that the decision is  tainted  by  a  material
error of law, then the case should be  remitted  to  the  First-tier  to  be
heard of new.

9. (a) Mr Goldborough, for the appellant, told me  that  the  decision  does
not contain an error of law, material or otherwise. He reminded me that  the
grant of permission to appeal focused on sections 117A and 117B of the  2002
Act. He told me that the Judge had given due  weight  to  the  determinative
factors in this case and that the decision  reflected  a  careful  balancing
exercise which  correctly  balanced  the  rights  of  the  appellants  three
dependent children against the public interest.

(b) Mr Goldborough reminded me that  the  appellant's  oldest  child  is  12
years of age and has lived in the UK for  11  years;  that  the  appellant's
middle child has lived in the  UK  for  seven  years,  and  next  month  the
appellant's youngest child will have been in the  UK  for  seven  years.  He
told me that the Judge gave  appropriate  weight  to  the  rights  of  three
qualifying children, and properly recognised that the appellant is a  victim
of domestic violence. He relied on a court order  allowing  the  appellant's
former partner restricted contact to  the  appellant's  three  children.  He
argued that the grounds of appeal amount to  no  more  than  a  disagreement
with findings  of  fact  which  were  well  within  the  range  of  findings
available to the Judge. He urged me to dismiss  the  appeal  and  allow  the
decision to stand

Analysis

10. The Judge's findings and conclusions start at [27]. Between [27] &  [30]
the Judge effectively sets out the procedural history  of  this  appeal  and
then, at [31] in one sentence, the Judge finds ".... That  the  respondent's
decision with regard to the best interests of the children under section  55
of the 2009 Act is inadequate."

11. The problem created by that one sentence at [31] is that  there  are  no
detailed findings of fact which lead the Judge to that conclusion. At  [32],
[33]  & [35] the Judge states that he ha s  given  "significant  weight"  to
evidence tendered of domestic violence, but the decision  does  not  contain
any analysis of that evidence  nor  any  reason  for  giving  that  evidence
significant weight.

12. At [38] the Judge repeats  his  opinion  that  the  respondent  has  not
properly considered the best interests of the children. At  [40]  the  Judge
rehearses his findings that the appellant and her children have  established
private life whilst they had lawful leave to remain in the UK,  and  appears
to embark on an investigation of the five  questions  posed  in  Razgar.  At
[42] it appears that the Judge's decision is reached primarily on the  basis
of consideration of the rights of the appellant's children.

13. What the Judge does not do is consider appendix FM  of  the  immigration
rules and then paragraph 276 ADE of the immigration rules. It is  not  clear
from  the  Judge's  decision  whether  or  not  the  appellant  fulfils  the
requirements of the immigration rules, because the Judge does not  make  any
findings in order to reach any conclusions in relation  to  the  immigration
rules.

14. At [38] the Judge says


   "While I note the respondent's finding that there were no  insurmountable
   obstacles in the mother and the children going to Nigeria..."


But the Judge neither analyses the evidence nor does  he  come  to  his  own
conclusion about "insurmountable  obstacles".  It  appears  that  the  Judge
makes no inquiry into the appellant's ability (or  otherwise)  to  meet  the
terms of the Immigration Rules.

15. It is most likely that the Judge has simply considered  the  appellant's
application on article 8 ECHR grounds out-with the  immigration  rules.  The
Judge does not explain why  he  chooses  not  to  consider  the  immigration
rules. The Judge does not follow the guidance given in SS Congo. Insofar  as
the judge conducts a proportionality assessment,  he  does  so  without  any
consideration of section 117B of the 2002 Act.

16. The Judge's superficial approach to the fact-finding  exercise  and  his
failure to consider the immigration  rules,  his  failure  to  consider  the
Nationality Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002,  and  his  failure  to  take
guidance from the established case law are all material errors of law.  They
are material errors because had the Judge considered the facts of this  case
against the guidance provided in statute in case law his decision  may  have
been different.

17. I therefore find that the decision is tainted by material errors of  law
and must be set aside.

18. I consider whether I am in a position to substitute my own decision  but
find that I am unable to do so. There is force in Mr  Staunton's  submission
that this case requires to be heard of  new.  The  errors  in  the  decision
include an inadequacy in the fact-finding process.  It  is  clear  from  the
submissions of Mr Goldsborough, and from the documentary  evidence,  that  a
child arrangement order has been made allowing the father of the  appellants
three children restricted contact to them. Two of the  appellant's  children
are qualifying children in terms of section 117 of the 2002 Act. In  just  a
few weeks, the appellant's youngest child will have  lived  in  the  UK  for
more than seven years and will be a qualifying child.

19. These are all matters which may well be determinative of this appeal  at
a renewed hearing; They are matters on which the appellant should  have  the
opportunity of leading up-to-date evidence.





Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

20. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 a case may  be  remitted  to  the  First  Tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:


    (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

21.  In this case I  have  determined  that  the  case  should  be  remitted
because of the nature and extent of the fact finding exercise  necessary  to
reach a just decision in this appeal. None of the findings of  fact  are  to
stand. A complete re-hearing is necessary.

22. I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal sitting  at  Hatton  Cross
to be heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge Thanki.

CONCLUSION

Decision

23. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted  by  material  errors
of law.

24. I set the decision aside. The appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First  Tier
Tribunal to be determined of new.


Signed                                                              Date 21
March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

