
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43216/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 July 2015                      |On 3 August 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM


                                   Between

                           victor ifeanyi omatsola
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Islam, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal R G Handley promulgated on 17 December 2014 in which the judge
    dismissed the  appeal  of  the  appellant  against  a  refusal  by  the
    Secretary of State to grant him leave to remain outside the Immigration
    Rules.

2.   The appellant was born on 29  September  1975  and  is  a  national  of
    Nigeria. He entered the United Kingdom on 9 January 2009 as  a  Tier  4
    (Student) Migrant. He was granted further periods of  leave  to  remain
    and his last period of leave expired on 24 March 2013.

3.   The appellant put in an application for  leave  to  remain  on  a  form
    FLR(O)  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  on  the  basis  that  he  had
    discovered he would be at risk of being killed or tortured if  returned
    to Nigeria. The application to the Secretary of State  was  accompanied
    by a number of letters some of which were handwritten, some  typed  and
    some of which came from a firm of lawyers in Nigeria. The gist of these
    letters suggested that the appellant was bisexual and would be at  risk
    on return to Nigeria as a result of his sexual orientation, and as  the
    result of threats against him by the family of a  person  killed,  that
    family believes, as a result  of  the  appellant's  influence  on  that
    person's sexual orientation.

4.   The documents served by the appellant also include  a  Nigerian  Police
    Force Station Diary extract relating to threats the appellant claims he
    received from members of the deceased person's family. I have also seen
    a letter from the Deputy Inspector General of  Police,  dated  30  July
    2013, relating to the complaint lodged on behalf of  the  appellant  by
    the lawyer.

5.   The Secretary of State refused the application  having  regard  to  the
    Immigration  Rules  giving  effect  to  private   life   considerations
    contained in paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

6.   The appellant had originally opted  for  an  oral  hearing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal. However, shortly before the appeal was due  to  be
    heard, his representatives requested  that  it  be  considered  on  the
    papers.  No explanation was provided for this move.

7.   In his determination the First-tier Judge considered the fact that  the
    appellant had only been in the United Kingdom since 2009. The judge was
    not satisfied that the appellant  met  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE. The judge then considered the alternative freestanding  Article
    8 claim and took  into  account  a  number  of  factors  including  the
    statutory considerations contained in Section 117B of the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act). Whilst the  judge  made
    reference to the appellant's fear that he would  be  at  risk  of  ill-
    treatment on his return to Nigeria, the judge entirely failed to engage
    in any meaningful way with this aspect of the appellant's claim.

8.    I  am  entirely  satisfied  that,  in  failing  to  engage  with   the
    appellant's Article 3/asylum claim, the judge erred  in  law.  I  place
    reliance on the authority of  Haque  (Section  86(2):  adjournment  not
    required) Bangladesh [2011] UKUT 00481, which indicates that,  pursuant
    to Section 86(2) of the 2002 Act, a Judge is obliged to  determine  any
    matter raised as a ground of appeal. The appellant specifically  raised
    his fear of ill-treatment in Nigeria as a ground of appeal.  The  judge
    was therefore obliged to consider this ground. The judge's  failure  to
    do so constitutes an error of law.

9.   I did consider the possibility that the  judge  would  have  inevitably
    concluded, having regard to the nature of the documents before him  and
    the absence of any oral evidence, that  the  asylum/Article  3  grounds
    were doomed to failure. The judge would clearly have been  entitled  to
    place only limited  weight  on  the  documents  given  the  appellant's
    absence, and the absence of the authors of the documents,  and  without
    any other opportunity to test  or  probe  the  various  facets  of  the
    appellant's account. However,  I  cannot  safely  say  that  any  judge
    properly directing themselves to the appropriate standard of proof  and
    having properly considered the evidence before them with  the  required
    degree  of  anxious  scrutiny  would  inevitably  have   rejected   the
    asylum/Article 3 ground.

10.  Therefore, in circumstances where no  consideration  at  all  has  been
    given to the appellant's  asylum/Article  3  ground,  I  regard  it  as
    appropriate to remit it back to the First-tier Tribunal to enable  full
    consideration to be given to the asylum/Article 3 ground and the extent
    that this bears on the appellant's private life grounds.

Notice of Decision and Directions

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
law.

The  appeal  will  be  remitted  back  to  the   First-tier   Tribunal   for
consideration of the appellant's asylum/Article 3 ground of appeal  and  the
extent that this bears on his private life.

No anonymity direction is made.



[pic]    31 July 2015
Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum

