
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43731/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 15th May 2015                          |On 27th May 2015                  |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                FRANK GOMANI
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss C Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B Chimpango of Crown & Law Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision of Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal M Davies (the  judge)  promulgated  on  20th
    January 2015.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and I will refer to him as the claimant.

 3. The claimant is a male citizen of Malawi born 26th  December  1979  who
    applied for leave to remain in the United Kingdom as the  dependant  of
    his spouse, a Tier 4 Student.

 4. The application was refused on 22nd  October  2014,  the  Secretary  of
    State making a combined decision to refuse to vary leave and to  remove
    the claimant from the United Kingdom.

 5. The application was refused with reference to paragraph 319C(i) of  the
    Immigration Rules on the basis  that  the  claimant's  spouse  was  not
    studying a course that was twelve months or longer in duration.

 6. The claimant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal  contending  that  the
    Secretary of State had erred in considering the Immigration Rules,  and
    further that the decision breached the claimant's  right  to  a  family
    life with his  wife,  pursuant  to  Article  8  of  the  1950  European
    Convention on Human Rights (the 1950 Convention).

 7. The appeal was heard by the judge on 13th January 2015.  The  Secretary
    of State was not  represented.   The  judge  heard  evidence  from  the
    claimant, and indicated that he did not need to  hear  any  submissions
    from Mr Chimpango.  The judge  found  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision dated 22nd October 2014 was not in accordance with the law, as
    there had been no consideration of the  claimant's  Article  8  rights.
    The judge found that the claimant had been in the United  Kingdom  with
    his spouse, and that they had two young children, and the Secretary  of
    State had not given consideration as to  how  the  decision  to  remove
    would affect the claimant's family or private life.   No  consideration
    had been given to the best interests of the children.

 8. In addition the judge  had  been  provided  with  a  previous  Tribunal
    decision which had been promulgated on 21st August 2012, in  which  the
    claimant's appeal, against a  previous  decision,  had  been  dismissed
    under the Immigration Rules but allowed  on  Article  8  grounds.   The
    judge found that the Secretary of State had not given any consideration
    to the previous Tribunal decision.

 9. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, contending in summary that the judge had erred in finding the
    decision not to be in accordance with the law, as  no  application  had
    been made by or on behalf of the claimant in relation to Article 8.

10. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Mailer in the following terms:

          a) The Appellant is  a  national  of  Malawi  1985.   His  appeal
             against the Respondent's  decision  to  refuse  him  leave  to
             remain as the dependent partner of a points-based migrant  and
             to remove him was allowed by FTT Judge  M  Davies.   He  found
             that the Respondent's decision was not in accordance with  the
             law as it was clear from the refusal letter that she  had  not
             considered the Appellant's Article 8 rights and  their  effect
             if he were to be removed.  Throughout his time in  the  UK  he
             has been here with leave as has his  spouse.   They  have  two
             young children.  No consideration had been given as  to  their
             best  interests  [10-11].   He  remitted  the  case   to   the
             Respondent for 'him' (sic) to reconsider the matters and  make
             a fresh decision.
          b) It is arguable, as submitted, that the decision to  remit  was
             wrong as no application had been made under Article  8.   This
             was a case relating  to  PBS  only.   Moreover,  the  Tribunal
             failed  to  identify  any  'compelling  circumstances'   which
             required the case to be  considered  under  Article  8  having
             failed to meet the relevant requirements under the Rules.
          c) Further a One-Stop Warning was given and the Appellant  raised
             Article 8 as part of his Grounds of Appeal as well as  relying
             on human rights in his witness  statement,  this  enabled  the
             judge to make the Article 8  decision  himself  as  a  primary
             decision maker.

11. Following the grant of permission, directions were  issued  that  there
    should be an oral  hearing  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  ascertain
    whether the First-tier  Tribunal  had  erred  in  law,  such  that  the
    decision must be set aside.

The Secretary of State's Submissions

12. Miss Johnstone relied upon the grounds contained within the application
    for permission to appeal, and the grant of permission to appeal.  I was
    asked to find that there was no evidence that the claimant had made  an
    Article 8 application, and there was no evidence that his children  had
    made any application.  I was asked to find that the judge had erred  in
    law, and the decision should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

The Claimant's Submissions

13. Mr Chimpango confirmed that there had been no response pursuant to rule
    24 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 but  submitted
    that the judge had not erred in law.  Mr Chimpango contended  that  the
    Secretary of State should have considered Article 8 when it  was  found
    that the claimant did not meet  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

14. In answer to questions that  I  put,  Mr  Chimpango  accepted  that  no
    application had been made under Appendix FM in relation to family life,
    and that there was no reference to Article 8 in  the  application  form
    that had been submitted.  Mr Chimpango did not believe that a  copy  of
    the  Tribunal's  previous  decision  had  been   submitted   with   the
    application.

15. Mr Chimpango agreed that if I found an error of law and set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal, it would be appropriate  to  remit
    this appeal back to the First-tier Tribunal.



My Findings and Conclusions

16. I find that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law and the decision  must
    be set aside.  My reasons for reaching  this  conclusion  are  that  no
    application was made under Article 8, either with reference to Appendix
    FM in relation to family life,  or  paragraph  276ADE  in  relation  to
    private life.

17. Moreover, no application was made with reference to Article  8  outside
    the Immigration Rules.  The claimant's application  form  is  contained
    within the Respondent's bundle that was before the First-tier Tribunal,
    and can be found at Annex A.  There is no reference  in  that  form  to
    Article 8, and no reference to the claimant having  children.   I  have
    not been provided  with  any  covering  letter  which  accompanied  the
    application form, and no such letter was placed before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

18. I accept Miss Johnstone's submission that a check had  been  made  with
    the Secretary of State's records, which  revealed  no  application  had
    been made in relation to the claimant's children.  I am satisfied  that
    no copy of the previous  Tribunal  decision  was  submitted  with  this
    application and there was no reference to that previous decision in the
    application form.

19. The Secretary of State was therefore not requested specifically, or  in
    my view by implication, to consider Article 8, and  in  any  event  was
    given insufficient information to make any informed decision on Article
    8.  The Secretary of State was asked to consider  an  application  made
    under paragraph 319C of the Immigration Rules and did so.  It was  open
    to the claimant to make an application under Article 8 or request  that
    Article 8 be considered and to provide sufficient information to enable
    this to be done, but the claimant did not do so.

20. In my view, the Secretary of State's decision to refuse to  vary  leave
    and to remove the claimant from the United  Kingdom  is  in  accordance
    with the law, and the First-tier Tribunal erred in finding otherwise.

21. As the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside, it needs to be
    re-made.  Both representatives  agreed,  and  I  conclude  that  it  is
    appropriate to remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.  In making
    this  decision  I  have  considered  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statements, and in particular paragraph 7.2 which I set out below:

         7.2  The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to  proceed
             to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case to  the
             First-tier Tribunal, unless the Upper  Tribunal  is  satisfied
             that:
             (a)  the effect of the error  has  been  to  deprive  a  party
                  before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other
                  opportunity for  that  party's  case  to  be  put  to  and
                  considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or
             (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial  fact-finding  which
                  is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be
                  re-made is such that,  having  regard  to  the  overriding
                  objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit  the  case
                  to the First-tier Tribunal.

22. In this case the appeal has not  been  substantively  considered.   The
    claimant has raised Article 8 as a Ground of Appeal, and the First-tier
    Tribunal will no doubt be asked to consider Article 8 as  well  as  the
    Immigration Rules.  Because  the  claimant's  case  has  not  yet  been
    substantively considered by the First-tier Tribunal, it is  appropriate
    to remit this appeal back to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  considered
    afresh by a judge, other than Judge M Davies.

23. The appeal will be heard at  the  Manchester  Hearing  Centre  and  the
    parties will be advised of the hearing  date  in  due  course.   It  is
    understood that no interpreter will be required, but if this is not the
    case, the claimant's solicitors must notify the Tribunal immediately.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that  it
is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity

No anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  There has  been
no request to the Upper Tribunal for anonymity, and no  anonymity  order  is
made.



Signed                              Date         18th May 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside,  so  has  the
fee award.  The Upper Tribunal makes no fee award.  This is  to  be  decided
by the First-tier Tribunal when the decision is re-made.



Signed                              Date         18th May 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

