
[pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43786/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 September 2015                 |On 16 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                               sohaib maqsood
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain, instructed by Hussain Immigration Law
Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Sohaib Maqsood, was born on 15 May 1990 and  is  a  male
    citizen of Pakistan.  He was refused leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom as the spouse of a person settled here by  a  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State dated 18 October 2014.  He appealed  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Dearden) which, in a decision  promulgated  on  13
    March 2015, dismissed the appeal.   The  appellant  now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The respondent had not  been  satisfied  that  the  appellant  met  the
    suitability requirements for  leave  to  remain  as  the  spouse  under
    Appendix FM (in particular, R-LTRP1.1) because he had  sought  to  rely
    upon a false English language test certificate.  The  evidence  adduced
    by the respondent in the appeal relating  to  the  appellant's  English
    language test was only generic; none was specific  to  this  appellant.
    The judge concluded that  the  burden  of  proof  (which  fell  on  the
    respondent) had not been discharged and that it  had  not  been  proved
    that the appellant had colluded with a proxy  in  taking  the  test  or
    otherwise to have obtained the false test results.

 3. However, having found that the appellant was not disqualified under the
    suitability requirements, the judge went on to state as follows:

         "The appellant therefore has access to EX.1 of Immigration Rules HC
         395 as amended.  The appellant seeks to  show  me  that  he  has  a
         genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  a  partner  within  the
         United Kingdom, is a British citizen, is settled in the  UK  or  in
         the UK with refugee leave or humanitarian protection and there  are
         insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life   with   that   partner
         continuing outside the United Kingdom."

    The judge concluded at [31]:

         "If the appellant is to show on the balance of  probabilities  that
         he has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a partner who  is
         in the United Kingdom one would have expected that partner to  have
         (a) provided a statement and (b)  to  have  attended  at  court  to
         advocate that statement.  There was no statement from  the  partner
         and she did not attend at  court  to  give  oral  evidence  to  me.
         Whilst I have copies of her passport and wage slips, and  whilst  I
         had the marriage certificate, the appellant has failed to show (the
         burden  on  this  matter  rests  upon  him  on   the   balance   of
         probabilities) that he is in a genuine and subsisting  relationship
         with a partner who is in  the  United  Kingdom  and  is  a  British
         citizen."

 4. Mr Hussain, for the appellant, submitted that, having found  in  favour
    of the appellant as regards the ETS test, the judge should simply  have
    allowed the appeal under the Immigration  Rules.   He  noted  that  the
    refusal letter [14] had recorded that,

         'It is considered that your client does not  meet  the  suitability
         requirements [of Appendix FM].  However, if they did,  your  client
         would meet the eligibility requirements for limited leave to remain
         in the UK as a partner under E-LTRP1.2-1.12 and 2.1 because of  his
         marriage to a British citizen, Ms Usma  Kausar.   Your  client  has
         provided evidence in the form of a certified  copy  of  a  marriage
         certificate  dated  25  February  2014  and  Ms  Kausar's   British
         passport.  As a result additional consideration will  be  given  to
         the criteria of Appendix FM EX.1(b) with regard to EX.2.'

 5. Mr Hussain is correct to point out that Judge Dearden was not  required
    to apply the provisions of EX.1 to the appellant.  If the appellant met
    the requirements of E-LTRP together with the  suitability  requirements
    (i.e. in this case the language test) then  he  was  not  required,  in
    addition, to meet the requirements of Appendix FM EX.1.  However, I  am
    not persuaded that the matter is as simple as Mr Hussain  submits.   In
    his Rule 24 letter, Mr Parkinson, Specialist Appeals Team,  points  out
    [3]  that  "The  judge  was  obliged  to  consider  whether   all   the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules were met.  In  that  respect  the
    judge followed the Tribunal decision  of  RM  (Kwok  On  Tong:  HC  395
    paragraph 320) India [2006] UKAIT 00039."  I agree  with  Mr  Parkinson
    that Kwok On Tong remains good law and that,  for  the  judge  to  have
    allowed the appeal he would have had to have been  satisfied  that  all
    the requirements of the relevant Immigration Rule were  met.   I  agree
    with Mr Hussain that  the  appellant  was  not  required  to  meet  the
    requirements of EX.1 but the judge's findings at [31] (quoted above) as
    to the genuineness and subsistence of the appellant's relationship with
    Ms Kausar are clearly relevant to the substantive  requirements  of  E-
    LTRP, in particular, sub-paragraph 1.7 ("the relationship  between  the
    applicant and their partner must be genuine and  subsisting.")   It  is
    the case that the refusal letter does not cast doubt upon  the  genuine
    and subsisting nature of the relationship but,  relying  upon  Kwok  On
    Tong, the judge was required to satisfy himself that the relevant  Rule
    was met in each of its requirements.

 6. I acknowledge that the judge may yet have fallen into legal  error  if,
    following the hearing, he has fixed upon and determined the  appeal  by
    reference to a matter in respect of which the parties were never  given
    the opportunity to  adduce  evidence  or  to  comment.   It  is  clear,
    however, from the Record of Proceedings that EX.1  was  raised  by  the
    representatives and was the subject of a submission by  Mr  Hussain,  a
    Counsel who has appeared before both Tribunals.   The  genuineness  and
    subsistence of the relationship are issues in common  to  EX1  and  the
    substantive rule, E-LTRP.  I note also that the appellant  had  adduced
    much documentary evidence with a view to proving the subsistence of his
    relationship to Ms Kausar.  I am satisfied that the parties were  aware
    that the genuineness/subsistence was at issue and I am  satisfied  also
    that the judge at [31] has reached a finding which has  been  supported
    by adequate reasons.  In the  circumstances,  and  notwithstanding  the
    fact that he found in the Appellant's favour as regards  the  ETS  test
    issue, the judge did not err in law by dismissing  the  appeal  against
    the immigration decision.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 10 October 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

