

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/43383/2013
                                                               IA/47663/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 16th June 2014                             |On 1st October 2014          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL

                                   Between

                           Mr Muneer Hussain Syed
                              Mrs Nousheen Sana

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr A Sreevalsalan
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants are  citizens  of  India.   On  12th  April  2013,  they
    applied for indefinite leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom.   That
    application was refused on 2nd October 2013, the respondent refusing to
    vary the appellants' leave and also deciding, on that  day,  to  remove
    them from the United Kingdom by way of directions under section  47  of
    the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 ("the 2006 Act").

2.   In refusing the applications for indefinite  leave,  the  Secretary  of
    State took into account the  appellants'  immigration  histories.   The
    first appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on  10th  February  2008.
    Paragraph 245CD(c) of the Immigration Rules ("the rules") provides that
    to succeed in the application he made for  indefinite  leave,  he  must
    have spent a continuous period of five years  lawfully  in  the  United
    Kingdom, of which the most recent must have been spent with leave as  a
    Tier 1 (General) Migrant.  The  first  appellant  had  leave  initially
    under the Highly Skilled Migrant Programme and subsequently as a Tier 1
    Migrant.   However, the  Secretary  of  State  drew  attention  to  his
    absence from the United  Kingdom  between  23rd  March  2008  and  13th
    October that year.  In this  regard,  paragraph  245AAA  of  the  rules
    provides that a period of valid leave is not considered  to  have  been
    broken where  an applicant has been absent from the United Kingdom  for
    a period of 180 days or less in any  of  the  five  consecutive  twelve
    months' periods preceding the date of  the  application  for  leave  to
    remain.  The application for indefinite leave was made  on  12th  April
    2013 and the relevant period of twelve months for  considering  absence
    was 13th April 2008 until 12th April 2009.  The first part of the first
    appellant's absence fell outside this period and was disregarded by the
    Secretary of State.  However, he was absent from 13th April 2008  until
    13th October 2008, a period of 182 days.  This exceeded the  period  of
    time allowed under paragraph 245AAA(a)(i) of  the  rules.   The  second
    appellant was given leave to enter the United Kingdom  on  17th  August
    2011, as the first appellant's partner.


3.   The Secretary of State took into account the medical  issues  that  the
    first appellant relied upon as showing that he was unable to return  to
    the United Kingdom sooner.  A  letter  from  a  doctor  referred  to  a
    prolapsed disc and to medical treatment in India from  16th  June  2008
    until 27th September that year.  However, the Secretary of State  found
    that the evidence revealed no reason why the first appellant was unable
    to return to the  United  Kingdom  after  that  date.   She  considered
    whether to exercise discretion in his case  but  concluded  that  there
    were no sufficiently compelling reasons to do so.  She concluded, as  a
    result, that the requirements of the rules were  not  met  and  so  the
    application for indefinite leave fell to  be  refused  under  paragraph
    245CD(c).

4.   So far as the appellants' human rights were  concerned,  the  Secretary
    of State noted that they had suggested in  the  application  for  leave
    that they wished to rely upon Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.
     A separate application was invited, using the  appropriate,  specified
    application form.  Nonetheless, notwithstanding the failure  to  comply
    with the requirements of the rules, the Secretary of  State  considered
    whether it would be appropriate  to  allow  the  appellants  to  remain
    exceptionally,  outside  the  rules.    Having   considered   all   the
    circumstances of their cases, she concluded that there was  nothing  to
    justify the grant of leave on this or any other basis.
5.   An appeal was brought against the adverse decisions.  It was  contended
    on the first appellant's behalf that the Secretary of  State  ought  to
    have  taken  into  account  "the  medical  issue"  and  exercised   her
    discretion differently.  He travelled from India to the United  Kingdom
    on 13th October 2008, about two weeks after he was certified  medically
    fit.  He was entitled to "a normal and reasonable post period" in which
    to prepare for his journey.  The Secretary of State ought to have taken
    "a pragmatic approach".  Overall, the period of the  first  appellant's
    absence from the United Kingdom exceeded the amount allowed by only two
    days.  It took time to arrange travel from India to the United  Kingdom
    and two weeks should have been considered a reasonable period of time.

6.   It was also contended that the Secretary of State failed  to  give  due
    consideration to the appellants' rights under Article 8.  Paragraph  29
    of the grounds is as follows: "Appellant [sic] has a  private  life  in
    the United Kingdom."  In the paragraph which followed, it was  asserted
    that no legitimate aim was being pursued by the Secretary of State.

Determination of the Appeal in the First-tier Tribunal

7.   The appellants' appeals came before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Dineen
    ("the judge") on 28th February 2014.  In  a  determination  promulgated
    thereafter,  the  appeals  were  "allowed  to  the  extent   that   the
    applications of the appellants  are  remitted  to  the  respondent  for
    further  consideration."   The  judge  took  into  account  a  recorded
    delivery slip showing that the application  for  indefinite  leave  was
    posted on 12th April 2013 and delivered on 15th April  that  year.   At
    paragraph 6 in the Secretary of State's letter giving reasons  for  the
    adverse  decisions,  the  application  was  described  as  having  been
    submitted on 12th April 2013.

8.   It appears that the judge found that the application was made two  days
    after it was posted and that,  for  the  purposes  of  the  rules,  the
    relevant period for calculating absence was 15th April 2008 until  14th
    April 2009.   On this basis, the first appellant's  period  of  absence
    from the United Kingdom was precisely 180 days.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

9.   The Secretary of State  applied  for  permission  to  appeal.   It  was
    contended on her behalf that the judge made  a  material  misdirection.
    Paragraph 34G(i) of the rules  provides  that  the  date  on  which  an
    application or claim is made is as follows: "Where the application form
    is sent by post, the date of posting ...".  As the judge found that the
    application was posted on 12th April 2013, that was the date  on  which
    it was made and so the Secretary of State had calculated the period  of
    absence correctly.  The judge ought to have dismissed the appeals.

10.  Permission to appeal was granted by a First-tier Tribunal Judge on  2nd
    May 2014.  Paragraph 34G(i) of the rules  appeared  not  to  have  been
    brought to the judge's attention and it was arguable that he  erred  in
    law in determining the appeals as he had.

11.  In directions sent on an uncertain date, the parties were advised  that
    they should prepare for the forthcoming hearing on the basis  that,  if
    the Upper Tribunal set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    any further evidence that might need to be considered in  remaking  the
    decision could be considered at the hearing.

12.  The appellants' solicitors provided a response under  rule  24  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  It was accepted on the
    first appellant's behalf that there was some force in  the  grounds  in
    support of the application for permission to appeal  but  not  accepted
    that any error would lead to a  materially  different  outcome  if  the
    decision were remade.  If the date  of  application  were  indeed  15th
    April 2013, the first appellant did not fall foul of the rules.

Submissions Regarding Error of Law

13.  Ms Isherwood said that the rules were clear on the relevant date.   The
    judge referred to the application for leave as having  been  posted  by
    recorded delivery and it was clear that it was not sent by courier.  It
    followed that the application was made on  the  day  on  which  it  was
    posted, 12th April 2013.  In his grounds of appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, the first appellant himself described the date on  which  the
    application was made as 12th April.  The Secretary  of  State  properly
    refused the application and the judge erred in allowing the appeals.

14.  Mr Sreevalsalan said that the application was submitted on  12th  April
    2013 and refused as the period of the first  appellant's  absence  from
    the United Kingdom was more than 180 days.

15.   He  conceded  that  the  first  appellant  could  not  show  that  the
    requirements of the rules were met as his absence amounted to 182 days.
     However, a medical report showed the  compassionate  circumstances  in
    his case.  The Secretary of State refused the application apparently on
    the basis that the first appellant took two  weeks  to  return  to  the
    United Kingdom.  He was discharged as medically fit on  27th  September
    2008 and travelled on 13th October that year.  In the rule 24 response,
    attention was drawn to the judge's decision to remit  the  applications
    so  that  the  Secretary  of  State  could  exercise  discretion.    Mr
    Sreevalsalan accepted that paragraph 8  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision letter showed that she considered the exercise  of  discretion
    in assessing the application for indefinite leave but  the  documentary
    evidence  in  turn  revealed  that  she  did  not  consider  discretion
    properly.  The appellants disagreed with the Secretary of State's  view
    that weight fell to be given to the period of absence after  the  first
    appellant's illness had come to an end.  The medical evidence was dated
    27th September 2008 and anyone would need time to recover  and  prepare
    to travel.  Mr Sreevalsalan said that the appellants' case was that the
    judge did not err notwithstanding any mistake made regarding  the  date
    on which the application was made.

Conclusion on Error of Law

16.  It is readily apparent that paragraph  34G(i)  of  the  rules  was  not
    brought to the judge's attention.  This is rather surprising.   In  any
    event, in the light of the rules, the date on which the application was
    made was 12th April 2013 and not 15th April.  The judge decided to send
    the application back for further consideration on the  basis  that  the
    latter date, the date of receipt, was the correct one but he  erred  in
    law in so doing.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set  aside
    and must be remade.

Remaking the Decision

17.  Mr Sreevalsalan made submissions  on  the  appellants'  behalves.   The
    evidence was before the Upper Tribunal.  The Secretary of State had not
    properly considered how to exercise discretion.   Paragraph  7  of  the
    decision letter of 2nd October 2013 made mention of medical issues  and
    a letter from the first appellant's doctor, dated 27th September  2008.
    Mr Sreevalsalan said that a person recovering  from  illness  might  be
    unable to board a plane.  A reasonable amount  of  time  was  required.
    The appellant took fifteen days to begin his journey.  The Secretary of
    State had not exercised discretion properly.  She had the  letter  from
    the doctor before her.  The appellants' case was that the Secretary  of
    State had not acted in a reasonable way.

18.   Ms  Isherwood  said  in  response  that  the  medical   evidence   was
    acknowledged by the Secretary of State.  It was clear that the decision
    maker had taken it into account.  So far as Article  8  was  concerned,
    the First-tier Tribunal grounds made brief mention of it but there  was
    nothing to show any compelling  or  compassionate  circumstances.   The
    first appellant was absent from the United Kingdom for 182  days,  more
    than the time allowed.  The appellants might disagree with the way  the
    medical evidence was considered by  the  Secretary  of  State  but  the
    weight to be given to it was a matter for her.

19.  Mr Sreevalsalan then drew attention to the  first  appellant's  witness
    statement, made on  28th  February  2014.   At  paragraph  21  of  that
    statement, the first appellant asked the Secretary of State to consider
    a normal and reasonable period of time, after medical treatment, for  a
    person to travel to the United  Kingdom.   In  considering  whether  to
    exercise discretion outside the rules, she was  obliged  to  take  this
    into account.  The first appellant  wished  to  rely  on  the  relevant
    guidance, regarding calculating the continuous period  in  applications
    for indefinite leave to remain.  This guidance bore on the exercise  of
    discretion outside the  rules,  in  cases  where  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 245AAA were not met.

20.  Reliance was also placed upon Article 8.  The first  appellant  arrived
    here in February 2008 and had  strong  private  life  ties.   His  wife
    joined him in 2011 and their family life together had  continued  since
    then.

21.  I allowed Mr Sreevalsalan time to obtain copies  of  the  Secretary  of
    State's guidance.  The hearing resumed and he drew attention to page 28
    of guidance published on 23rd January 2014 concerning absences of  more
    than 180 days.  Decision makers were advised that they  might  consider
    the grant of  indefinite  leave  outside  the  rules  if  an  applicant
    provided evidence to show that  the  "excessive  absence"  was  due  to
    serious or compelling compassionate reasons.  Mr Sreevalsalan submitted
    that  this  showed  that  discretion   should   have   been   exercised
    differently.

22.  Ms Isherwood said in response to this  submission  that  it  was  clear
    that the guidance concerned the grant of leave outside the  rules.   In
    any event, the Secretary of State did  consider  the  medical  evidence
    and, at paragraph  8  of  the  decision  letter,  whether  to  exercise
    discretion in the appellants' favour.

Findings and Conclusions

23.  In this appeal, the burden lies with the appellants to prove the  facts
    and matters they rely upon and the standard  of  proof  is  that  of  a
    balance of probabilities.  In remaking the decision, the Upper Tribunal
    had before it the evidence which was before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    including the witness statement made by the  first  appellant  on  28th
    February 2014.

24.  It is readily apparent that the appellants are unable to show that  the
    requirements of the rules have been met.  It was  accepted  that  their
    application for indefinite leave was made on 12th April 2013 and so the
    period of the first appellant's absence from the United Kingdom in 2008
    was properly found to be 182 days, two  days  more  than  permitted  by
    paragraph 245AAA(a)(i) of the rules.  Although the  margin  of  failure
    appears to be rather slight, important guidance has been given  by  the
    Supreme Court in Patel  [2013]  UKSC  72.   There  is  no  room  for  a
    formalised "near-miss" or "sliding scale" principle in relation to  the
    requirements of the rules.  A near-miss cannot provide substance  to  a
    human rights case which is otherwise lacking in merit.  (paragraphs  55
    to 57 of the judgment.)

25.  The fundamental difficulty the appellants face  is  that  paragraphs  8
    and 12 of the decision letter sent by the Secretary  of  State  to  the
    first appellant on 2nd October 2013 show, as  Ms  Isherwood  submitted,
    that the medical evidence obtained by him was taken into account.  That
    evidence, consisting of a letter from a doctor, was before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.  It records  that  the  first  appellant  received
    treatment for a prolapsed disc between 16th  June  and  27th  September
    2008.  As at the date  of  the  letter,  he  was  described  as  having
    recovered successfully with no symptoms and was certified as  medically
    fit.  The decision letter shows that the Secretary of State  took  this
    into  account.   Her  conclusion  that  there  were  no  compelling  or
    compassionate   circumstances   justifying   the   grant   of    leave,
    notwithstanding  the  period  of  absence,  cannot  be   described   as
    irrational or perverse.  The decision letter shows  that  she  properly
    considered whether to ignore the period  of  absence  beyond  what  was
    permitted and whether to consider granting  leave  outside  the  rules.
    The appellants' cases have been advanced on the basis that her decision
    in this context was wrong.  There is a short answer to this point.   It
    is clear from the decision  letter  and  from  the  guidance  given  to
    caseworkers in relation to calculating a continuous period of residence
    that in appropriate cases leave  may  be  granted  outside  the  rules.
    Section 86(6) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    provides that refusal to depart from or  to  authorise  departure  from
    immigration rules is not the exercise of a discretion for the  purposes
    of section 86(3)(b).  In other words, the  exercise  of  discretion  in
    this context, as opposed to  making  a  decision  where  discretion  is
    available under the rules, is not justiciable in the Tribunal.   It  is
    entirely a matter for the Secretary of  State.   She  was  entitled  to
    decide not to depart from the rules and the appellants have  not  shown
    that her decision is unlawful.

26.  As noted earlier, the grounds of  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    briefly mention Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.   So  far  as
    the first appellant is concerned, it is asserted on his behalf that  he
    has a private life in the United Kingdom and that no legitimate aim  is
    pursued by the Secretary of State in refusing to  vary  his  leave  and
    seeking to remove him.  So far as the second  appellant  is  concerned,
    there is a similar assertion in the grounds that the adverse  decisions
    are incompatible with her human  rights  and  that  she  has  built  up
    "social ties in the UK" and has "family and  private  life"  here.   In
    neither case are there any  details  at  all.   The  first  appellant's
    witness statement similarly contains no  detail  regarding  private  or
    family life ties.

27.  The first appellant has been present in the United Kingdom since  2008,
    save for his absence between March and October that year and  his  wife
    joined him in 2011. There can  be  little  doubt  that  they  may  have
    established friendships and associations but, again, there is no detail
    in the evidence.  There is nothing to show that any friendships  cannot
    be maintained from abroad.  There is also  nothing  to  show  that  the
    appellants would face any real difficulty in re-establishing themselves
    in India, following their removal together as a family unit.   Overall,
    taking into account the paucity of evidence, I  find  that  their  ties
    here are relatively modest and established in periods of time when they
    had only limited leave.

28.   The  legitimate  aim  pursued  by  the  Secretary  of  State  is   the
    maintenance of immigration control, in the interests  of  the  economic
    wellbeing of the United Kingdom.  The failure to meet the  requirements
    of the rules is a factor of  substantial  weight  in  relation  to  the
    public interest in the appellants'  removal.   The  evidence  discloses
    very little to put in the  balance  on  the  other  side.   Again,  the
    appellants have been here for a relatively short period of  time,  with
    limited leave throughout and the evidence  does  not  show  that  their
    removal to India would result in any  real  difficulty.   I  find  that
    Article  8  is  engaged,  the  threshold  of   engagement   being   not
    particularly high.  The adverse decisions were made in accordance  with
    the law and in pursuit of a legitimate  aim.   Weighing  the  competing
    interests, I conclude that  the  balance  falls  on  the  Secretary  of
    State's side.  The decisions to refuse to vary leave and to remove  the
    appellants amount to a proportionate response.

29.  In summary, the  appellants  have  not  been  able  to  show  that  the
    requirements of the rules were met.  The decision of the  Secretary  of
    State not to depart from the rules was a matter for  her  and  has  not
    been shown to be unlawful.  The appellants  have  not  shown  that  the
    adverse decisions breach their human rights  or  are  unlawful  on  any
    other basis.  The appeals are dismissed.



DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside.   It  is  remade
as follows: appeals dismissed.

ANONYMITY


There has been no application for anonymity and I make no direction on  this
    occasion.




Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell

FEE AWARD

As the appeals have been dismissed, I make no fee award.


Signed
         Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell
