
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number IA/43467/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City House Birmingham|Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 28th May 2015                     |On 10th June 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                              MOHI UDDIN AHMED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Sawar (Counsel, instructed by Kays Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. In this determination the  term  Appellant  applies  to  the  Appellant
    before the First-tier Tribunal and Respondent refers to  the  Secretary
    of State. This is to avoid confusion and to maintain consistency in the
    application of the different terms.

 2. The Appellant came to the UK in 2010 on a Tier 4 (General) Student visa
    which was subsequently extended resulting in leave to remain until  the
    3rd of June 2015. However his college lost its approval and accordingly
    the Appellant's leave was curtailed leaving him with 60 days  in  which
    to find another sponsor college where he could complete his studies.

 3. The Appellant did not make an application under Tier 4 to continue  his
    studies but instead applied to remain as the  dependent  of  a  Tier  1
    (Entrepreneur). That application was refused as the Appellant could not
    show he had held the required funds for 90  days  as  demanded  by  the
    rules. On that basis his appeal was also dismissed in the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge McDade promulgated on  the  26th  of  January
    2015.

 4. The Appellant's appeal was allowed by the Judge on the basis  that  his
    situation was sufficiently exceptional and compelling that his  removal
    would be disproportionate under article 8 of the ECHR. The reasons  are
    given at paragraph  4  of  the  decision.  It  was  observed  that  the
    Appellant could have, but unwisely, did not make a further  application
    under Tier 4 and that as a Tier 1 dependent he could still  study.  The
    Judge found that  with  the  financial  requirements  for  the  Tier  1
    dependent application being more onerous it was arguably prejudicial to
    an individual who had received a notice of curtailment to  arrange  for
    the requisite sums to be in his bank account.

 5. The Respondent sought permission to appeal on the basis of  grounds  of
    the 2nd February 2015. In short it was argued that the  Judge  had  not
    given  adequate  reasons  why  the   Appellant's   circumstances   were
    exceptional.  There  were   reasons   for   the   different   financial
    requirements between a Tier 1 and Tier 4 application and it was not  to
    be considered an exceptional factor. It was also argued that the  Judge
    had misapplied sections 117A and 117B.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Cruthers on the 9th of  March
    2015. He did so observing that it was arguable that the Judge  may  not
    have identified any exceptional circumstances and had not  demonstrated
    how the public interest had been outweighed.

 7. At the hearing the Appellant was represented. The  submissions  of  the
    parties are set out in the Record of Proceedings and referred to  where
    relevant below. The Home Office relied in particular  on  the  case  of
    Patel [2013] UKSC 72 and observed that the quote from paragraph 55  had
    not been taken in full. The Appellant had had 60 days to enable him  to
    find another college. Considering section 117B the fact of his finances
    and English language ability were neutral and not positive factors. For
    the Appellant  it  was  noted  that  the  Appellant  had  the  required
    maintenance and that the Judge had had regard to the Appellant's family
    life and that the interference would be disproportionate.

 8. At the hearing it was indicated that I found that the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge contained an error of law and that  it  would
    be set aside, remade and dismissed. The reasons for that  decision  are
    given below.

 9. It was clearly not the  fault  of  the  Appellant  that  his  college's
    licence was withdrawn leaving him without a place at  which  to  study.
    For that reason he was given 60 days to obtain a new CAS, that met  the
    requirement of fairness that  arises  in  such  circumstances.  If  the
    Appellant had obtained a new CAS as the Secretary of State allowed  him
    to do that would have been the end of the matter.

10. It was the Appellant's choice to submit a different  application  which
    engaged different maintenance requirements and not something  that  the
    Secretary of State had any influence over. It has to be assumed that as
    the Appellant had some familiarity with  the  Points  Based  System  he
    would have been aware of the different requirements for the application
    that he  chose  to  submit.  The  Appellant  could  have  submitted  an
    application to continue studying and when he had sufficient  papers  to
    meet the requirements for a  dependents  application  could  have  then
    submitted a further application.

11. The situation which led to the Appellant's leave  being  curtailed  and
    his being granted 60 days to obtain the CAS were not of his making. The
    application which he chose to make  was  his  decision  alone  and  not
    dictated by the circumstances in which he found himself in.  There  was
    no basis that would justify the Judge finding  that  the  circumstances
    were exceptional and effectively decided  the  case  on  a  "near-miss"
    basis.

12. Accordingly I  find  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    contains a material error of law and I set the decision aside. I remake
    the decision and dismiss the appeal of the Appellant on the basis  that
    he cannot meet the requirements of the Immigration  Rules  relating  to
    Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)  Dependents  and  there  are   no   exceptional
    circumstances that would  justify  considering  his  case  outside  the
    Immigration Rules and nothing that would justify  allowing  the  appeal
    under article 8.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

I re-make the decision in the appeal dismissing the  appeal  of  Mohi  Uddin
Ahmed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005  and  I  make  no
order.

Fee Award

In dismissing this appeal I make no fee award.


Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal Parkes (IAC)
Dated: 9th June 2015
