
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43679/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 3 March 2016                          |On 21 March 2016                  |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                            KIRANKUMAR R VAGHELA
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Bellara of Counsel, instructed by AH Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Andonian promulgated on 3 August 2015.


2.   Although before me I only have one appeal in the name of Mr  Kirankumar
    Vagheela it is the case that  he  has  two  dependants,  his  wife  and
    daughter, and the outcome of this appeal will necessarily  also  impact
    upon their respective positions as  his  dependants,  both  in  general
    terms and in immigration terms.

3.    It  is  unnecessary  for  present  purposes  to  rehearse  the  entire
    immigration history of  the  Appellant.  Suffice  to  say  for  present
    purposes  that  the  current  appeal  arises  in  circumstances  of  an
    application for variation of leave to remain  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student. The Appellant who  had  previously  had  leave  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student made an application for  further leave on 1 September
    2014, which was in due course refused by the Secretary of State for the
    Home Department on 14 October 2014.


4.    In  support  of  his  application  the  Appellant  indicated  on   his
    application form that he was seeking leave to remain to pursue a course
    leading to a Diploma in Health Care Management at Level NQF7,  being  a
    one year course running from September 2014 until September 2015 at  an
    institution called the UK Business College. He also expressly indicated
    on his application  form  that  he  did  not  have  a  Confirmation  of
    Acceptance for Studies ('CAS').


5.   The Appellant submitted with his  application  a  letter  from  the  UK
    Business  College,  also  dated  1  September  2014,  which  is  headed
    "Conditional Letter", and in material part is in these terms:

         "Thank you for your  application  at  UK  Business  College.  I  am
         pleased to conditionally offer  you  a  place  into  the  following
         courses below Subject to the terms and conditions  of  Registration
         and Enrolment."

    There then follows the  details  of  the  course,  its  fees,  and  the
    maintenance and living costs, before the letter ends

         "We look forward to welcoming you to the UK Business  College.  You
         can find information about studying at UK Business College  on  our
         website. You will be studying on a full-time basis which consist of
         a minimum of 16 hours per week of organised daytime study."


6.   No reference is made in that conditional offer letter of a CAS.


7.   In those circumstances it is  perhaps  not  surprising  that  when  the
    Secretary of State's decision-maker came to  consider  the  Appellant's
    application the absence of a CAS was identified and in consequence  the
    Appellant was awarded 0 points; further, in turn, because there was  no
    specific course identified, it was not possible to award any points for
    maintenance.   The  Appellant's  application  was   therefore   refused
    pursuant in particular to paragraph 245ZX(c) of the Immigration  Rules,
    the Appellant was refused variation of leave to remain, and a  decision
    was made to remove him pursuant  to  section  47  of  the  Immigration,
    Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

8.   The Appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  grounds  of
    appeal that appear on his Notice of Appeal are in generalised terms and
    do not specifically address the key issue  upon  which  the  Respondent
    determined his application.  Before the First-tier Tribunal  there  was
    evidence by way of a witness statement dated 6 July 2015 in  which  the
    Appellant gave a history of the difficulties that he had had in respect
    of his studies at a previous institution called Williams College, where
    he had attended up until March 2014.  It appears that this  institution
    was taken off the Home Office's  Register  of  Approved  Sponsors;  the
    Appellant suggests that this was for reasons connected with the college
    manipulating information in respect of attendance figures that  it  was
    giving to the Home Office.


9.   Be that as it may, the Appellant otherwise  indicated  in  his  witness
    statement that he had been able to enrol in the  UK  Business  College,
    but that this was a conditional offer. He says in his witness statement
    that they gave him "conditional offer if the  Home  Office  would  have
    asked to submit a fresh CAS for you then there are ready to issue CAS".
     As I say, there is no specific reference  possibly  to  providing  the
    Appellant with a CAS in the UK Business College's 'conditional letter',
    and I am unable to identify any other supporting evidence that that was
    the college's position.


10.  For reasons set out in his decision First-tier Tribunal Judge  Andonian
    essentially upheld the  decision  of  the  Respondent:  indeed  as  was
    acknowledged by Mr Bellara today, the  Appellant  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules in the absence of a CAS, and such
    a concession was made before Judge Andonian.


11.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge also dismissed the appeal  on  Article  8
    grounds.


12.  The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    which was in the first instance refused by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Frankish on 1 December 2015 but was granted on renewed  application  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce on 18 December 2015.


13.  In granting permission  to  appeal  Judge  Bruce  identified  that  the
    Appellant had apparently been acting in person in the  context  of  the
    application for permission to appeal - although he had  previously  had
    the benefit of representation before the First-tier Tribunal -  and  to
    that extent she gave particular scrutiny to the  overall  substance  of
    the case.  Judge Bruce said this in granting permission to appeal:

              "1. The grounds have been settled by the Appellant,  and  with
             this in mind I have read the determination of  the  First-tier
             Tribunal with especial care.  The grounds are in the most part
             a complaint about  the  conduct  of  the  Appellant's  Tier  4
             Sponsor, and to some extent the  challenge  faced  by  Tier  4
             Migrants of having to pay non-refundable course  fees  without
             knowing whether the chosen  college  will  remain  operational
             until the end of the course. None of  these  points  raise  an
             arguable error of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
             Tribunal.


              2. In respect of the human rights of  the  Appellant  and  his
             family the determination is brief but on the facts before  the
             Judge the decision could not have been otherwise. None of them
             met  the  requirements  of  the  Rules  and  no   particularly
             compelling  circumstances  are  identified  such  that   leave
             outside the Rules would be justified.


              3. The grounds  do  however  raise  one  arguable  issue.  The
             Appellant was refused further leave to remain because his  CAS
             was not valid, his Tier 4 Sponsor having lost its licence.  It
             is  arguable  that  in  these  circumstances   the  First-tier
             Tribunal  should have considered whether the appeal  could  be
             allowed on the limited grounds that the decision was   not  in
             accordance with the law for failure  to  issue  the  Appellant
             with a '60 day letter': Patel (Revocation of Sponsor licence -
             fairness) India [2011] UKUT 00211 (IAC)."




14.  Mr  Bellara  before  me  has  not  sought  to  go  behind  the  Judge's
    observations that to a large extent the Appellant's  challenge  to  the
    outcome of the proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal was based  on
    generalised criticisms and complaint concerning his Tier  4  Sponsor  -
    and in that regard in particular the complaint primarily relates to the
    college at which he ceased to study in March 2014,  approximately  five
    to six months before the date of his application for variation of leave
    to remain.  Nor does Mr  Bellara  seek  to  make  anything  further  in
    respect of any potential Article 8 issues.  The  focus  before  me  has
    indeed been on the potential applicability of the reasoning in the case
    of Patel to the facts herein.


15.  It is appropriate to note at the outset of my own considerations  that,
    with the benefit of more time to consider the  Appellant's  application
    and appeal than perhaps is usual for a Judge when  considering  matters
    at the permission to appeal stage, it  is  possible  to  identify  that
    Judge Bruce was in error in referring to the Appellant's CAS  as  being
    "not valid". This was not a case of the Patel type -  not  infrequently
    seen - where a CAS had been submitted with the  application  but  which
    had subsequently become invalid by reason of the course provider  being
    removed from the register of approved sponsors. Rather, this was a case
    where no CAS was submitted with the application at all. For my own part
    it seems to me that if this had been perhaps more clearly understood at
    the time of considering the grant of permission to appeal, it is likely
    that permission to appeal would not have been granted.


16.   In  the  event  this  significant  factual  distinction  between   the
    circumstances of this case and  the  circumstances  that  informed  the
    deliberations of the Tribunal  in  Patel  is,  in  my  judgment  highly
    material - indeed to an extent that it becomes impossible to  say  that
    the principles in Patel apply to the Appellant's case.

17.  In this regard I simply remind myself of what is said in  the  headnote
    in Patel to the following effect at paragraphs 2 and 3:

         "2.  Where a sponsor licence has been revoked by the  Secretary  of
             State during an application for variation  of  leave  and  the
             applicant is both unaware of the revocation and not  party  to
             any reasons why the licence has been revoked, the Secretary of
             State should afford an applicant a reasonable  opportunity  to
             vary the application by identifying a new sponsor  before  the
             application is determined.


         3.    It  would  be  unfair  to  refuse  an   application   without
             opportunity being given to vary it under  s.3C(5)  Immigration
             Act 1971."


18.  It is to be emphasised that  the  consideration  in  Patel  related  to
    fairness in the sense of procedural fairness,  and  the  criticism  was
    being made in that case of a practice whereby the  Secretary  of  State
    upon discovering that a CAS  valid  at  the  time  of  application  was
    invalid at the time of consideration of the same application would then
    refuse the application without reverting to  the  Appellant  to  ensure
    that they were aware that the CAS was invalid and if appropriate giving
    them an opportunity to amend the position.


19.  It cannot be said that anything  approaching  that  situation  pertains
    here.  The Appellant knew at the time that he submitted his application
    that he did not have a valid CAS, and in  my  judgement  there  was  no
    procedural requirement upon the Secretary  of  State  as  a  matter  of
    fairness or otherwise to give him a further opportunity to  attempt  to
    vary his application by submitting a valid CAS.


20.  It is not apparent that the Appellant set out  in  his  application  in
    any sort of detail, or at all, the difficulties that he had  previously
    experienced with  his previous institution in the same way that he  did
    in his witness statement to the First-tier Tribunal.  It  is  suggested
    by Mr Bellara - and with respect it seems to me somewhat tentatively  -
    that the Secretary of State should have in effect been on  constructive
    knowledge  of the fact that the Appellant's  previous  institution  had
    had its licence terminated and  that  this  should  have  informed  the
    Secretary of State, particularly when read  alongside  the  conditional
    letter the Appellant had from the UK Business College, to be  alert  to
    the potential difficulties that the Appellant was in,  and  perhaps  to
    make  further enquiries of him or to provide him further opportunity to
    make good his application.


21.  It seems to me that that is to expect too  much  of  the  Secretary  of
    State in circumstances in particular where, as  I  say,  the  Appellant
    himself did not seek to set out overtly these  circumstances,  and  the
    conditional letter did not make any reference  to  the  possibility  of
    issuing a CAS in the event that the Secretary of State should say  that
    that was required. The UK Business College if on the  register  at  the
    time that it issued the conditional letter would have been fully  aware
    that the Secretary of State would have expected a CAS to  be  submitted
    with the application: it is curious  that  in  such  circumstances  the
    letter is silent on the issue.


22.  That  said,  it  seems  absolutely  clear  to  me  that  there  was  no
    procedural unfairness in the Secretary of State's approach  in  dealing
    with the application that was before her and in finding - as indeed  is
    accepted - that it did not meet the requirements of the Rules.  It  was
    not, as a matter of procedural fairness or  otherwise,  incumbent  upon
    the Secretary of State to do any more  than  consider  the  application
    that was put before her, and I find that no analogy is to be drawn with
    the case of Patel to assist the Appellant.


23.  There being no other issues raised by the Appellant  the  challenge  to
    the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  fails.  The  Respondent's
    decision was in accordance with the Immigration Rules and otherwise  in
    accordance with the law, as indeed in turn  was  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.


Notice of Decision

24.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained no errors of law  and
    stands.


25.  The appeal is dismissed.


26.  No anonymity order is sought or made.


The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:                                 Date: 8 March 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

