
[pic]




Upper Tribunal

Immigration and Asylum Chamber    Appeal Number:  IA/43461/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House              |Promulgated                       |
|On 10 December 2014               |On 12 December 2014               |
|                                  |                                  |

                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?


                                   Between

                                 S M Tazbir
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          Determination and Reasons

Details of appellant and basis of claim

 1.   This appeal comes before me following the grant of permission  on  20
    October  2014  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Reeds  in  respect  of   the
    determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Walters  who  dismissed  the
    appeal following a  hearing  at  Hatton  Cross  on  9  July  2014.  The
    determination was promulgated on 30 July 2014.

 2.   The appellant is a Bangladeshi national born on 5 December  1986.  He
    entered the UK as a Tier 4 student on  8  March  2011.  His  leave  was
    curtailed on 14 May 2013 to expire on 13 July 2013  and  on  3  October
    2013 a decision was made to refuse to vary his leave and to remove him.



 3.   The appellant failed to attend  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. It was maintained by his representative that he was suffering
    from back ache;  a  medical  note  was  adduced  to  confirm  this  and
    certifying him "unfit for work". Additionally, the appellant  had  been
    admitted to hospital that morning with "chest  pains";  no  documentary
    evidence in support of that was available and the appellant's wife (not
    a co-appellant) was  not  in  attendance  either.  The  judge  was  not
    satisfied with the evidence and refused to  adjourn  the  hearing.  The
    representative then withdrew and the judge proceeded in his absence. He
    considered  the  Article  8  claim  put  forward  but  found  that  the
    requirements of paragraph  276ADE  had  not  been  met.  He  considered
    whether there were any other circumstances which warranted a  grant  of
    leave  outside  the  rules  but  found  none.  Finally,  he  noted  the
    references in the appellant's  application  form  to  problems  over  a
    property dispute in Bangladesh but concluded that as the appellant  had
    failed to make an asylum application to the respondent,  there  was  no
    asylum issue for the Tribunal to determine.

 4.   The appellant sought and was granted  permission  to  appeal  on  the
    basis that arguably the judge should have dealt with all matters raised
    by the appellant in support of his appeal.

Appeal hearing

 5.   The appeal  came  before  me  on  10  December  2014.  There  was  no
    appearance on or by the appellant and no messages had been received. In
    the  absence  of  any  communication  from   the   appellant   or   his
    representatives, I proceeded to hear  the  appeal  in  the  appellant's
    absence. As of the  time  of  preparation  of  this  determination  the
    following day there has still been no communication from the  appellant
    or his representatives.

 6.   Mr Jarvis made submissions. He accepted that following  on  from  the
    Tribunal's detention in Haque (s  86(2)  -  adjournment  not  required)
    Bangladesh [2011] UKUT 00481 (IAC),  the  judge  had  been  obliged  to
    determine a ground of appeal brought  under  section  84(1)(g)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The judge's  failure  to
    do so amounted to a material error of law. Mr  Jarvis  asked  that  the
    decision be re-made and the appeal dismissed.  He  submitted  that  the
    appellant had failed to attend his hearing. He had  not  particularised
    his claim nor had he taken the opportunity to  put  his  claim  to  the
    Secretary of State. At its highest the claim was  not  covered  by  the
    Refugee Convention and a risk of a breach of Articles 2 or  3  had  not
    been made out. This was a property dispute and no real risk of harm had
    been established.

 7.   At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my determination which  I
    now give.

Findings and Reasons

 8.   I deal first with the criticisms of the judge's determination. It  is
    alleged that the appellant was deprived of a fair hearing  because  the
    judge refused to  adjourn  the  appeal.  There  is  no  merit  in  that
    complaint. The judge was entitled to be sceptical  of  the  appellant's
    claim to be so unwell with back ache  that  he  could  not  attend  the
    hearing. He noted that the medical certificate did  not  state  he  was
    unable to attend a hearing and there is no suggestion of any history of
    back trouble. Moreover, the appellant's  claimed  problems  arose  just
    around the date of the hearing; assuming they were  genuine,  he  would
    have been expecting to attend and pursue his appeal but  no  bundle  of
    documents  in  support  of  the  claim  were  submitted.  Despite   the
    directions issued, no witness  statement  had  been  submitted  and  no
    details of the claim were adduced. The appellant  could  have  arranged
    for evidence from the hospital to have been forwarded to  the  Tribunal
    or indeed for his wife to attend on his behalf to  give  details  about
    his condition. To date, there has been no confirmation of  his  claimed
    admission  to  hospital.   The   judge   considered   the   adjournment
    application and was entitled  to  refuse  to  grant  it.  His  decision
    discloses no error of law.

 9.   The same cannot be said however of the judge's failure to  deal  with
    the appellant's claim that he would be at risk on return to Bangladesh.
    The appellant raised the matter in his application for leave and in his
    grounds of appeal, albeit  briefly.  As  conceded  by  Mr  Jarvis,  and
    confirmed by Haque, the judge had a duty to consider the matter and his
    failure to do so was an error of law.

10.   I therefore set aside the determination in its entirety. In  view  of
    this  conclusion,  my  view  on  the  matter  of  the  adjournment   is
    essentially academic. I now proceed to re-make the determination.

11.   I note that the  appellant  and  his  representatives  were  properly
    served with the notice of hearing on 3 November 2014. The notice  warns
    the parties that the appeal may be determined in the absence of a party
    who does not attend. The appellant did not attend and neither  did  his
    representatives. No message or correspondence has  been  received  from
    either to explain the non attendance. No further  documentary  evidence
    has been submitted in support of the appeal. In all the circumstances I
    am satisfied that it is  appropriate  to  proceed  in  the  appellant's
    absence.
12.   There are three parts to the appellant's  claim.  The  first  is  his
    application for leave to remain as a student. As he has not studied for
    at least the last year and a half, and there is no evidence that he  is
    enrolled on a course, he has no claim to be here as a Tier 4 Migrant.

13.   The appellant also relies on Article 8. He claims to have  a  private
    life here on account of  his  friendships,  studies  and  work  but  no
    details of any of these have been adduced. He claims to have a wife and
    to have family life with her but there  is  no  information  about  his
    marriage and no details of his  wife's  status  in  the  UK.  No  other
    reasons are put forward. Given the vagueness of the  appellant's  claim
    and the absence of any supporting evidence, I am unable  to  find  that
    the claim of private and/or family life is made out. The evidence  does
    not satisfy the requirements of paragraph 276ADE. No factors have  been
    put forward to warrant a consideration of leave outside the rules

14.   I now turn to the last limb.  The appellant maintains in the  limited
    evidence before me  that  he  has  problems  in  Bangladesh  over  some
    property. It seems that his "enemies" want to occupy it and  have  made
    threats. Not much more is known and indeed the appellant has not  taken
    the opportunity to expand on his account. The appellant came here as  a
    student for a temporary period. He would have known that  he  would  be
    expected to return on completion of his studies. Even so, no steps were
    taken to claim asylum. Instead the appellant abandoned his studies  and
    has failed to put  a  full  account  of  his  case  forward.  He  first
    mentioned his alleged problems to the respondent only after  his  leave
    was curtailed and even then as part of an Article  8  application.  The
    timing and circumstances of his application suggest  this  was  a  last
    ditch attempt to prolong his stay and his reluctance to put forward any
    evidence to support his claim undermines its credibility.

15.   Even if the account were true, the appellant does not appear to  have
    taken any steps to engage  legal  assistance  to  pursue  his  property
    dispute. Plainly  such  assistance  is  available  in  Bangladesh.  The
    appellant also  has  the  option  of  seeking  the  assistance  of  the
    authorities or of relocating until the dispute is resolved.  the  claim
    does not engage the Refugee Convention and the appellant has failed  to
    show that there would be a real risk of a breach of his Article 2 or  3
    rights if he was returned to  Bangladesh.  It  seems  to  me  that  the
    appellant is intent on remaining in the UK by any means possible and he
    has made full use of the appeals process to prolong  his  stay  despite
    his entirely unmeritorious claims.

Decision

16.   The First-tier Tribunal made errors of law and the  determination  is
    set aside. I remake the decision and dismiss the appeal on all grounds.



Anonymity

17.   The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  anonymity  order  and  no
    request for one was made to me.






    Signed:


    Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?


    11 December 2014


