
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43284/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 16th July 2015                    |On 23rd July 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN


                                   Between

                        MR MOHAMMAD SHAFAYET HOSSAIN
                        ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     The Appellant in person
For the Respondents:   Miss A Holmes (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    Appellant with regard to a decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Scott-Baker) promulgated on 6th January 2015 by which she dismissed the
    Appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to  refuse
    him leave to remain in the UK as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant and
    to remove him to Bangladesh.

 2. The grounds on which permission to appeal was granted by  a  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge argue that the Judge  erred  in  failing  to  take  into
    account evidence that was before her.

 3. It is unfortunate that, having paid for an oral hearing  the  Appellant
    did not attend the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  asked
    that it be decided on the  papers.   Had  he  attended  he  could  have
    referred the Judge to the relevant evidence.

 4. Nevertheless  it  is  apparent  that  the  Judge  had  before  her  the
    Appellant's bundle because she refers to it.  However she  states  that
    the there was no bank evidence submitted by  the  Appellant  since  the
    document verification report.  That was not the case.  There was a bank
    statement contained in the bundle that was not taken into account.   As
    the Secretary of State  has  not  had  the  opportunity  to  check  the
    document and the fact that  the  Appellant  wished  to  adduce  further
    evidence that had not been seen before by the Secretary  of  State  and
    thus its veracity not checked, the appropriate way forward  is  to  set
    aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision as containing a material error
    of law in not taking into account  evidence  that  was  before  it  and
    remitting it to the First-tier Tribunal for a  full  rehearing  on  all
    matters.

 5. The documents were copied and provided to the  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer so that they can be checked.

 6. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed to the extent  that  it  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.



Signed   Date 22nd July 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
