
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA435852014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 February 2016                  |On 08 June 2016                      |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                          md sultanur arefin islam
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Rahman, Legal Representative from JKR
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Atreya (the judge), promulgated  on  24  June  2015,  in
    which she dismissed the Appellant's appeal. That appeal was against the
    Respondent's combined decisions of 11 September 2014, refusing to  vary
    leave to remain as a Tier 4 Student and to remove  the  Appellant  from
    the United Kingdom under section 47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006.

 2. The Appellant had spent some time in this country as a student. He  had
    undertaken a number of course at degree level or above. In addition  he
    had sought to undertake two courses but had  been  unable  to  complete
    them because the Respondent  revoked  the  institution's  licences  and
    curtailed the Appellant's leave.

 3. The Appellant made his last application for further leave to remain  as
    a student on 28 June 2014. In refusing the application  the  Respondent
    concluded that when the latest proposed course of studies was accounted
    for, a resulting grant of leave would entail the Appellant having spent
    more than five years in the United Kingdom  as  a  student  undertaking
    course at degree  level  or  above.  Therefore  he  could  not  satisfy
    paragraph 245ZX(ha) of the Immigration Rules (the Rules).

The relevant Rule

 4. As at the date of the Respondent's decision, paragraph 245ZX(ha) read:
         "If the course is at degree level or above, the grant of  leave  to
         remain the applicant is seeking must  not  lead  to  the  applicant
         having spent more than 5 years in the UK  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
         Migrant, or as a Student, studying courses at degree level or above
         unless:"

 5. It is common ground that  none  of  the  exemptions  contained  in  the
    remainder of the paragraph are relevant to the Appellant's case.

The judge's decision

 6. The sole issue before the judge was whether the Appellant fell foul  of
    the time limit under paragraph  245ZX(ha)  (see  paragraph  15  of  the
    decision).

 7. It was argued on the Appellant's  behalf  that  the  periods  of  leave
    granted in respect  of  two  courses  (those  at  LCSMS  and  Kimberley
    College) should have been disregarded for the purposes  of  calculating
    the time limit.  This  was  because  the  Respondent  had  revoked  the
    institution's' licence and therefore the Appellant was  precluded  from
    undertaking  the  courses.  It  was  submitted  that  time  should   be
    calculated on the basis of "actual study" (see paragraph 18).

 8. Having considered the evidence before her,  the  wording  of  paragraph
    245ZX(ha), and the Respondent's guidance on Tier  4  (the  contents  of
    which were said to be identical to that in the guidance  applicable  at
    the date of decision), the judge found that the courses  at  LCSMS  and
    Kimberley College were to be taken into  account.  She  concluded  that
    there was no provision in the Rules or the guidance which  allowed  for
    the discounting of periods of leave at institutions whose licences  had
    been revoked. Thus, it was said that the Appellant was  caught  by  the
    five-year bar,  notwithstanding  that  this  appeared  to  have  unfair
    consequences (see paragraphs 31-40).

 9. Article 8 was dealt with briefly at paragraph 41.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

10. The grounds contend that paragraph 245ZX(ha) should be read as  meaning
    that only periods actually spent  on  studies  are  to  be  taken  into
    accounted when calculating time under this provision. It is  said  that
    the wording of the Respondent's guidance supports  this  position.  The
    conclusions on Article 8 were not challenged.

11. Permission to appeal was initially refused by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    but granted on a somewhat tentative basis by Upper Tribunal Judge  King
    on 25 November 2015. He found the calculations made by  the  judge  and
    the Appellant unclear. The  Appellant's  representatives  were  advised
    that they must provide further details on the  courses  undertaken  and
    the periods of leave granted.

The hearing before me

12. Mr Rahman provided a schedule detailing  the  various  institutions  at
    which the Appellant had studied (or sought to study),  the  periods  of
    leave granted by the Respondent, and the periods of "actual study".  It
    was unclear to me whether this last calculation related to  time  spent
    by the Appellant in actual study or to the  length  of  the  respective
    courses. When asked to clarify,  Mr  Rahman  appeared  to  suggest  the
    former, but having looked at the various documents in  the  Appellant's
    bundle, I am satisfied that the figures in fact represent the  duration
    of the courses.

13. Mr Rahman accepted that the  total  leave  afforded  to  the  Appellant
    (including that sought by the latest  application)  would  exceed  five
    years. He also accepted that the total  duration  of  all  the  courses
    would exceed the limit. In essence, his primary position appeared to be
    that only time spent actually studying at the institutions should count
    towards the calculation of time under paragraph 245ZX(ha). He relied on
    the wording of  the  Respondent's  guidance  at  paragraph  103,  which
    suggests that the length of the  course  is  the  relevant  figure  for
    calculating overall time. He expressly stated,  when  asked,  that  the
    comments of the Upper Tribunal at paragraph of  Islam  (Para  245X(ha):
    five years' study)  [2013]  UKUT  00608  (IAC)  are  wrong.  Mr  Rahman
    confirmed that there had been no  'free-standing'  fairness  submission
    made to the judge beyond what was said about the  construction  of  the
    Rule and the contents of the guidance. As a final  point  he  suggested
    that if leave is curtailed, there is no grant of leave left and so this
    must be accounted for when calculating time.

14. Ms Willocks-Briscoe submitted that the wording of  paragraph  245ZX(ha)
    is clear, as it that of  the  guidance:  there  are  no  exemptions  in
    respect of situations in which the sponsor's licence has been  revoked.
    The judge was right to have concluded in the way she did and  there  is
    no error of law. Whether one looks at the length of  leave  granted  or
    the length of the courses themselves, the five-year limit is passed and
    so the Appellant had to fail. She also suggested that leave extended by
    operation of section 3C of the  Immigration  Act  1971  could  also  be
    accounted for.

Decision on error of law

15. I have decided that the judge did materially err in law. My reasons for
    this decision involve going through a number of issues in turn.

The interpretation of paragraph 245ZX(ha)

16. I start by considering whether the judge erred in  her  application  of
    paragraph 245ZX(ha) of the Rules.  I  conclude  that  it  is  wrong  to
    suggest that for the purposes of calculating time under this  provision
    only  actual  time  spent  studying  can  be   counted.   The   correct
    interpretation of paragraph 245ZX(ha) is that it  is  the  leave  as  a
    student or a Tier 4 Migrant which must be  added  up  when  calculating
    time, subject to paragraph 245ZY(a) - (b) (see below). This is  so  for
    the following reasons.

17. First, the natural and ordinary words used in the provision  are  clear
    enough. There is express  reference  to  the  "grant  of  leave"  being
    sought, not the "length of course", as could have  been  provided  for.
    This is a good indication that it is the leave which is to be  counted,
    rather than the length of courses or actual time spent studying on  the
    courses. Further, the  five-year  maximum  is  clearly  linked  to  the
    applicant's status in the United Kingdom as  a  Tier  4  Migrant  or  a
    student. In both cases the status only exists because  of  a  grant  of
    leave, not on the basis simply that the applicant is on any  particular
    course  of  studies.  Again,  the  connection  between  leave  and  the
    calculation of time is strong.

18. Second, as Islam expressly decides, leave as a student prior to the PBS
    coming into existence in March  2009  does  fall  to  be  counted  when
    calculating time. Therefore, use of the  word  "student"  in  paragraph
    245ZX(ha) does not assist Mr Rahman's argument. In addition, the period
    of leave granted to the Appellant in 2008 is  to  be  counted  for  the
    purposes of paragraph 245ZX(ha).

19. Third, the phrase "studying courses" in paragraph 245ZX(ha) is simply a
    statement of fact as regards of the level of course which will have led
    to the grant of leave.

20. Fourth, although strictly speaking obiter on this particular point, the
    Upper Tribunal (which included the Vice-President) in Islam  was  clear
    in its view (at paragraph 11):
         "... Mr Ahmed did not suggest in his oral submissions that only the
         appellant's time actually  spent  studying  should  be  taken  into
         account.  (We did not understand Mr Ahmed to pursue the point  made
         in para 12 of the grounds.) The evidence was that the appellant had
         'dropped out' of his BSc course  after  2  years.   Again,  in  our
         judgment, that is correct.  The appellant had leave  as  a  student
         for 4 years to pursue his degree course; that  he  chose  to  'drop
         out' (and not inform UKBA of that fact)  does  not  deny  that  the
         whole of the period of leave (excluding pre- and post-course  leave
         granted under para 245ZY(b)) counts  towards  the  maximum  5  year
         period and whatever he chose to do in that period, he did it during
         a period of leave as a student.  It is the period of the leave  and
         not the actual study which  is  the  measure  for  calculating  the
         period spent in the UK imposed by para 245ZX(ha)."
                                               (underlining in the original)

21. This passage supports my interpretation of paragraph 245ZX(ha).

22. Fifth, it is well-settled law that guidance issued by the Respondent is
    not a tool to be used for the interpretation of the Rules. The guidance
    relied on by Mr Rahman  does  not  assist  his  argument  on  paragraph
    245ZX(ha).

23. In light of the above,  the  judge  did  not  err  in  concluding  that
    paragraph 245ZX(ha) relates to leave granted, not the actual time spent
    on studies.



Relevance of curtailment of leave

24. The next issue is whether the whole of the periods of  leave  grant  to
    the Appellant in relation to LCSMS and Kimberley  College  should  have
    been counted notwithstanding that the Respondent curtailed both periods
    of leave.

25. It seems to me only logical and fair that if the calculation of time is
    based upon  leave  (as  I  find  it  is,  and  as  the  Respondent  has
    contended), a curtailment of leave must  be  taken  into  account:  the
    Respondent cannot have it all ways at once.

26. From a fair  reading  of  the  judge's  decision,  she  has  not  taken
    cognisance of the curtailed leave in respect of the  courses  at  LCSMS
    and Kimberley College. In this regard, she has erred. I would note that
    the Respondent also seems to have failed to take  the  curtailed  leave
    into account.

27. Unfortunately, Mr  Rahman  had  not  endeavoured  to  provide  me  with
    calculations as  to  the  total  leave,  taking  the  curtailment  into
    account. I have undertaken this calculation based  upon  the  following
    figures (the names of  the  relevant  institutions  are  stated  on  Mr
    Rahman's schedule):
         Grant of leave      Days
         8 September 2008 to 31 December 2009 480
         24 March 2010 to 1 October 2010      192
         3 February 2011 to 28 January 2012   360
         30 March 2012 to 1 June 2013 (curtailed expiry) 429
         22 August 2013 to 30 June 2014 (curtailed expiry)     313
         Prospective leave for latest course
         (based upon length of course only)   490
            Total 2264

28. This total figure results in a period of leave in excess of six years.

29. It would appear as though the  judge's  error  on  the  application  of
    paragraph 245ZX(ha) is immaterial. However, having regard to what I say
    below, this is not the case.

Paragraph 245ZY of the Rules

30. The Rules, as they stood at the date of the Respondent's  decision  and
    the hearing, contained paragraph 245ZY(a)-(b), which states:
         (a)      Subject to paragraphs (b), (ba) and (c)  below,  leave  to
         remain will be granted for the duration of the course.
         (b)      In addition to the period of leave to  remain  granted  in
         accordance with paragraph (a), leave to remain will also be granted
         for the periods set out in the following table. Notes to  accompany
         the table appear below the table.



         |Type of course   |Period of leave to     |Period of leave to     |
|                 |remain to be granted   |remain to be granted   |
|                 |before the course      |after the course ends  |
|                 |starts                 |                       |
|12 months or more|1 month                |4 months               |
|6 months or more |1 month                |2 months               |
|but less than 12 |                       |                       |
|months           |                       |                       |


         ...
         (iii)    The additional periods of leave to remain granted  further
         to the  table  above  will  be  disregarded  for  the  purposes  of
         calculating whether a migrant has exceeded the limits specified  at
         245ZX(h) to 245ZX(hb).

31. Neither the Respondent nor the judge appears to have taken  account  of
    this provision. Certainly there is no indication  in  the  reasons  for
    refusal letter and the judge's  decision  that  appropriate  disregards
    have been factored into the calculations. In fairness to the  judge,  I
    doubt very much whether paragraph 245ZY was brought to her attention at
    the hearing.

32. I have considered attempting to once again  re-calculate  the  figures,
    taking into account paragraph 245ZY(b)(iii). However, I am not prepared
    to do so. Neither party has sought to assist  in  alerting  me  to  the
    issue, much less provide me with relevant periods. In addition,  it  is
    very difficult  to  make  out  with  sufficient  clarity  how  relevant
    disregards are to be applied in this appeal. The most I can say is that
    if paragraph 245ZY(b)(iii) had been applied, it may have  affected  the
    outcome of the Appellant's case.

33. In light of the above, I conclude that, through no fault  of  her  own,
    the judge did materially err in law by failing to  consider  and  apply
    paragraph 245ZY(b)(iii) of the Rules. It is right to say that the error
    occurred because of the Respondent's own failings.

The Respondent's guidance

34. Given my conclusion above, I mention the guidance for two reasons only.
    Paragraph 103 of the document shows that relevant disregards are to  be
    applied when calculating time. This aspect  of  the  guidance  was  not
    taken into account by the judge (or the Respondent).

35. Second, reliance on the guidance formed part of the grounds  of  appeal
    and paragraph 103 expressly states  that  certain  periods  are  to  be
    disregarded. Thus, whilst the manner in which this point has  been  put
    forward by the Appellant is less than clear, the general issue relating
    to the correct calculation of time is before me.

The section 3C leave issue

36. Nothing is said in the reasons for refusal letter about  the  inclusion
    of any section 3C leave in the calculation of time. I see no  reference
    to the point in any of the papers before the judge  or  in  submissions
    made to her. There is no mention of it  in  the  Respondent's  rule  24
    response. The Respondent's guidance, as it stood at all relevant times,
    says nothing about such leave being counted.

37. In these circumstances the 3C leave issue does not affect my conclusion
    that the judge materially erred in her decision.

Conclusion

38. Taking all of the above into account, I set aside the judge's decision.

Remaking the decision

39. Both representatives agreed that I could remake the decision based upon
    the evidence before me. Aside from the schedule provided by  Mr  Rahman
    (which  is  only  of  limited  assistance  given  what  I   have   said
    previously), there is nothing new from either party.

40. I conclude that the Respondent's decision of 11 September 2014 was  not
    otherwise in accordance with the  law.  My  reasons  for  this  are  as
    follows.

41. First, having regard to what I have said when deciding the error of law
    issue, the Respondent failed to consider paragraph 245ZX(ha)  correctly
    because she took  no  account  (as  far  as  I  can  see)  of  the  two
    curtailments of leave. Whilst on my own calculations this may not  have
    made a material difference to the outcome of the appeal (and so perhaps
    the application as well), it was an error nonetheless.

42. Second, and  more  importantly,  a  further  error  occurred  when  the
    Respondent failed to apply the disregards under paragraph 245ZY(b)(iii)
    of the Rules and her own guidance. In terms of the Appellant's  appeal,
    I have decided  that  this  error  (as  committed  by  the  judge)  was
    material. It follows that  the  Respondent's  initial  error  was  also
    probably material.

43. The Respondent will need to make  a  fresh  decision  in  light  of  my
    decision.

44. In so doing, she must set out clearly the periods  taken  into  account
    and those which fall to be disregarded. All relevant provisions of  the
    Rules must be considered, and current guidance accurately applied.

Anonymity

45. No direction has previously been made and none has been sought from me.
    There is no need to make a direction and I do not do so.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I re-make the decision by allowing the Appellant's  appeal  to  the  limited
extent that the Respondent's decision was not otherwise in  accordance  with
the law, and the Appellant's  application  made  on  28  June  2014  remains
outstanding before the Respondent awaiting a lawful decision.

Directions
      1. When making a new decision  on  the  Appellant's  application,  the
         Respondent shall apply paragraph 245ZX(ha) of the Immigration Rules
         in light of my decision;
      2. When making a new decision  on  the  Appellant's  application,  the
         Respondent shall apply paragraph 245ZY(a) - (b) of the  Immigration
         Rules;
      3. The current guidance on Tier 4 must be applied;
      4. The new decision shall be taken no sooner than  6  weeks  from  the
         promulgation of my decision. Prior to this, the Appellant  has  the
         option of submitting to the Respondent any further  representations
         and/or evidence relied upon.


Signed      Date: 26 February 2016

H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make a limited  fee
award of �40.00. Whilst the Respondent failed to  consider  the  Appellant's
application correctly, that application was not bound  to  succeed  and  the
Appellant's own arguments on appeal have been flawed.


Signed      Date: 26 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
