
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/43369/2014
                                                               IA/43377/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 24 November 2015                  |On 2 December 2015                    |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                             (1) Mr NAVEED IQBAL
                             (2) Mr SALMAN RAUF
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    In person
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1.      The  Appellants  appealed  with  permission  granted  by  Upper
         Tribunal Judge Goldstein on 8 July 2015 against  the  determination
         of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Lloyd-Smith  who  had  dismissed  the
         Appellants' linked appeals as Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrants.   The
         decision and reasons was promulgated on 3 March 2015.

    2.     The Appellants are nationals  of  Pakistan,  business  partners,
         born respectively on 14 July 1987  and  5  September  1981.   Judge
         Lloyd-Smith found that the Appellant had failed to show  that  they
         had submitted the specified documents with their  applications  and
         so had failed to satisfy the Immigration Rules.  Their  appeals  to
         the First-tier Tribunal thus failed.

    3.     Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
         Goldstein because he was "just persuaded" that it was arguable that
         the judge had erred in his application of the relevant  Immigration
         Rules and "less persuaded" that the judge had erred in relation  to
         the Article 8 ECHR claim.

    4.     Standard directions were made by the tribunal.

    Submissions - error of law

    5.     The Appellants were unrepresented.  In  summary  they  submitted
         that the Respondent should have  applied  paragraph  245AA  of  the
         Immigration Rules and  requested  further  information  from  them,
         which they were willing to supply. Their onwards appeals should  be
         allowed.

    6.     Mr Kandola for the Respondent opposed the onwards  appeals.   It
         was  plain  that  the  judge's  decision  had  been  based  on  the
         Appellants'  failure  to  provide  the  specified  documents.    He
         submitted that the judge's decision had been open  to  her,  indeed
         that no other decision would have  been  possible.   There  was  no
         scope for the application of the evidential flexibility  policy  as
         contained in paragraph 245AA as the  documents  identified  by  the
         judge had not been produced  with  the  applications  as  required.
         They were not documents in the wrong format or documents from which
         a page or pages were missing.  There had been  no  misdirection  in
         law by the judge.

    7.     There was nothing the Appellants wished to add by way of reply

    8.     The tribunal indicated at the conclusion of submissions that  it
         found no error of law and that its determination was reserved.

    No material error of law finding

    9.     In the tribunal's view the grant of permission to appeal by  the
         Upper Tribunal Judge was not easy to follow and was  at  best  over
         generous.  It was for the Appellants to show that Judge Lloyd-Smith
         had erred in law, e.g.,  in  her  findings  of  fact,  and  in  the
         tribunal's judgment the Appellants manifestly failed to do so.  The
         permission to  appeal  application  was  simply  an  expression  of
         disagreement with the judge's findings and  the  Appellants'  brief
         submissions were to the same effect. In the  tribunal's  view,  the
         refusal of permission to appeal by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Astle
         on 6 May 2015 had been correct: "There were critical  omissions  in
         that  evidence  and  the  Appellants  have  not  demonstrated  that
         paragraph 245AA would have assisted them".   The  tribunal  accepts
         and endorses Mr  Kandola's  submissions  which  were  to  the  same
         effect.

    10.    It is plain from Judge Lloyd-Smith's thorough and well  balanced
         decision that she carefully weighed the evidence placed before her.
          The burden of proof was  on  the  Appellants.   Judge  Lloyd-Smith
         explained why (with regret) she had to find that the Appellants had
         not complied with the Immigration Rules: see [10] of  the  decision
         and reasons which it is unnecessary  to  repeat  here.   The  judge
         specifically referred to paragraph 245AA of the  Immigration  Rules
         at [10(iii)] of the decision and reasons, and explained  why  those
         provisions  were  incapable  of   providing   assistance   to   the
         Appellants.   The judge mentioned all of the factors which  it  was
         permissible for her to take into account when assessing the Article
         8 ECHR claim and her concluding treatment of that claim at [14] was
         sufficient.  Her findings were all open to  her  and  were  clearly
         explained.

    11.    Accordingly, the tribunal finds that there was no error  of  law
         in the determination and there is no basis for interfering with the
         judge's decision.  It is, of course,  open  to  the  Appellants  to
         submit fresh and compliant applications for further leave to remain
         under any relevant category of the Immigration Rules.   If so, they
         must ensure they apply promptly.

    DECISION

    The making of the previous decision did not involve the  making  of  an
    error on a point of law and stands unchanged




    Signed Dated


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell


