
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/43107/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 17 January 2017                         |On 25 January 2017             |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER


                                   Between

                                 SALMA BEGUM
                          (NO anonymity direction)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Martin of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

    1. The Respondent refused the  Appellant's  application  for  leave  to
       remain as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant on 13  October  2014.  Her
       appeal against that decision was dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Phillips following a hearing on  30  July  2015.  This  is  an
       appeal against that decision.

The grant of permission


    2. The Vice President of the Upper Tribunal, Judge  Ockeleton,  granted
       permission to appeal (12 December 2016) in light of the decision  of
       Mrs Justice Lang DBE sitting in the High  Court  (CO/2814/2016)  who
       determined that the case ought to be reconsidered  in  light  of  SH
       (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 426 and in particular [24]. The  evidence
       missing from the application was who owned the website/domain.


    3. In essence it was submitted that [245AA (d) (iii)] of the  Statement
       of Changes  in  Immigration  Rules  HC395  ("the  rules")  had  been
       misapplied. This states;


       "If the applicant has submitted a specified document:
       (iii) which does not contain all of the  specified  information  but
       the missing information is verifiable from:
   1) other documents submitted with the application,
   2) the website of the organisation which issued the document, or
   3) the website of the appropriate regulatory body,


       The  application  may  be  granted  exceptionally,   providing   the"
       Respondent "is satisfied that the specified documents are genuine and
       the applicant meets all the other requirements."


    4. Appendix A 41SD (e) (iii) (2) states  that  the  following  must  be
       submitted;


       "if the applicant ... owns the domain name of the business's  website
       and submits  evidence  to  this  effect,  dated  printouts  from  the
       business's website detailing the service or product provided  by  the
       applicant's business ..."

    5. I do not extend permission to extend the grounds of this  appeal  to
       enable the 10 year residence point to be considered as that was  not
       a fact that existed when the Judge made his decision, and the  Judge
       could not have erred in not considering it.


Respondent's position

    6. It was submitted in the rule 24 notice (9  January  2017)  that  the
       Appellant had not provided evidence of the domain name relied  upon.
       The Respondent was not required to request  this  evidence.  It  was
       open to the Judge to conclude that the rules were not met.


   7. It  was  submitted  orally  that  [13]  of  the  determination  was  a
      submission by the Appellant and not a finding as to  whether  the  web
      domain had been purchased on 7 July 2014 and would  have  led  to  the
      application being  granted  had  it  been  then  provided.  Evidential
      flexibility as explained in SH is not relevant as the rules are  clear
      as to what should be submitted with an application.


Appellant's position

    8. There is no doubt that the required web site existed and there is  a
       document that shows who owns the domain. This was  submitted  within
       the Appellant's original bundle. The website designers could confirm
       the Appellant owned the domain name. The Respondent did not open her
       mind to this and did not  ask  if  there  was  further  information.
       Exceptionality is not required to  exercise  the  power  to  request
       further information. Mandalia v SSHD [2015] UKSC 59 cautions against
       pedantry.


The Judges findings

    9. The Judge found [27]


       "that the omission of the confirmation of ownership  of  the  domain
       name does not fall within paragraph 245AA because the appellant  did
       not submit a specified document in the wrong format...or  one  which
       did  not  contain  all  the  specified  information...the  proof  of
       ownership of domain name is not a document in sequence..."

Guidance Case Law

   10. SH notes [24] that if there is overwhelming evidence that a document
       existed,  and  enough  evidence  that  had  it  been  provided   the
       application would succeed, that the  evidential  flexibility  policy
       provides that the benefit of  the  doubt  in  cases  of  uncertainty
       should be exercised in favour of the Appellant.

Discussion

   11. I am not satisfied that the Judge materially erred for the following
       reasons.


   12. The details of website/domain  ownership  was  not  verifiable  from
       other documents submitted with the application or the website of the
       organisation which  issued  the  document  or  the  website  of  the
       appropriate regulatory body. It was only  verifiable  by  contacting
       the organisation directly. It was not just a matter of going  online
       and looking at information on a screen, but required contact  to  be
       made,  an  enquiry  lodged,  and  information  being  provided.  The
       evidential flexibility policy  contained  within  [245AA]  does  not
       cover that type of  investigative  work.  It  is  not  a  matter  of
       pedantry, and there was no overwhelming evidence  available  to  the
       Respondent when  the  application  was  submitted  that  had  enough
       evidence been provided, the application would have succeeded. It  is
       worth noting that the application had been refused on other  grounds
       as well, but the Judge found on  the  Appellant's  favour  on  those
       matters. However, with  a  multiplicity  of  apparent  defects,  the
       Respondent could not be said to have erred in determining  that  had
       the evidence of the website/domain ownership then been provided  the
       application would have succeeded.

Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

      I do not set aside the decision.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
24 January 2017
