
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/43643/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 25 November 2015                  |On 3 February 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                      v

                               MR BIGYAN HAMAL
                        (NO ORDER FOR ANONYMITY MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I. Ali, Everest Law solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Staunton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                             DECISION & REASONS

1.    The Appellant is a national of Nepal, born on 30th December  1991.  On
28th August 2014, he applied for further leave to remain  in  the  UK  as  a
Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant.  This  application  was  refused  on  21st
October 2014 with  regard  to  paragraph  245ZX(c)  and  the  Appellant  was
awarded 0 points for his CAS because the  document  provided  by  Swarthmore
College on 3rd June 2014 has been verified  as  false  and  the  course  for
which his CAS has been assigned cannot be verified as representing  academic
progress. The application was  also  refused  with  reference  to  paragraph
322(1A) of the Rules on  the  basis  that  a  document  submitted  has  been
confirmed as false.

2.    The Appellant appealed against  this  decision  and  his  appeal  came
before First Tier Tribunal Judge Cohen for hearing on 8th  May  2015.  In  a
decision promulgated on 20th May 2015, he dismissed the appeal on the  basis
that the Respondent's refusal was correct and he  rejected  the  Appellant's
claim to be married to a British citizen.

3.    The Appellant made an in-time application for permission to appeal  to
the Upper Tribunal on 1st June 2015, on  the  basis  that  the  Judge  erred
materially in law: (i) in wrongly concluding that the  underlying  issue  in
the refusal was submission of a false CAS whereas it was not the CAS  but  a
letter from Swarthmore College, upon which  the  CAS  was  based,  that  was
impugned because the College had verified that all the  information  in  the
letter  was  correct  but  the  person  signing  the  letter  was  not   the
Examination Officer. Thus  was  outwith  the  Appellant's  control  and  the
Judge's conclusion at [13] that the Appellant deliberately  sought  to  rely
on a document containing a false signature is a material error of law;  (ii)
in his assessment of the Appellant's credibility in  that  he  is  genuinely
married to Dibya Chand since 9 June 2014 but did  not  provide  evidence  in
support of this fact because it was not part of the refusal letter.

4.    Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on  7th  August
2015 by First Tier Tribunal Judge Simpson on the basis that  in  appeals  in
which dishonesty or deception is alleged the starting point  should  be  the
Court of Appeal judgment in AA  (Nigeria)  [2010]  EWCA  Civ  773  that  the
reference  to  "false"  means  "dishonestly"  false,  however,  the  Judge's
decision is silent as to dishonesty and it was arguable that there has  been
a material error of law. It was also arguable that the Judge  ought  not  to
have rejected out of hand the fact  that  the  Appellant  is  married  to  a
British national which must give rise to Article 8 issues but  none  of  the
recent cases have been considered and the Judges findings at  [19]  arguably
cannot be maintained.

5.    At  the  hearing  before  me,  Mr  Ali  relied  upon  the  grounds  of
challenge. He submitted that Judge Cohen  had  misdirected  himself  in  the
manner in which he considered the CAS, which is a  requirement  whereas  the
letter from Swarthmore College is intended to show  academic  progress.  The
CAS is genuine, whereas the letter is signed  by  someone  not  entitled  to
sign it. He referred me to 27-30 of his bundle, which contained the DVR  and
a copy of the letter and he submitted that everything is correct  about  the
letter except the person who has signed  it.  That  is  the  basis  for  the
finding that the  document  is  false  and  the  alleged  deception  by  the
Appellant. The Appellant was not cross examined as to how he  obtained  that
letter. He submitted that deception was not proved  by  the  Respondent.  In
respect of the issue of the credibility of the Appellant's evidence and  the
issue of his human rights, he submitted that the Appellant is married  to  a
British citizen and has a British child, but  previous  representatives  had
not advised him to produce any documents and his wife  was  not  present  at
the appeal hearing. Judge found damaged credibility.

6.    In  response,  Mr  Staunton  relied  upon  the  Respondent's  Rule  24
response at [3] to [5]. He submitted that  the  Appellant  had  been  cross-
examined [9] and had nothing to prove that  the  CAS  was  genuine.  It  was
clear  the  Respondent  has  discharged  the   burden   of   proving   false
documentation and it had  been  fully  open  to  the  Judge  to  make  these
findings in the absence  of  evidence  to  refute  the  false  document.  In
respect of the Article 8 findings, he  submitted  that  there  had  been  no
evidence from or about the Appellant's wife and it had been  fully  open  to
the Judge to find the Appellant was attempting to bolster a weak  claim.  He
submitted that dishonesty had been proved and the Judge had been correct  in
finding that deception had been used.  It  was  clear  what  the  Judge  was
stating in the determination.

7.    Mr Ali then sought to rely on a further line of  argument,  which  was
in fact a repetition of his first line of argument, as to the evidence  that
the Judge treated the letter from Swarthmore College as a CAS  and  he  drew
my attention to [3] line 3 and [9] which refer to the CAS when it should  be
the letter. The whole issue  of  academic  progression  not  raised  by  the
Judge. He questioned how a letter could be false, just because it  had  been
signed by a different  person.  [7].  He  submitted  that  it  was  not  the
Appellant's fault and should not  undermine  his  credibility.  He  drew  my
attention to the decision in Pokhriyal [2013] EWCA Civ  1568  at  31-37  and
submitted that the  Respondent  had  accepted  the  Appellant's  submissions
regarding 120b of Appendix A. He submitted that the Appellant had  not  been
properly represented as this should have  been  the  key  point  before  the
Judge and consideration should have been given  to  the  importance  of  the
letter itself; who should have conduct of the investigation into the  letter
and how far it should be conducted. He further submitted that given that  it
was not the Appellant's fault, it did not matter who issued the letter.

8.    I reserved my decision, which I now give with my reasons.  In  respect
of the first ground of appeal, I do consider that First Tier Tribunal  Judge
Cohen erred in law, however, for the reasons I give below I do not  consider
that his errors were material for the following reasons:

8.1.  At [12] of his decision he directs himself that the burden of  proving
that the decision of the respondent was not in accordance with the  law  and
the relevant Immigration Rules rests upon the appellant. Whilst that is  the
case in respect of the decision under paragraph 245 ZX(c) of the  Rules,  it
is not the case with regard to the paragraph  322(1A)  decision,  where  the
burden of proving that a false document  has  been  submitted  is  upon  the
Respondent: see Shen (Paper appeals; proving dishonesty) [2014]  UKUT  00236
(IAC) at [25].

8.2.  The judgment of the Court of Appeal in AA  (Nigeria)  v  Secretary  of
State for the Home Department [2010] EWCA  Civ  773  is  authority  for  the
proposition  that:  "Dishonesty  or  deception   is   needed,   albeit   not
necessarily  that  of  the   applicant   himself,   to   render   a   "false
representation" a ground for mandatory refusal"  per  Lord  Justice  Rix  at
[76].

8.3.  On the facts of this case, the document in question is a  letter  from
Swarthmore College dated 3rd June 2014 which was provided to  the  Appellant
at his request to support the issuing of a CAS by his new college, East  End
Computing & Business College, Swarthmore College having  been  closed  down.
This document was verified in the form of a DVR as a false document in  that
Swarthmore College confirmed in an email to the Home Office of 12th  October
2014 that the authorized signature on the letter is not  genuine  as  it  is
not the examining officer's signature. The definition  of  "false  document'
set out at page  9  of  the  Modernized  Guidance  on  "General  Grounds  of
Refusal" last updated on 1.9.15 is a:

    ( genuine document which has been altered or tampered with

  . counterfeit document (one that is completely false)

  . genuine document that is being used by an imposter

  . genuine document which has been fraudulently obtained or issued

  . genuine document which contains a  falsified  or  counterfeit  visa  or
    endorsement

It is clear and I find that the letter from  Swarthmore  College  dated  3rd
June 2014 is a false document within the meaning of the guidance.

8.4.  In these circumstances, whilst Judge  Cohen  did  not  direct  himself
correctly  following  AA  (Nigeria)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department [2010] EWCA Civ 773  as  to  the  requirement  of  dishonesty  or
deception, it is  clear  that  dishonesty  or  deception  were  employed  in
respect of the letter, which resulted in the wrongful issuing of a CAS.  The
Appellant's case was that there was no dishonesty or deception on  his  part
but this was not  accepted  by  Judge  Cohen  who  found  at  [13]  that  he
"deliberately sought to rely on a document containing a false  signature  in
respect of the present  application."  Paragraph  322(1A)  is  in  mandatory
terms and expressly states that that "where false representations have  been
made or false documents or information have been submitted (whether  or  not
material  to  the  application,  and  whether  or  not  to  the  applicant's
knowledge), or material facts have not been disclosed, in  relation  to  the
application or in order to obtain documents from the Secretary of  State  or
a third party required in support  of  the  application"  [emphasis  added].
Therefore, whether or not the Appellant was unaware that  the  document  was
false, this matters not for the purpose  of  paragraph  322(1A).  The  false
document was used to support his application for a CAS and for an  extension
of his leave to remain as a Tier 4  student  and  thus  the  Respondent  was
entitled to refuse the  application  on  this  basis  and  Judge  Cohen  was
correct to uphold that decision.

9.    That leaves the second ground of appeal,  which  was  that  the  Judge
erred at [14] in rejecting the credibility of the Appellant's  claim  to  be
married to a British citizen. There was no written evidence to  support  the
Appellant's oral evidence that he was married to a British citizen  and  his
wife was not present at that hearing. There is no reference to his  wife  in
his witness statement before the First Tier Tribunal. The grounds of  appeal
against the Respondent's decision of 21 October 2014 state simply  that  the
refusal infringes the Appellant's right to family life under Article  8  and
refers to the Appellant having established a private and family life in  the
UK but no details  are  provided.  At  [14]  Judge  Cohen  states  that  the
Appellant "raised for the first time a  claim  that  he  was  married  to  a
British citizen" and placed weight on  the  fact  that  this  had  not  been
raised in his witness statement, no marriage certificate had been  submitted
and his wife was not in attendance at court nor had  provided  a  letter  of
support. In these circumstances and in  the  absence  of  any  corroborating
evidence at all, it was open  to  him  to  reject  the  credibility  of  the
Appellant's claim in this respect. Therefore, he did not err  materially  in
law in so doing.

10.   It follows that the  Appellant's  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed and the decision of First Tier Tribunal  Judge  Cohen  is  upheld.
However, I am bound to observe that the  Appellant's  wife  was  present  in
court at the hearing before me and the Appellant's new  solicitors  produced
evidence in support of his assertion to be married  to  a  British  citizen.
Whilst in light of my finding that there is no material error of law in  the
decision of First Tier Tribunal Cohen  I  cannot  take  this  evidence  into
consideration, it is open to the Appellant to make  an  application  to  the
Home Office for leave to remain on the basis of his marriage.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

26th November 2015
