
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43493/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 25 February 2015                           |On 10 March 2015              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M HOLMES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Mrs Anjulee Takun
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Vidyadharan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Gokhool, Solicitor of Siddick Gokhool


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Mauritius who applied within the  UK  for
    indefinite  leave  to  remain  as  the  dependant  upon  her  husband's
    application.  The  application  was  refused  and  the  Appellant  duly
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and her appeal  came  before  Judge
    Shamash at Taylor House on 29 August 2014.

 2. By way of a decision promulgated on 24 September 2014 the judge allowed
    the appeal under Article 8.  However, it is plain from the text of  the
    decision that he spent the majority of his time considering whether  or
    not the decision made by the Respondent was in accordance with the law,
    and plainly concluded that it was not.

 3. The Respondent duly applied to the First-tier Tribunal  for  permission
    to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  against  this  decision,  essentially
    stating in simple terms that  once  the  judge  had  decided  that  the
    underlying decision was not in accordance with the law, then he  should
    have done no more than allow the appeal on that limited basis. In short
    he should have stopped at that point.  The Respondent relied  upon  the
    decision of Lord Justice Sedley in Mirza [2011] EWCA Civ  159  to  that
    effect.

 4. Permission was granted on 9 January 2015 by Judge Hollingworth on  that
    limited ground.  There is no Rule 24 response from the Appellant and so
    the matter comes before me today.

 5. Upon the appeal being called up for hearing I am told by  both  parties
    that they are content to accept that the judge did err in law  on  this
    narrow basis; having found that the decision was not in accordance with
    the law he should have simply allowed the appeal on that limited  basis
    and no more. On that basis they are both agreed that I can  dispose  of
    the matter by way of a brief extempore decision, which is  what  I  now
    do. It seems to me quite a  simple  and  straightforward  point  and  I
    accept the concession that is made.

 6. I go on in passing to comment that it does appear to me from a  reading
    of the decision as a whole that at points the  judge  appears  to  have
    treated this matter as an appeal against a refusal of entry  clearance.
    This was a decision that did not prolong, or cause, any  separation  of
    the family members.  It was an in-country application, and the decision
    in relation to this family member by the Respondent  was  for  whatever
    reason inconsistent with the course taken  in  relation  to  the  other
    family members; as the judge found. In the circumstances  there  is  no
    profit in me going back over the Article 8 appeal, and  no  purpose  to
    doing so, as Sedley LJ pointed out in Mirza.

 7. I am therefore satisfied that there was an error of law in the  judge's
    approach that requires me to set aside his decision and remake  it.   I
    do so with the consent of both parties so as to allow the appeal on the
    limited ground that the underlying immigration  decision  under  appeal
    was not made in accordance with the law. That  leaves  the  application
    outstanding and awaiting a lawful decision upon it.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 5 March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes
