
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43733/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 20th May 2014                              |On 26th June 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                             Angela Sola Oyewole
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Uzoechina instructed by Patterson Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the respondent but
    for the purposes of this determination I shall refer to the parties  as
    they were described before the First Tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, born on 28th November  1964  and
    she made an application on 17th January 2013 for a  residence  card  as
    confirmation of a right to reside in the UK on the basis of a  marriage
    or durable relationship with Austrian (EEA) national  Benedict  Faniku.
    This application was refused on 10th October 2013.

 3. The respondent refused the appellant's application  with  reference  to
    Regulations 6 and 7 of the EEA Regulations.  The EEA family member  had
    failed to provide evidence that the sponsor was a qualified  person  as
    set out in Regulation 6 or she was is in a durable relationship with an
    EEA national in accordance with Regulation 8.

 4. The detailed refusal letter stated that the appellant had not  provided
    evidence to demonstrate  she  had  registered  her  customary  marriage
    within 60 days stipulated  by  The  Births,  Deaths,  etc.  (Compulsory
    Registration) Act CAP B9  laws  of  the  Federation  of  Nigeria  2004.
    Accordingly it was not legally recognised as valid in Nigeria and  thus
    could not be accepted as valid in the UK.

 5. The application was also  considered  under  Regulation  8(5)  but  the
    appellant had provided no evidence that she  and  her  sponsor  resided
    together as a couple at the same address prior to  the  date  of  their
    customary marriage certificate.

 6. First-tier Tribunal Judge S J Pacey determined the matter on the papers
    on 22nd January 2014 and issued a determination on 7th February  2014.
    He accepted that there were HMRC documents indicating that the  sponsor
    was self-employed and liable for national  insurance  contributions  on
    the basis a letter from an accountant to  this  effect  and  the  self-
    assessment tax calculation, as well  as  self-assessment  statement  of
    account.

 7. The judge accepted that there was  a  certificate  of  registration  of
    marriage which referred to registration on 24th  January  2011  clearly
    within the time limit required for registration of 60 days.  The  judge
    therefore accepted the marriage certificate at face value.   He  stated
    "I note what the respondent says about the appellant not being  present
    at the marriage ceremony but that to my mind is inherent  in  marriages
    by proxy and is referred to in the affidavit from  the  father  of  the
    appellant."

 8. An application for permission to appeal was submitted by the respondent
    on the basis that the determination failed to have any  regard  to  the
    decision of the Upper Tribunal  in  Kareem  (Proxy  marriages  EU  law)
    Nigeria [2014] UKUT 24.  The judge failed to make the findings required
    of him as to in particular whether this type of marriage is  recognised
    in the EEA state of the sponsor, Austria.

 9. In response the appellant stated that the grant of permission by  Judge
    Williams was misconceived.  The only issue before the Tribunal  was  an
    issue of fact as to whether the marriage was registered within 60  days
    of celebration.  The respondent's reason for refusal letter  raised  no
    issue of law and no reliance was placed on Kareem.  The respondent  was
    fully aware of the promulgation of Kareem but failed to apply to amend,
    withdraw the reasons for refusal or place any reliance on Kareem and it
    was not open to raise this issue  presently.   The  judge  applied  the
    first limb of Kareem principles in that "the respondent takes no  issue
    with regards to the authenticity of the certificate and nothing on  the
    face of it gives rise to reasonable doubts as to its reliability."

10. Having found that the marriage certificate was properly  registered  or
    issued by the competent authority the First-tier Tribunal Judge  needed
    to take the matter no further.

The Hearing

11. Mr Tufan stated that Kareem had been determined and  was  published  on
    16th January 2014 and  prior  to  the  determination.   The  ratio  as
    outlined in the head note at (g) stated that it should be assumed  that
    without independent and reliable evidence that the recognition  of  the
    marriage under the laws of the EEA country and/or the country where the
    marriage took place, the Tribunal is likely to be unable to  find  that
    sufficient evidence has been provided to discharge the burden of proof.

12. Mr Uzoechina submitted that the issue before the judge was  a  question
    of fact and the question centred on whether  the  marriage  certificate
    was valid and registered within 60 days.

13. The judge clearly found that the marriage was registered within 60 days
    and it can be seen from the  documentation  that  the  certificate  was
    stamped by the Nigerian authorities.  The marriage took place  on  18th
    December 2010, the marriage was registered on  24th  January  2011  and
    these are the dates given  on  the  marriage  certificate  and  it  was
    stamped on 23rd April 2012 in London.  The judge was entitled to decide
    a question of fact and the judge said nothing about the reliability.

14. In an instance it was issued by a competent authority and Mr  Uzoechina
    drew my attention to paragraph 68(d) of Kareem.

15. Kareem had, he submitted, two limbs and if there was no  issue  of  the
    competence as to the body of issue of the certificate that was the  end
    of it.  It was possible to have a proxy marriage  in  Nigeria  and  the
    correct law was the 2004 Act.  There was no requirement  to  apply  the
    question as to whether the law was valid in Austria.  The  second  limb
    of Kareem did not apply.  It was only where marriage certificates  were
    challenged that the  laws  needed  to  be  considered.   Under  private
    international law a country where the marriage is celebrated is the key
    and in private international law if the marriage is good by the law  of
    that country it is good all over the world.  Kareem conflicted with the
    House of Lords  which  effectively  confirmed  that  EEA  law  was  not
    relevant.

16. Mr Tufan responded that this was a question of EU law and an EU citizen
    marrying another EU citizen.  The case which was  produced  on  Qyewole
    was not a reported decision and not a precedent.





Conclusions

17. I note that the judge identified that the  appellant  and  sponsor  had
    married and that he recorded that the certificate of marriage had  been
    registered within 60 days and therefore was valid.   Nonetheless  I  am
    bound  by  an  Upper  Tribunal  reported  decision  Kareem  which   was
    promulgated prior to the issue of the determination in this  case.   No
    reference was made to Kareem by the Judge.

18. I do not accept that EEA law is irrelevant in this matter.   The  basis
    on which both appellant and sponsor are in the UK is European  law  and
    further to the European Economic Area Regulations 2006 are derived from
    European community law.

19. It is clear from paragraph 22 of Kareem that the question to  be  asked
    is whether the appellant is the spouse of a qualified  person  for  the
    purposes of EU law and in  that  light  it  is  important  to  seek  to
    determine the legal system in which it is to be established whether the
    appellant was in a  marital  relationship.   The  question  is  whether
    according to Austrian law, as the sponsor in this case is Austrian,  is
    whether the marriage would be regarded as  having  been  celebrated  in
    Nigeria or in the UK and thus whether a  proxy  or  customary  marriage
    will be recognised in Austria.

20. No evidence whatsoever was produced in relation to this.

21. Kareem confirms [13] that a marriage certificate issued by a  competent
    authority will normally suffice as evidence that a  marriage  has  been
    contracted the document must have legal status and  it  can  only  have
    legal status if it is issued by an authority with the power  to  create
    or confirm the facts attested. This  will  depend  on  identifying  the
    authority with legal power to create such a document or confirm that  a
    marriage has been contracted.  There  must  be  proof  of  the  private
    international law of that country and such evidence will not only  have
    to identify relevant legal provisions in that other  country  (Austria)
    but identify how they operate in practice.  The  legal  system  of  the
    nationality of the Union citizen governs whether a  marriage  has  been
    contracted Kareem [18].

22. In this instance there was no evidence of the relevant foreign law  and
    thus the appellant must fail. There was no examination of  the  law  of
    the member state with regards proxy marriages Kareem [17].

23.  For  completeness  the  determination  produced  by  the   appellant's
    representative in Oyekunle was dated June 2013 and predated Kareem  and
    was  not  a  reported  decision  AO  (unreported   determinations   not
    precedents) Japan [2008] UKAIT 00056.

24. I find that the Judge did not follow Kareem and there was an  error  of
    law.  I therefore set aside that determination and remake the decision.



25. Even if the point with regards  Austrian  law  was  not  taken,  Kareem
    confirms that Nigerian law makes provision about who can be a registrar
    and there was no evidence save for a stamp that the person  who  signed
    the certificate was a registrar.  [42]  Kareem.   Also  noted  in  that
    judgement was that evidence provided by  the  British  High  commission
    suggested  that  no  official  certificates  were  issued  to   confirm
    customary marriages.

26. For the reasons given above I find that there  was  no  evidence  of  a
    valid marriage contacted between the appellant and the sponsor.

27. The evidence which was put before me in relation to whether there was a
    durable marriage was strictly limited and even the submissions  by  the
    appellant's representative was that there  was  very  limited  evidence
    with which to establish a durable relationship.

28. I examined  the  documentation  in  relation  to  the  address  of  the
    appellant and the sponsor and whether they could be linked at the  same
    address.   There was a paucity of evidence.  I was  provided  with  two
    statements from the Water Services dated  24th  January  2012  and  4th
    March 2012 which had the name of the appellant recorded in small  print
    on the document and two job centre letters  to  the  appellant  at  the
    address of the sponsor dated 4th July 2013 and 21st June 2013.  This is
    inadequate evidence on which to find  a  durable  relationship.   There
    were no cards, photographs or any  other  evidence  which  would  found
    evidence of a  relationship.   I  note  the  appellant  stated  in  the
    submissions that  she  had  been  unable  to  obtain  employment,  bank
    accounts or other documentation or able to engage in  "any  transaction
    that  could  generate  correspondence  to  her   home   address"    but
    nonetheless on the evdience presented I am not satisfied that there  is
    a durable relationship.

29. I also found the evidence supporting the claim that the sponsor  was  a
    qualified person further to Regulation 6 of the EEA Regulations  to  be
    insufficient.  For the sponsor there was one accountant's letter  dated
    16th July 2012 from TEEAC accountants but with no attachments (save for
    a covering sheet entitled Financial Statement  for  25  weeks  for  the
    period ended 5th April 2012), one Lloyds Bank statement dated  November
    2012 and a self  assessment  tax  calculation  for  2011-2012  and  two
    statements from HMRC dated 30th March and 2nd June  2013  referring  to
    National Insurance Contributions.  The application was made in 2013 and
    the decision made in January 2013 and the decision in October 2013  and
    no up to date information was  provided  for  the  paper  determination
    before the First Tier Tribunal Judge or before me.  A  self  assessment
    for tax does not show that the sponsor was in fact working and  nor  do
    the national insurance contributions. I find that the sponsor  has  not
    shown that he was exercsing treaty rights.

30. I find that the determination of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  cannot
    stand as there was an error of law.  I remake the decision and  dismiss
    the appeal of the appellant against the decision of the  respondent  to
    refuse to issue a residence card.

Signed                                  Date 24th June 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
