
IAC-AH-SC-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43475/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 February 2015                           |On 25 February 2015           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM


                                   Between

                               Illya Liberman
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Norman, Counsel instructed by Sterling & Law
                    Associates LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Ukraine  and  his  date  of  birth  is  1
    November 1976.  He made an application for permanent right of residence
    pursuant to Regulation 15 of the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 on the basis that  he  is  a  family  member  who  has
    retained the right of residence pursuant to Regulation 10 of  the  2006
    Regulations.  His application was refused by the Secretary of State  in
    a decision of 11 October 2013.

2.   The reason the Secretary of State refused the application was  twofold.
     First the appellant had failed to establish that the EEA national  was
    a qualified person when the decree absolute was issued (16 August 2011)
    and second that she failed to provide evidence that since the  date  of
    his divorce he has been a  worker,  self-employed  person  or  a  self-
    sufficient person.

3.   The appellant appealed against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    and his appeal was dismissed by a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal in a
    decision that was promulgated on 1 August 2014 following a  hearing  on
    16 July 2014.  The appeal was dismissed because the  Judge  found  that
    the appellant had not established that his ex-wife was at the  time  of
    the divorce exercising treaty rights.

4.   The appellant appealed against the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    and Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal JM  Lewis  a  grant  of
    permission on 20 August 2014.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

5.   The Judge at [4] referred to the history of  the  case.   She  recorded
    that the appellant had requested an  adjournment  on  9  December  2013
    having asked the Tribunal to make a direction pursuant to  Rule  45  of
    the 2005 Rules  requiring  the  secretary  of  state   to  provide  any
    information that she has about the appellant's ex-wife's employment  in
    August 2011.  The application was refused.  The matter was listed on 21
    May 2014 when the representative on behalf of the  secretary  of  state
    agreed to assist the appellant by providing any information held on the
    employment of the appellant's ex-wife in August 2011.  The  matter  was
    adjourned for a period of eight weeks to enable the respondent to serve
    this information.

6.   At the hearing before Judge Birk the respondent had  not  produced  any
    further evidence and the representative  for  the  secretary  of  state
    applied  for  an  adjournment  in  order  to   obtain   the   necessary
    information.  The Judge recorded that the appellant  initially  opposed
    the adjournment request but then agreed to it.

7.   The Judge refused an adjournment and recorded the decision as follows:

          "6. I refused the adjournment request having  considered  Rule  21
             and the overriding objective under Rule 4 of  the  Asylum  and
             Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005  which  is  for
             appeals to be dealt with 'fairly, quickly and  efficiently  as
             possible;'.  I considered that insufficiently good reasons had
             been given by the respondent for the adjournment.  I find that
             the  respondent  has  had  sufficient  time  to  produce   the
             documents it has access to and I note that the request had not
             been sent straight away after the hearing but a  month  later.
             There is no good evidence or realistic indication as  to  when
             the response will be likely to be forthcoming and  no  earlier
             request for adjournment has been made by the respondent  until
             this morning.  I find that the point had been reached when the
             appeal had to be decided on the evidence that was available".

8.   The Judge made the following findings:-

          "17.    I reject the argument set out in the skeleton argument  at
             paragraphs 9 to 11 that there is an onus on the respondent  to
             provide evidence to assist the appellant in his claim, even if
             willing agreed to by the respondent, and that in  the  absence
             of which I should find in the appellant's favour  because  the
             appellant has  done  all  that  can  be  done  by  himself  to
             establish the point.  My view is that  the  Immigration  Rules
             still have to be satisfied by the appellant.

         18.  However, the Immigration Rules require evidence and that  does
             not necessarily mean documentary evidence although that  would
             be the best form of evidence in regards to this type of point.
              I therefore can consider all the evidence before me.

         19.  There is a previous determination on the same issues that  are
             before me.  There is no new evidence or  legal  argument  that
             was presented to me that means that I  should  not  treat  the
             findings in that determination on the relevant issues in  this
             appeal as the starting point for my findings.

         20.  The issue as to the appellant's employment has at paragraph  4
             of the previous determination  has already been determined  in
             his favour in that he is working and I have been provided with
             very full evidence in the appellant's bundle to  confirm  this
             to be the case.

         21.  The main issue  that  remains  is  that  of  the  ex-wife  and
             providing evidence that she was exercising her  treaty  rights
             at the date of the decree absolute.

         22.  The appellant has produced the divorce petition which is dated
             17.7.10 and I find  that  there  is  no  reason,  evidence  or
             argument to go behind the findings that have already been made
             in respect of this document as set out at paragraph 6 and 7 of
             that  determination.   The   finding   was   that   this   was
             insufficient evidence to show that the appellant's ex-wife was
             exercising her treaty rights at the relevant time.

         23.  I find that the  appellant  is  a  credible  witness  who  has
             provided all the documentation that he  could.   He  has  done
             everything within his means to establish the evidence  on  the
             outstanding issue and some of his efforts have  been  detailed
             in paragraph 4 of the previous determination.

         24.  He has made further evidence by contacting the respondent  and
             requesting  their  assistance.   He  has  through  his   legal
             representatives tried to contact Ms Liberman by email but  her
             response on the 5.2.13 was,

              'I would like to inform  you  that  I  do  not  wish  to  get
             involved in Mr Liberman's immigration matters.  I also do  not
             want to be contacted by him either directly or indirectly.   I
             trust you will relay this message onto Mr Liberman.'

         25.  The appellant's written and oral evidence was  not  challenged
             but as he states he was not in direct contact with her at  the
             time of the divorce.  His evidence  is  therefore  from  third
             parties  rather  that  his  direct  knowledge.   His   written
             evidence did not set out what he knew  about  her  from  third
             parties.  I find that his oral evidence did  not  provide  the
             detail in terms of who these friends were and who was involved
             in these conversations, when  the  conversations  took  place,
             what period of time was being spoken about etc. and so this is
             insufficient evidence to be reliable evidence of  her  working
             at the relevant time.

         26.  There is also a statement from Mr Pavel Burkov  dated  8.2.13.
             He did  not  attend  the  appeal  hearing  and  there  was  no
             application for an adjournment to secure his attendance.

         27.  He states that,

              'I last spoke to Victoria Liberman in person (face to face) a
             few months ago (2012) at her home in  south  London.   To  the
             best of my knowledge and believe (sic) Ms Victoria Liberman is
             residing in the UK.  I can also confirm that on the  basis  of
             the information I am  receiving  from  her  Miss  Liberman  is
             currently working in the UK at one of the London prisons.'

         28.  I find  his  written  evidence  also  to  be  insufficient  to
             establish whether she was  exercising  her  treaty  rights  in
             August 2011 because it refers to a period  well  after  August
             2011."

The Grounds of Appeal and Oral Submissions

9.   Ground 1 argues that there is a material irregularity  because  of  the
    Judge's decision in relation to the adjournment.   There  was  a  joint
    application  for  an  adjournment.    The   appellant   supported   the
    respondent's application.  The appellant's witness, Mr Burkov, had been
    compelled to fly abroad on business the previous day and the First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  was  wrong  to  record  at  [26]  that  there  was  no
    application to adjourn in order for Mr Burkov to attend.

10.  The Judge failed to consider Rule 21 of the 2005  Procedure  Rules  and
    she did not consider whether the  appeal  could  be  justly  determined
    without an adjournment.

11.  The Judge found that the appellant was a credible witness who had  made
    every effort to obtain relevant evidence.  It is clear that  the  Judge
    was not prepared to allow the appeal on the basis  of  the  appellant's
    evidence  and  in  the  circumstances  she  should  have   granted   an
    adjournment to  enable  the  appellant's  witness  to  attend  for  the
    respondent to comply with directions of the Tribunal.

12.  The second ground of appeal argues that the  Judge  applied  the  wrong
    standard of proof and  that  she  did  not  accept  evidence  that  was
    unchallenged.  The Judge  found  that  the  appellant  was  a  credible
    witness who had done all that he could to establish that his  wife  was
    working at HMP Bromfield at the date of the divorce.  The appellant was
    not cross-examined on this point and the  Judge  was  not  entitled  to
    reject his evidence.  Ground 3 argues that the Judge did not make clear
    findings, the Judge did not reject the appellant's evidence however  it
    was not suggested that the ex-wife was not  working,  the  unchallenged
    evidence was that she was working at  the  relevant  time.    The  sole
    issue was whether it was  more  likely  than  not  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities that the appellant's ex-wife  had  been  working  at  the
    relevant time.

13.  Ground 4 argues that the Judge failed to have  regard  to  all  of  the
    evidence, she failed to have regard to  all  of  Mr  Burkov's  evidence
    contained in his witness statement and to consider this in  conjunction
    with the divorce petition which showed that the appellant's ex-wife was
    working as a prison officer at HMP, Bromfield just  before  the  decree
    absolute was issued.  There was an  affidavit  submitted  from  another
    friend, Tatiana which was in the respondent's bundle and the Judge  did
    not take this into consideration.

14.  Ground 5 argues that this was an appeal under the 2006 Regulations  and
    not the Immigration Rules.  It  is  unclear  what  particular  evidence
    required by the Immigration Rules the Judge had  in  mind  however  the
    conflation of the Rules with the Regulations has  infected  the  First-
    tier Tribunal's attitude to the evidence.

15.  Both parties made oral submissions.     Ms Norman submitted that on  19
    May 2014 when the matter first became before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    the Presenting Officer, Counsel Mr A Duncan,  made  an  undertaking  on
    behalf of the respondent to the court that the Home Office  would  make
    enquiries in relation to the appellant's ex-wife and  whether  she  was
    working or not at the relevant time.   Mr  Whitwell  submitted  a  note
    prepared by Mr Duncan from that hearing which appeared to  accord  with
    that which Ms Norman asserted in relation to an undertaking having been
    given.  Mr Whitwell indicated that there was nothing  on  the  file  to
    indicate that any progress had been made in relation to the  enquiries.
    Mr Whitwell submitted that the undertaking was to  make  enquiries  and
    there was no guarantee of the outcome of these  enquiries  and  in  his
    view there was no agreement made by the respondent that  contact  would
    be made with a third party namely Her Majesty's Revenue & Customs.

16.   Mr  Whitwell  submitted  that  the  reference  to  the  Rules   is   a
    typographical  error.  It  was  not  clear  whether  Tatiana  Vincent's
    evidence was before the First-tier Tribunal. Ms Norman argued that  she
    was deeply unimpressed by the Home Office's  position  because  it  was
    clear that it was envisaged that the respondent would make contact with
    HMRC in relation to the appellant's ex-wife.

Error of Law

17.  There were no credibility issues.  The Judge dismissed  the  appeal  on
    the basis of there being insufficient evidence.   The  evidence  before
    the First-tier Tribunal was the oral evidence of the appellant and that
    in his witness statement of 15 May  2014.   He  and  Victoria  Liberman
    married on 16 September 2004.  He is now married to a  British  citizen
    and they have a daughter who is also a British citizen.  The  appellant
    made efforts in order to contact his ex-wife so that she would  confirm
    her employment position, but she refused to give any information.

18.  The appellant relied on the divorce petition  issued  by  his  wife  in
    which it is stated that the petitioner (the appellant's ex-wife) is  by
    occupation a prison officer. His oral evidence was  documented  by  the
    Judge at [25].  There was  a  witness  statement  of  Mr  Burkov  of  8
    February 2013.  His evidence is that he has known Victoria Liberman for
    six years and he has been in occasional  contact  with  her  since  she
    separated from the appellant.  He last spoke to her (face to  face)  in
    Summer 2012 and she is currently working in the UK at one of the London
    prisons.

19.  The relevant date is that of 11 August 2011. The  evidence  before  the
    Judge was that the appellant's ex-wife was working at the time  of  the
    issue of the divorce  petition.   This  is  indicated  on  the  divorce
    petition and was not challenged.  The appellant's evidence is  that  he
    has not had direct contact with his ex-wife but  he  knows  from  third
    parties that she was in employment at the relevant  time.   It  appears
    that the Judge considered his evidence to be lacking in detail  but  he
    was not cross-examined and his evidence was not challenged.  There  was
    the evidence of Mr  Burkov  which  established  that  he  had  received
    information that the appellant was currently working (at  the  time  of
    his witness statement 8 February 2013) and he goes on to  say  that  he
    understands that she has been a prison officer since the divorce. There
    was a letter from Ms Vincent which was not in  the  appellant's  bundle
    but was submitted with the application.  This does not appear  to  have
    been brought to the Judge's attention and it is not clear  to  me  that
    the Judge had regard to it.

20.  The Judge required direct evidence of some  kind  or  another.   Whilst
    the burden of proof is on the appellant, by requiring  direct  evidence
    of the ex-wife's employment the Judge applied a two  high  standard  of
    proof.  The appellant's evidence as recorded by the Judge at  [25]  was
    not speculative and it was based on information that had been given  to
    him by another.  Considering the evidence as a whole  in  my  view  the
    Judge applied too high standard of proof and this is a  material  error
    of law.

21.  In the circumstances I set aside the decision of the Judge  to  dismiss
    the appeal under the 2006 Regulations and remake the decision.

22.  In my view the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  was  sufficient
    to discharge the burden  of  proof  that  rests  on  the  appellant  to
    establish that at the date of the divorce (the decree absolute) the EEA
    national in this case Victoria Liberman was exercising  treaty  rights.
    On this basis the appeal is allowed under the 2006 Regulations.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Joanna McWilliam       Date 23 February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
