
[pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43063/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford Upper Tribunal     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 June 2015                      |On 15 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      muhammad yusuf bin mohamad asraff
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Hussain, instructed by Khan & Company,
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent, Muhammad Yusuf Bin Mohamad Asraff, was born on 18 April
    1992 and is a male citizen of Singapore.  I shall  hereafter  refer  to
    the appellant as the respondent and to the respondent as the  appellant
    as they appeared respectively  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against the  decision  of
    the Secretary of State dated 15 October 2014 to  refuse  to  grant  him
    further leave to remain.  The appellant had made a previous application
    for leave which had been refused but which had succeeded (to a  limited
    extent) on appeal to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Reed).  Judge Reed,
    in a decision promulgated on 4 March 2013, had found (on the  basis  of
    the respondent's so-called evidential flexibility policy  in  force  at
    that time) that the appellant should have been "offered an  opportunity
    to provide the required  documentary  evidence  relating  to  financial
    sponsorship  from  his   father   and/or   mother   rather   than   his
    grandparents."  [19] The judge noted that the appellant had  mistakenly
    provided evidence of financial sponsorship from his grandparents rather
    than from his parents as required by the Immigration Rules.  The  judge
    stated that, "Grandparents could not act as financial  sponsors  for  a
    student."  Judge Reed considered that it was  fair  of  the  respondent
    "not to seek further clarification and further evidence about financial
    sponsorship from the appellant."  The judge noted  that  the  appellant
    had been in the United Kingdom as a student since 2005 and had  in  the
    past met all financial requirements for  leave  to  remain.   In  [22],
    Judge Reed directed that,

         "The respondent should consider this application after  allowing  a
         period of 60 days for the appellant to provide evidence relating to
         financial sponsorship from his parents.  I take the view that  this
         should include documentary evidence from the  appellant's  parents'
         bank relating to the 28 day period prior to the submission  of  the
         application on 2 June 2012.  The appellant should however take care
         to apprise himself of all the relevant requirements of  Appendix  C
         (I have not set all these out above).  If he has any doubts then he
         should seek advice."

 2. As I have noted above, after  the  matter  was  remitted  to  her,  the
    Secretary of State issued a new decision again refusing the appellant's
    application.  In the decision letter of 15 October 2014, the  appellant
    was awarded zero points for maintenance (funds) because he had provided
    only a letter "of financial sponsorship  ...  from  [his  grandparents]
    confirming their willingness to  provide  financial  assistance  during
    your time in the United Kingdom."  The appellant appealed against  that
    decision to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Robson) who heard the appeal
    in Bradford on 2 February 2015.  Judge Robson found that the  appellant
    had "been given the benefit of evidential flexibility in the context of
    the judge's direction but that the appellant did not take advantage  of
    the same.   I  therefore  find  that  the  appellant  fails  under  the
    Immigration Rules." [56] The judge noted [54]  Judge  Reed's  direction
    that the appellant should  provide  further  information  and  evidence
    within 60 days but found that the appellant had  completely  failed  to
    provide any information.  The judge went on to consider Article 8 ECHR,
    finding that the appellant could speak English that he had not  been  a
    burden on tax payers since he arrived in the United Kingdom in 2005. At
    [62] the judge concluded that any  interference  with  the  appellant's
    private life in the United Kingdom "will not be  proportionate  to  the
    legitimate/end sought to be achieved (sic)."  He therefore allowed  the
    appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds but dismissed it under the Immigration
    Rules.

 3. The Secretary of State now  appeals,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  I acknowledge that the appellant has sought to  comply  with
    the Immigration Rules during his time here as a student since 2005.  In
    his submissions, Mr Hussain sought  to  characterise  the  decision  of
    Judge Robson as entirely coherent and, in particular, not  perverse  on
    the basis of the evidence.  It may be the case  that  the  decision  of
    Judge Robson is not perverse but I consider that his use of  Article  8
    ECHR in this instance was  wholly  improper.   I  reject  Mr  Hussain's
    submission that the judge has followed relevant jurisprudence, such  as
    CDS (PBS: "available": Article  8)  Brazil  [2010]  UKUT  00305  (IAC).
    Whilst the Tribunal in that case did acknowledge that  the  person  who
    had been admitted to follow a course of study which had not  yet  ended
    might "build up a private life that deserves respect"  it  also  firmly
    held that "Article 8 does not give an Immigration Judge a free-standing
    liberty  to  depart  from  the  Immigration  Rules."   Likewise,  Nasim
    (Article 8) Pakistan [2014] UKUT 25 (IAC) following Patel  [2013]  UKSC
    72 recognised the limited utility of Article 8 in private  life  cases.
    What is clear from all the relevant jurisprudence is that Article 8  is
    not to be used by judges as a general dispensing power in circumstances
    where they feel sympathy for an appellant but are unable  to  allow  an
    appeal under the Immigration Rules.  In my view, that is  exactly  what
    has occurred in this instance.  The judge has taken no account  of  the
    fact that Judge Reed had offered the appellant the opportunity  to,  in
    effect, perfect his application by giving details  from  the  financial
    circumstances of his parents (as opposed  to  his  grandparents).   His
    determination could not have  been  clearer.   The  appellant  took  no
    advantage  of  the  60  day  period  given  to  him  by  Judge   Reed's
    determination and (as Judge Robson noted) he supplied no  new  evidence
    at all.  Judge Robson has not considered the relevance of the fact that
    this appellant has been the author of  his  own  misfortune.   Further,
    Judge Robson, by allowing the appeal on private  life  Article  8  ECHR
    grounds, made no proper attempt to examine  the  extent  to  which  the
    appellant's private life might be disrupted  disproportionately  by  an
    immigration decision which the appellant has, in effect,  brought  upon
    himself by his own acts and, in particular, omissions.  This is, in  my
    view, a clear case of Article 8 being used as  a  dispensing  power  to
    save an appellant for whom the judge felt some  sympathy  but  who  was
    patently unable to satisfy the  relevant  Immigration  Rules.   As  the
    Supreme Court has made clear in Patel  (see  above)  that  is  not  the
    manner in which Article 8 should be used by  judicial  decision-makers.
    In the circumstances, I find that Judge Robson's  determination  should
    be set aside.  I remake the decision dismissing the appeal against  the
    immigration decision.

Notice of Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on  12  March  2015
is set aside.  I remake the decision.  The appellant's  appeal  against  the
respondent's immigration decision of 15 October 2014 is dismissed under  the
Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds (Article 8 ECHR).

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date 10 July 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane



I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed   Date 10 July 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

