
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/43654/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 5 January 2016                    |On 14 January 2016                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             RAJA KARAMAT ULLAH
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Dewar, Advocate, instructed by Burnley Legal,
                    Solicitors, Woodford Green


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The parties are as described above, but the rest of this  determination
    refers to them as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born on 25 April 1932.  He  has
    not requested an anonymity direction and none has been made.

 3. The appellant entered the UK as a visitor.  On 28 April 2014 he  sought
    leave to remain outwith the Immigration Rules, on the basis  of  family
    and private life under Article 8 of the ECHR, and on compassionate  and
    compelling grounds.

 4. The respondent refused that application  for  reasons  explained  in  a
    letter dated 3 September 2014:  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules were not met; the appellant would not be deprived of care  if  he
    returned to Pakistan; 4 of his 6 children live in Pakistan, not in  the
    UK where the other 2 live; his health would not be  adversely  affected
    by removal; there was no truly exceptional  case;  and  there  were  no
    sufficiently  compelling  or  compassionate  circumstances   to   merit
    granting settlement outwith the Rules.

 5. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Lea  allowed  the  appellant's  appeal  for
    reasons explained in her determination promulgated on 15 July 2015.

 6. The SSHD's grounds of appeal may be summarised as follows:

      1. The appellant having arrived as a visitor was precluded from making
         an in-country application as a dependant relative.

      2. The judge erred in finding that the appellant enjoyed  family  life
         with his adult children in the  UK.   Notwithstanding  his  medical
         conditions, there was no  dependency  over  and  above  normal  and
         emotional ties.

      3. In finding that the appellant would now qualify if he applied  from
         outside the UK, the judge entered into  impermissible  speculation.
         The judge relied on evidence that the 4 children in  Pakistan  were
         not in a position to care for the appellant and that  the  children
         in the UK were not aware of a care home for him in his home area in
         Pakistan, but the refusal letter had gone into considerable  detail
         about medical treatment available in Pakistan.  The judge had based
         her decision on family preferences not inability to obtain care and
         treatment in Pakistan.

      4. Although the judge had  evidence  that  the  appellant  was  "unfit
         currently to travel" ... this is  an  irrelevant  consideration  in
         assessing whether the appellant could obtain care abroad.

 7. Mr Matthews did not seek to advance ground 2.   He  accepted  that  the
    existence of family life was a question of fact  for  the  Tribunal  to
    resolve.  He said that the substance of the respondent's criticism  was
    in paragraph 3.  There were detailed requirements to apply from  abroad
    as  an  adult  dependant  relative,   including   specific   evidential
    requirements.  The judge referred to that route a number of  times  and
    to the "Chikwamba" principle, but did not address the matter correctly.
      Chen  (Appendix   FM   -   Chikwamba   -   Temporary   separation   -
    proportionality) IJR [2015] UKUT189 establishes that the onus is on the
    appellant to show that entry clearance requirements would be met.   The
    appellant did not produce such evidence.  Separately, and although  not
    mentioned in the grounds, there was an error of approach  in  light  of
    Part 5A of the 2002 Act.  The determination should  be  set  aside  and
    either a rehearing should be ordered in the First-tier Tribunal, or the
    appeal should be dismissed on the basis that the  appellant,  if  in  a
    position to do so, was entitled to make a fresh application  backed  up
    by the necessary supporting evidence.

 8. Mr Dewar submitted that although the SSHD said that it was  speculative
    for the judge to have thought that the appellant  would  be  likely  to
    succeed under the Rules, that was rather based on common sense.  In any
    event, whether the judge thought the appellant would succeed under  the
    Rules was neither here nor there.  The  references  to  Chikwamba  were
    incidental, and not determinative of the  proportionality  issue.   The
    judge reached the same conclusion whether  or  not  the  appellant  was
    likely to meet the terms of the Immigration Rules.  She held  that  the
    appellant was an elderly man so ill  as  to  be  unable  to  travel,  a
    conclusion properly open to her, having heard the evidence,  and  which
    was not criticised in the grounds of appeal.  The grounds said that the
    judge had no regard to evidence of availability of  care  in  Pakistan,
    but that overlooked the evidence from the appellant's  2  daughters  in
    the UK who were in a position to speak to that matter.  The judge  said
    at paragraph 12 that she accepted the evidence of the  sponsors,  which
    included their evidence regarding  the  attitude  of  the  siblings  in
    Pakistan and the availability  of  care.   The  respondent's  strongest
    point of criticism was based on the misapplication  of  Chikwamba,  but
    that misunderstood the eventual outcome.

 9. Mr Matthews in response submitted that  the  Chikwamba  issue  was  not
    collateral, having been referred to in the determination 3  times,  not
    only once or in passing.  The judge plainly thought that the  principle
    had a significant bearing on the outcome.

10. I reserved my determination.

11. This is the concluding paragraph of the determination:

         "The facts ... are somewhat  unusual.   I  find  that  family  life
         between the appellant and the sponsors is  clearly  established  in
         the UK.  I consider that it would not be possible for  family  life
         to continue ... by way of visits and accordingly there would be  an
         interference ...  I  also  find  that  interference  ...  would  be
         disproportionate.  The appellant may well have been  able  to  meet
         the requirements of the elderly dependent relative rule if  he  had
         made an application from Pakistan.  It is clearly not  possible  or
         proportionate for him to return to make such an application.   Even
         if he did not qualify under this Rule, given his medical conditions
         and dependence on his daughters in the  UK  and  his  inability  to
         travel, I would allow the appeal in any event under Article 8."

12. The final sentence is crucial.  The  determination  at  earlier  stages
    perhaps does skirt with a  misapplication  of  Chikwamba,  particularly
    when read in the light of its application in Chen.  However, there  was
    a critical finding that the appellant is now an elderly man, too ill to
    travel.  Given his age and the progressive nature  of  his  conditions,
    the finding is not one of a temporary inability  to  travel  but  of  a
    situation unlikely ever to be reversed.  I see no sense in  the  SSHD's
    grounds at paragraph 4, stating that unfitness to travel is irrelevant.
     Mr Matthews made no submission to that effect.  The facts found by the
    judge were very different from  the  facts  as  they  appeared  to  the
    respondent's decision  maker.   On  that  earlier  basis  of  fact  the
    appellant had perhaps no hope of another  outcome,  but  the  basis  on
    which the judge came to assess proportionality was radically different.

13. The judge's final assessment is not based on any error of fact-finding,
    or  on  any  material  misdirection  of  law.   It  was  an  assessment
    reasonably open to her.  Her determination shall therefore stand.




           [pic]
           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


           13 January 2016.


