
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43968/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 December 2015                  |On 13 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                             mr Haryshan Kandiah
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms B Asanovic, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, HOPO


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW

1.   The Secretary of State is the party that has  been  granted  permission
    to appeal the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Miles and  Mrs
    L R Schmitt JP lay member who in  a  determination  promulgated  on  25
    March 2015 allowed the appellant's appeal against the decision  of  the
    Secretary of State made on 5 November 2014 that he  should  be  removed
    from the United Kingdom under Regulation 19(3)(b)  of  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006.   The  appellant  appealed
    under Regulation 26.

2.   Although the Secretary of State is the appellant in these  proceedings,
    I shall maintain the titles for ease of reference.

3.   The appellant is a citizen of Holland  born  on  7  October  1986.   He
    claims to have entered the United Kingdom in July 1999 with his parents
    and siblings.  In April 2004 he was convicted in Warwickshire  Juvenile
    Court for three offences of possessing an offensive weapon, affray  and
    burglary for which he was sentenced to a detention and  training  order
    for six months.  Between 9 May 2005 and 8 August 2014 he was  convicted
    of 40 additional offences  for  which  he  received  various  sentences
    including  community  orders,   unpaid   work   requirements,   driving
    disqualifications  and  licence  endorsements,   financial   penalties,
    electronic monitoring and sentences of imprisonment both suspended  and
    immediate.  His last sentence was a term of  twelve  months'  immediate
    imprisonment on each of three counts of handling stolen goods, in  each
    case a motor vehicle.

4.   In his appeal, the appellant submitted that he  is  a  person  who  has
    resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of at  least  ten
    years prior to removal decision and therefore may only  be  removed  on
    imperative grounds  of  public  policy  or  public  security.   In  the
    alternative, he argued that he has established  a  permanent  right  of
    residence under Regulation 15 of the 2006 Regulations which meant  that
    his removal could only be justified on serious  grounds  of  policy  or
    security.

5.   The FtT accepted that the appellant has resided in the UK for  over  15
    years since his initial entry in July 1999.  They were  satisfied  that
    the appellant established significant integration into the UK,  despite
    his record  of  offending.   They  concluded  that  in  the  particular
    circumstances of this case, the appellant's continuity of residence has
    not been broken for  the  purposes  of  assessing  his  claim  to  have
    achieved the highest level protection under the 2006  EEA  Regulations,
    in accordance with the guidance in MG i.e. C-400/12 Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department v MG, judgment given on 16 January 2014.

6.   The FtT further held  that  they  were  unable  to  conclude  that  the
    appellant with his offending can be characterized  as  a  person  whose
    removal is justified on imperative grounds of public policy  simply  on
    that basis.  Furthermore, and even if that  proposition  was  arguable,
    they  would  find  that  removal  of  the  appellant  would  not  be  a
    proportionate response to his offending given his integration into  the
    UK since his entry and significant evidence  of  his  article  8  human
    rights.

7.   The First-tier Tribunal however found that  it  was  not  necessary  to
    consider the appellant's appeal under Article 8 ECHR because  they  had
    concluded that the appellant's removal would not be in accordance  with
    the 2006 EEA Regulations.

8.   Permission was granted to the respondent on  grounds  which  challenged
    the FtT's decision on the basis that the FtT failed properly to  engage
    with the appellant's periods of imprisonment in relation  both  to  the
    question of permanent residence and ten  years'  lawful  residence  and
    misdirected themselves  in  law.   There  was  arguable  merit  in  the
    grounds, in particular considering the panel's failure to consider  the
    Upper Tribunal's more recent decision in MG (Prison - Article  28(3)(a)
    of Citizens Directive) Portugal  [2014]  UKUT  392  when  applying  the
    guidance in Case C-440/12 Secretary of State v MG.  The respondent  was
    permitted to argue all grounds.

9.   I find that the panel's decision is flawed and I shall give my  reasons
    below.

10.  In the judgment of the European Court in MG 16 January 2014, the  court
    ruled:

         "1.  On a proper construction  of  Article  28(3)(a)  of  Directive
         2004/38/EC of the European Parliament and  of  the  Council  of  29
         April 2004 on the right of citizens of the Union and  their  family
         members to remove and reside freely within  the  territory  of  the
         Member States amending Regulation (EEC) ... the 10 year  period  of
         residence referred to in that  provision  must,  in  principle,  be
         continuous and must be calculated by counting back from the date of
         the decision ordering the expulsion of the person concerned.

         2.   Article 28(3)(a) of Directive 2004/38 must be  interpreted  as
         meaning that a period of imprisonment  is,  in  principle,  capable
         both of interrupting the continuity of the period of residence  for
         the purposes of  that  provision  and  of  affecting  the  decision
         regarding  the  grant  of  the  enhanced  protection  provided  for
         thereunder, even where the person concerned  resided  in  the  host
         member state for the ten years prior to imprisonment.  However, the
         fact that that person resided in the host state for the  ten  years
         prior to imprisonment may be taken into consideration  as  part  of
         the overall assessment required in order to determine  whether  the
         integrating links previously forged with a host member  state  have
         been broken."

11.  MG came back to the Upper Tribunal  for  determination.   In  its  head
    note the Upper Tribunal held:

         "(1)  Article  28(3)(a)  of  Directive  2004/38/EC   contains   the
             requirement that for those who have resided in the host member
             state for the previous ten years, an expulsion  decision  made
             against them must be based on  imperative  grounds  of  public
             security.

         (2)  There is a tension in the judgment of the Court of Justice  of
             the European Communities in Case C-400/12 Secretary of State v
             MG in respect of the  meaning  of  the  'enhanced  protection'
             provision.

         (3)  The judgment should be understood as meaning that a period  of
             imprisonment during  those  ten  years  does  not  necessarily
             prevent a person from qualifying for  enhanced  protection  if
             that person is sufficiently integrated.  However, according to
             the same judgment,  a  period  of  imprisonment  must  have  a
             negative  impact  insofar  as  establishing   integration   is
             concerned."

12.  The panel found that the appellant had been  residing  in  the  UK  for
    over fifteen years and therefore had been residing for  more  than  ten
    years before the decision to remove him,  which  is  dated  5  November
    2014, was taken.  They noted however that in the period from 5 November
    2004 until 5 November 2014, the appellant has also been sent to prison,
    on  the  basis  of  his  record,  on  five  occasions   for   sentences
    cumulatively totalling 138 weeks and would  therefore  have  served  69
    weeks of the total term.

13.  I find that the FtT erred in law in their interpretation  of  the  "ten
    years prior to imprisonment".   The ten years must be counted back from
    the date of the respondent's decision, in this case, 5 November 2014 to
    5 November 2004.  The ten year period has to be  continuous  and  there
    must no offending in that ten year period. It is  on  this  basis  that
    Headnote 1 of the Upper Tribunal's decision in  MG  becomes  applicable
    i.e. an expulsion decision made against them (the  appellant)  must  be
    based on  imperative  grounds  of  public  security.  It  is  when  the
    appellant has reached the 10 year threshold, that an overall assessment
    is required  in  order  to  determine  whether  the  integrating  links
    previously forged with the  host  Member  State  have  been  broken  by
    periods of imprisonment.

14.  In light of the FtT's finding that the appellant was sent to prison  on
    five occasions during the ten year  period,  the  appellant  could  not
    arguably qualify for the enhanced protection.

15.  As the appellant having entered the United Kingdom in  July  1999,  and
    was first convicted in April 2004, could he meet the five  year  period
    of residence for the low basic level of protection?  This is  an  issue
    that also needs to be considered.

16.  In light of the above, I find that the FtT's decision is  flawed.   The
    decision cannot stand.

17.  The decision is remitted for rehearing by a  panel  other  than  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Miles and Mrs L R Schmitt JP.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

