
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43601/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 October 2015                    |On 9 October 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     NVN
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. T. Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. A. Eaton, Counsel, instructed by Breytenbachs
                    Immigration Ltd.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Thanki who allowed NVN's appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision to refuse leave to remain on the basis of
    her rights under Article 8.

 2. For the purposes of this decision I shall refer  to  the  Secretary  of
    State as the Respondent and NVN  as  the  Appellant,  reflecting  their
    positions as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. Permission was granted on the grounds that it  was  arguable  that  the
    judge failed to resolve a material  conflict  of  fact  in  respect  of
    paragraph 276ADE, and further that the  reasoning  in  respect  of  the
    public interest requirements under Section 117B was inadequate.

 4. At the hearing Mr. Wilding stated that there were two specific parts to
    the grounds of appeal on which he relied, that relating to the lack  of
    consideration under paragraph 276ADE, and the analysis  of  Article  8.
    Regarding paragraphs 2 and 3 of the grounds, he made no submissions  on
    these as the adult dependent relative route was not  available  to  the
    Appellant as she was already in the United Kingdom.

 5. I heard submissions from both representatives on these two points.   At
    the hearing I reserved my decision and  I  set  it  out  here  with  my
    reasons.

Error of law decision

 6. I find that the decision does not involve  the  making  of  a  material
    error of law.

 7. The relevant paragraphs in relation to  the  findings  under  paragraph
    276ADE are as follows.  Paragraph [38] states:
         "It is clear that she cannot qualify under Appendix FM  for  family
         life considerations as she is neither a parent nor has a partner in
         the UK.  She does not satisfy the requirements under  private  life
         rights when considering paragraph  276ADE  except  under  paragraph
         276ADE(vi) it could be found that there would be  very  significant
         obstacles to the Appellant's integration into the country to  which
         she would have to go if required to leave the  UK,  that  is  South
         Africa.   There  are  a  number  of  issues  in  considering  "very
         significant obstacles" to her return to South Africa.  The first is
         that she has only distant family and they are either infirm through
         age or of very modest circumstances who it is claim  cannot  assist
         the appellant in South Africa.  It is possible that  she  could  be
         maintained financially from the UK from her parents but the  family
         in South Africa cannot assist her with settlement difficulties upon
         arrival or support her in maintain her mental health.

 8. Paragraph [39] states:
         "The other significant matter is whether the appellant  is  capable
         of independent life.  She has remained a dependant of  her  parents
         since her birth and remains  so  presently.   The  reason  for  the
         current position is that she  has  been  diagnosed  suffering  from
         Manic Depression and has a mild  form  of  bi-polar  mental  health
         problem.  She also had suicidal ideation.  She requires her  family
         around her to  spot  when  she  has  an  onset  of  her  depressive
         episode."

 9. It was submitted by Mr. Wilding that the fact that the judge  had  said
    that it "could" be found that there would be very significant obstacles
    meant that there had been no conclusive assessment.  I  find  that  the
    judge states in paragraph [38] that the Appellant does not satisfy  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE "except under  paragraph  276ADE(vi)".
    I accept that he then states that it "could" be found that there  would
    be very significant obstacles.  However he is clear in the  first  part
    of this sentence that he finds that she satisfies the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE(vi).  This is supported by his decision  at  paragraph
    [53] where  he  states  "The  ground  of  appeal  in  relation  to  the
    Immigration Rules is allowed".   The  only  Immigration  Rule  that  is
    relevant, and which is considered, is paragraph 276ADE(vi).

10. In paragraphs [38] and [39] the judge gives reasons as to why paragraph
    276ADE(vi) applies.  He finds first that she would not have support  in
    South Africa, taking into account her family in South Africa.  Secondly
    he finds that she remains the dependant of her parents and  so  is  not
    capable of independent life.  The third reason is her mental health, as
    she has been diagnosed with manic depression and a  mild  form  of  bi-
    polar.

11. I find that, had the judge stated at the end of paragraph [39] what  he
    states in paragraph [53], it would have been clear that he had  allowed
    the appeal under the immigration rules.  While I accept that  it  could
    have been better structured so as  to  indicate  before  proceeding  to
    consideration of Article 8  outside  the  immigration  rules  that  the
    requirements of the immigration rules had already been met,  I  do  not
    find that this is a material error of law.  In paragraph [38] he  finds
    that the Appellant does  not  satisfy  paragraph  276ADE  except  under
    paragraph 276ADE(vi).  While it could  be  better  worded,  it  is  not
    possible to read these paragraphs and to deem other than that the judge
    has allowed her appeal under paragraph 276ADE(vi) giving three distinct
    reasons.  There was no suggestion by the Respondent  that  the  reasons
    given were not adequate.

12. I find that the consideration of paragraph 276ADE(vi) does not  contain
    an error of law.

13. As the judge allowed the appeal under the immigration rules, it was not
    necessary to proceed to consider it under  Article  8  outside  of  the
    immigration rules, and as I have found that there was no error  of  law
    in his consideration of paragraph 276ADE(vi), I find that the  decision
    contains no error of law.

14. However, for completeness, I find that the submission by the Respondent
    that the judge failed to give adequate reasons for allowing the  appeal
    outside of the immigration rules is without  merit.   The  judge  deals
    with Article 8 from paragraphs [40] to  [52].   At  paragraph  [41]  he
    refers to section 117 of the 2002 Act, and lists the factors  which  he
    must take into account, including the public  interest  in  maintaining
    immigration control.  He proceeds to find that the Appellant has family
    life in the United Kingdom, and then proceeds to find that the decision
    is not proportionate.  His consideration under Article  8  outside  the
    immigration  rules  is  reasoned  and  includes  consideration  of  the
    relevant factors under section 117B.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 8 October 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
