

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43874/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 5 June  2014                               |On 6th June 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                           MS VILMA TAMULA TORRES

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Dias
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, HOPO


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW


1.   The respondent has been granted permission to appeal the determination
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Maxwell in which he allowed the
    appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision made on 8 October
    2013 to refuse her application for leave to remain as an Overseas
    Domestic Worker under paragraph 159D of the Immigration Rules, as
    amended.  The appellant was granted limited leave to enter the UK on 26
    August 2012 until 26 February 2013.

2.   The judge's determination is flawed because he failed to tell us what
    the substance of his decision was.  Effectively, all he said was that
    both parties agreed that the matter need to be reconsidered by the
    Secretary of State and he was sending it back to the Secretary of
    State.  The determination does not inform the reader what the issues
    were and what was agreed between the parties.  Time and again the
    Higher Courts have held that the losing party to the appeal needs to
    know why they have lost.  I appreciate that in this case the HOPO below
    was party to the agreement.  However, Ms Holmes who appeared before me
    did not know what her colleague below had agreed to.  I did not know
    either.  Counsel said that the agreement reached by the parties was on
    the basis of what was set out in his skeleton argument.  He relied on
    the case of Kalidas (agreed facts -best practice) [2012] UKUT 00327
    (IAC) which said that judges should not look behind factual concessions
    unless in exceptional circumstances.  However, in this case, the
    determination did not tell us what the "factual" concessions were.

3.   I find that the judge erred in law in failing to set out his reasons
    for supporting the agreement reached by the parties.  His decision
    cannot stand.  His decision is set aside.

4.   The appellant's appeal is remitted to Hatton Cross for rehearing on 13
    November 2014 by a First-tier Judge other than FtTJ Maxwell.





Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun



