
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/43004/2014
     IA/43008/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 November 2015                        |   On 8 December 2015            |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                preyal patel
                              vatsalkumar patel
                       (ANONYMITy DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Applicants:    Mr S Canter of Counsel under the Public Access
Scheme.
For the Respondent:    Ms S Sreeraman of the Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS


The First-tier Tribunal Appellants

 1. Preyal  Patel  and  Vatsalkumar  Patel  are  sister  and  brother  born
    respectively on 9 September 1991 and 30  May  1995.   They  are  Indian
    citizens.

 2. On 1 May 2005 they entered with leave as visitors and overstayed.  They
    have a maternal aunt and a paternal grandmother living  in  the  United
    Kingdom who are stated to be British citizens.  The First-tier Tribunal
    found that both their  parents  had  come  to  the  United  Kingdom  as
    visitors and overstayed.  It would appear from the  sister's  statement
    of 24 April 2015 that her father but not her mother has been removed to
    India and that her parents are  separated.   On  14  October  2005  the
    brother and sister each applied for indefinite leave to remain.  On  12
    June 2006 the applications were refused.  On  24  August  2010  further
    applications were made by each of them relying  on  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention.  On 6 October 2010 both applications were  refused
    with no right of in-country appeal.

 3. On 15 July 2014 further representations for the sister and brother were
    made which the Respondent treated  as  fresh  applications  which  were
    refused on 8 October 2014 by way of reference to paragraph 276ADE(1) of
    the Immigration Rules and to  Article  8  of  the  European  Convention
    outside the Immigration Rules.  They  were  each  given  an  in-country
    right of appeal under Section 82 of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 as amended (the 2002 Act) which on 27 October 2014 each
    of them exercised.  The grounds of appeal note the sister  and  brother
    arrived when they were children and met the requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  because  there  were   very
    significant obstacles to their integration on return to India  and  for
    similar reasons their removal would place the United Kingdom in  breach
    of its obligations to respect their private and family  life  protected
    by Article 8 of the European Convention outside the Immigration  Rules.



The First-tier Tribunal Decision

 4. By a decision promulgated on  21  May  2015  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Zahed found at paragraph 11 that the  sister  had  spent  less
    than half her life in the United Kingdom and so could not succeed under
    paragraph 276ADE(1).  He found that as  at  the  date  of  the  hearing
    before him the brother had spent over half his life continuously in the
    United Kingdom.  He found that each of the sister and  brother  had  no
    family life in the United Kingdom and that their private lives had been
    established over a  time  when  they  were  unlawfully  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  He noted the sister had a boyfriend of some  years'  standing
    in the United Kingdom and was supported in the United  Kingdom  by  her
    aunt and that she was pursuing studies here.  He concluded the sister's
    removal would not be in breach of her rights protected by Article 8 and
    dismissed her appeal under both the Immigration Rules  and  Article  8.
    Having found for the brother under the Immigration  Rules  he  did  not
    consider the brother's position under Article 8 outside the Immigration
    Rules.

 5. The sister sought permission to appeal on the grounds that:-

       . The Judge had erred in failing to consider her  claim  specifically
         under sub-paragraph (vi) of paragraph 276ADE(1)  (very  significant
         obstacles to re-integration).

       . The Judge had erred in not carrying out an adequate  assessment  of
         the nature and extent of the family life of the sister and  brother
         in the United Kingdom and had  erred  in  concluding  they  had  no
         family life.

       . The Judge had erred in not considering  all  the  relevant  factors
         identified in Section 117B  of  the  2002  Act  and  in  particular
         whether each of them was not a burden  on  taxpayers  and  able  to
         integrate as provided for in Sections 117B(2) and (3) of  the  2002
         Act.

       . The Judge had  erred  in  considering  that  there  was  a  minimum
         threshold of the existence of "exceptional circumstances" before  a
         breach of Article 8 could be found and had  failed  to  conduct  an
         assessment of  the  claims  under  Article  8  complying  with  the
         procedure recommended in R (Razgar) v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27.

 6. The SSHD sought permission to appeal the  decision  in  favour  of  the
    brother on the grounds that the Judge had erred  in  assessing  whether
    the brother had spent half his life in the United Kingdom by  reference
    to the date of the hearing rather than the date of his application.  If
    assessed at the date of his application, he would not have  spent  half
    his life in the United Kingdom.

 7. By decisions of 4 and 5 August 2015 Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Fisher granted each party permission  to  appeal.   The  grant  to  the
    sister was on the basis that the Judge had arguably erred in law by  in
    not  considering  her  claim  under  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of   the
    Immigration Rules and granted permission solely  on  that  ground.   He
    granted the SSHD permission to appeal the Judge's decision  in  respect
    of the brother on the basis that it was arguable he had used the  wrong
    termination date for assessing the length of time the brother had lived
    continuously in the United Kingdom.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 8. Both sister and brother were present although they took no part in  the
    proceedings.

 9. Mr Canter submitted that although the sister  may  not  have  qualified
    under the "half life" Rule in paragraph 276ADE(1)(v) the Judge had made
    no findings whether there were "very significant obstacles" to her  re-
    integration into India under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).  Her evidence  in
    this regard was limited to what she had said in  paragraph  19  of  her
    statement which refers to her ambition to study law at  university  and
    the shortage of women police officers.

10. In response, Ms Sreeraman relied on the letter of 12 August  2015  from
    the SSHD, being a response under Procedure  Rule  24.   The  Judge  had
    considered all the evidence before him and read as a whole his decision
    dealt with the issue of the sister's return to India where  her  father
    lived.   She  is  an  Indian  national  and  had  been  living  in  the
    "ethnically Indian Diaspora in the UK".  There was no evidence that her
    re-integration into India would be unduly harsh or that there would  be
    substantial obstacles to it.  Her aunt could continue  her  support  if
    the  sister  pursued  her  studies  in  India.   Despite  the   lengthy
    relationship with her  boyfriend,  there  was  no  evidence  that  they
    planned to marry and the Judge was entitled  to  conclude  that  family
    life had not been established in that context.

11. The relevant factors for consideration under Section 117B of  the  2002
    Act were not positive points in favour of the sister but simply factors
    the Judge was required to take into account.

12. Ms Sreeraman continued that on  looking  at  paragraphs  12-15  of  the
    Judge's decision it would be seen that he had effectively had regard to
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) and had not  identified  any  very  significant
    obstacles to her re-integration in India and so was entitled  to  reach
    his conclusion at paragraph 16 of his decision rejecting  the  sister's
    claim under Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.  The assessment of
    the proportionality of the decision of the SSHD's decision in paragraph
    18 of the Judge's decision was adequate and on the facts  as  found  no
    other Tribunal would have reached a different decision.  There  was  no
    material error of law in the decision of the sister's appeal.

13. Mr Canter replied that paragraphs 12-15 of the Judge's decision  merely
    summarised the evidence before him but contained no findings  that  the
    evidence showed  there  were  no  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    sister's re-integration in India.

14. Turning to the SSHD's appeal against the Judge's finding in  favour  of
    the brother, Ms Sreeraman relied on the SSHD's grounds for  permission.
    The Judge had erred in finding that the end date for assessment whether
    an applicant had lived more than half his life in  the  United  Kingdom
    was the date of the hearing.  The relevant end date was the date of the
    application to the  SSHD  for  leave  to  remain.   The  provisions  of
    paragraph 276AO of the Immigration Rules were not  applicable  and  the
    decision should be set aside.

15. Mr Canter relied on paragraph 276AO(iii) which came into  effect  on  6
    November 2014 and provides that:-

         For the purposes of paragraph 276ADE(1) the requirement to  make  a
         valid application will not apply when the Article 8 is raised:

          i) Not applicable.

         ii) Not applicable.

        iii) in an appeal  (subject  to  the  consent  of  the  SSHD  where
             applicable).

16. He stated he had relied on this when he had presented the case for  the
    brother at  the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing.   The  effect  of  sub-
    paragraph (iii) was to waive the requirement of  there  being  a  valid
    application in an appeal.  The issue of  the  SSHD's  consent  was  not
    applicable to the brother's appeal.

17. He submitted that because there was no valid application, the end  date
    for assessment of the length of time an  applicant  had  lived  in  the
    United Kingdom could not be the date of the application and so must  be
    the date of the hearing of  the  appeal.   He  was  not  aware  of  any
    guidance from the SSHD or case  law  which  addressed  this  particular
    point.

18. Additionally or in the alternative, he  submitted  that  the  Judge  at
    paragraphs 16-18 of his decision had erred in that his consideration of
    the claim under Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules was  inadequate
    because he had not addressed the brother's claim at all.

Findings and Consideration

19. It was incumbent upon the Judge to address the sister's claim by way of
    reference to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi). At paragraph 8 of his decision he
    set out the whole of paragraph  276ADE(1)  but  did  not  consider  the
    sister's claim in that and  the  context  of  sub-paragraph  (vi):   as
    identified by Judge Fisher in his grant of permission.   This  amounted
    to a material error of law.

20. I do not accept the SSHD's submission that paragraph 276AO(iii) has  no
    application to the brother's appeal.  Paragraph  276AO  refers  to  the
    "requirement to make a valid application" (emphasis  added).   Even  if
    the applicant makes an application which is not valid and which is  not
    made in time during the currency of a previous leave, the applicant has
    nevertheless made an  application  just  that  it  does  not  meet  the
    requirement of being a valid one.  In  such  circumstances  absent  any
    guidance or authority, I find the  relevant  end  date  for  assessment
    whether an applicant has lived half his  life  in  the  United  Kingdom
    would  be  the  date  of  the  application,  whether  valid   or   not.
    Alternatively and if I am incorrect about the application date, I would
    find the next most appropriate end date would be the date of the SSHD's
    decision and if the point was not addressed by the SSHD in the  reasons
    for refusal, I would suggest that the last appropriate  date  would  be
    the date the Appellant lodged his appeal but certainly not the date  of
    the hearing.

21. In the brother's case he meets the "half life" requirement only if  the
    end date for assessment of the half life is the date of the hearing. He
    cannot meet the requirement if any earlier date is used.

22. It was also incumbent on the Judge  to  consider  the  brother's  claim
    under Article 8 of the  European  Convention  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules in the light of the paragraph 276AO(iii) argument which Mr Canter
    says was canvassed at the First-tier Tribunal hearing.

23. I would add that the Judge  appears  to  have  had  no  regard  to  the
    possible impact of his decisions which effectively separate sister  and
    brother who have been living in the same household since their  arrival
    in the United Kingdom.   Further,  the  Judge  erred  in  finding  that
    "family life is not engaged" in  his  assessment  of  the  claim  under
    Article 8  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  at  paragraph  16  of  his
    decision.  There was ample evidence before  him  that  the  sister  and
    brother had a family life with each other and with the  relatives  with
    whom they have lived since arriving in the United  Kingdom.  There  was
    also ample evidence they each had  established  a  substantial  private
    life in the United Kingdom if only by reason of the length of time that
    they have been here during which they have been educated.

24. The issue which  the  Judge  had  to  decide  was  whether  the  SSHD's
    decisions amounted to an interference with the private and family lives
    of each of the sister and brother which would be  sufficiently  serious
    to engage the State's obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention to respect their private and family lives.  He failed so  to
    do.

25. For these reasons the appeals of the sister and  the  SSHD  are  upheld
    because there are material errors of law in  the  Judge's  decision  in
    relation to each of the brother and sister.  The errors are  such  that
    the decision must be set aside in its entirety and in the circumstances
    no findings of fact can be preserved.

26. Having regard to Section 12(2) of the Tribunals Courts and  Enforcement
    Act 2007 and Practice Statement 7.2(b) and the  nature  and  extent  of
    fact-finding required, I conclude both appeals should  be  remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal to decide afresh.

Anonymity

27.  Neither sister nor brother applied  for  an  anonymity  direction  and
    having heard  the  appeals  I  do  not  consider  such  directions  are
    warranted.

NOTICE OF DECISIONS

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of law such that  it
is set aside in its entirety and both appeals are  remitted  to  the  First-
tier Tribunal for hearing afresh.


Signed/Official                                                        Crest
Date 30. xi. 2015




Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal




