
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43212/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 9th September 2014                           |On 16th September 2014     |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE

                                   Between

                    dayani lakmalee kasthuri arachchilags
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Pararajasingam, Solicitor instructed by
                  Freedman Alexander LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals with permission  a  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Oakley) promulgated on 18th March  2014  in  which  the
    judge dismissed this Sri Lankan national's appeal against a decision of
    the Respondent refusing her application to switch from  visitor  status
    to dependant of her husband, present as a Tier 2  (Entrepreneur)  under
    the points-based system.  The Respondent had  refused  the  application
    because the Rules made no provision for switching, requiring applicants
    to have been granted leave to enter as the  dependant  of  the  points-
    based migrant.

 2. In the grant of permission Upper Tribunal Judge Freeman draws attention
    to the judge's recognition that the Appellant's two children, both  who
    had been in the United Kingdom  since  2011,  attending  Clifton  Lodge
    Preparatory School, had been permitted to switch to leave in line  with
    their father, a circumstance facilitated by the fact that  the  Tier  4
    status they enjoyed was also  a  points-based  status,  and  the  Rules
    permitting switching between points based categories.

 3. The judge noted the submission that a correct application of the   case
    of   Beoku-Betts [2008] UKHL 39: to the point  that  in  assessing  the
    interference with family life and the proportionality of  the  same  to
    the legitimate economic aim as referenced by  the  application  of  the
    immigration rules the position of all the family members affected by  a
    removal must be taken into account, the position of the husband and the
    two minor children of the appellant, should result in  an  allowing  of
    the appeal because a  refusal  resulting  in  an  interference  with  a
    genuinely subsisting and significant family life  in  order  to  obtain
    formal  compliance  with   the   Rule   requiring   an   out-of-country
    application, is rarely  proportionate.   The  judge  distinguished  the
    position from Beoku Betts, at paragraphs 19 and 27 to 28, finding  that
    the Appellant's arriving here before her husband as a visitor had  been
    devised by someone to avoid the provisions of the Rules  applicable  to
    dependants of Tier 2 Entrepreneurs.  In the  context  of  that  adverse
    finding the judge found that the Appellant could easily return  to  Sri
    Lanka and apply for and obtain a visa in the  proper  way  from  there.
    The judge also found, at [32] that the Appellant and her husband  could
    easily hire a carer or manage to look after the children in the  United
    Kingdom, if necessary, whilst that was done.

 4. In his grant of permission Judge Freeman reasons that if there was some
    good reason for supposing that the Appellant's Visit  Visa  Application
    had been made to avoid the requirements of the PBS  then  the  decision
    would not be contrary to the  guidance  in  Beoku-Betts.   However,  he
    notes, the Respondent had never relied on  such  a  suggestion  in  the
    refusal letter, and the judge's decision does  not  set  out  any  good
    reason for such a conclusion.  Upper Tier Judge Freeman indicates  that
    if there was such a reason, obvious on the evidence before  the  judge,
    albeit not apparent from the decision, would be a position for argument
    before the Upper Tribunal.

 5. Before me Mr Nath readily indicated  that  there  was  nothing  in  the
    Respondent's refusal letter, or referenced in the evidence  before  the
    judge, which would substantiate such an adverse  credibility,  finding,
    and he had no argument to make on the point.  No evidence was required,
    the Respondent having raised no issues about  the  bona  fides  of  the
    Appellant.  Mr Nath confirmed that he did  not  intend  to  defend  the
    decision of the judge on  the  basis  that  the  chronology  alone  was
    sufficient to  sustain  such  a  finding,  and  told  me  that  in  the
    circumstances he was not in a position to argue that  the  refusal  was
    proportionate.

 6. The Appellant's husband was not granted his visa until April  2013  and
    the finding of the  judge  at  paragraph  19  to  the  point  that  the
    Appellant "is unable to explain why no application  was  made  at  that
    time for her to come to the United Kingdom as the dependant of an  Tier
    1 (Entrepreneur) and one would have expected that an application  would
    have been made jointly with her husband but  no  explanation  has  been
    forthcoming in the evidence" raises an issue which was not taken by the
    Respondent in the decision or in submissions. I note that the Appellant
    has a history of visiting the United Kingdom in connection with the two
    children's education here since 2011  and  so  on  its  face  there  is
    nothing unusual or suspicious about her arrival  on  3rd  October  2012
    having been issued with an entry clearance as a special visitor with  a
    child at school, valid between 26th September 2012 and  26th  September
    2013.  There is no basis to find bad faith.

 7. I find that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  was  vitiated  by
    material legal error, relying on  an  unsustainable  finding  that  the
    Appellant's in-country application was vitiated by mala fides,  to  the
    point that the interference with her and her family's life necessitated
    by requiring her to return to Sri Lanka to make an application  out  of
    country was justified  and  proportionate  to  the  legitimate  aim  of
    requiring conformity to the Immigration Rules.

 8. The error is material because as the grant  of  permission  identified,
    and Mr Nath was unable to resist, absent mala fides, this is not one of
    those rare cases  where  such  a  requirement  can  be  seen  as  being
    proportionate.

Decision

 9. I set the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  aside  and  re-make  it
    allowing the Appellant's appeal on Article 8 grounds.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge


