
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/44508/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                   |                     Decision & Reasons |
|                                      |Promulgated                             |
|On 26th January 2016                  |                     On 12th February   |
|                                      |2016                                    |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                             MR GURJENDRA SINGH
                         (anonymity ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs R Pettersen (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)
For the Respondent:    Ms L A Turnbull (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant in this appeal to the Upper Tribunal is the Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department, hereinafter, "the Secretary  of  State".
    The Respondent in this appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is  Mr  Gurjendra
    Singh,  a  national  of  India  who  was  born  on  12th  April   1989,
    hereinafter, "the claimant".  The Secretary of State has appealed, with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal against a decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Colyer) promulgated on 13th February 2015, allowing the
    claimant's appeal against the Secretary of  State's  decision  of  30th
    October 2014 to remove him from the United Kingdom.

 2. By way of background, the claimant obtained entry clearance abroad  and
    came to the UK on 7th December 2009  as  a  Tier  4  (General)  Student
    Migrant.  He subsequently obtained two further grants  of  leave  on  a
    similar basis, the latter one taking him up to 21st June 2014.  On 28th
    May 2014 he married Dr Mandeep Kaur Bhandal, who is a British  citizen,
    and on 13th June 2014, therefore within the currency  of  his  existing
    leave, he applied for leave to remain as her spouse.

 3. The Secretary of State  considered  the  claimant's  application  under
    Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) both within
    and outside the Immigration Rules.   However,  with  respect  to  those
    Rules, the Secretary of State decided that the claimant  did  not  meet
    the suitability requirements because, it was said, when  undergoing  an
    English language test on 15th January  2013  at  the  Premier  Language
    Training Centre, for  the  purpose  of  a  leave  application,  he  had
    practised deception.  Specifically it was claimed by the  Secretary  of
    State that he had used a proxy test  taker.   The  Secretary  of  State
    concluded that such was fatal to the application under the  Immigration
    Rules and that it also meant he had failed  to  show  that  there  were
    "exceptional circumstances" such as to enable him  to  succeed  outside
    the Rules.

 4. The claimant appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  there  was  a
    hearing which took place, at Nottingham, on 20th January 2015.  He gave
    oral evidence at the hearing as did  his  spouse.   Both  parties  were
    represented.  The sole issue  of  dispute  was  that  relating  to  the
    Secretary of State's view that the claimant  had  practised  deception.
    He denied it and said that he had taken the relevant  English  language
    test  himself.   At  the  hearing  the  Secretary  of  State   provided
    additional evidence in the form of  witness  statements  of  one  Peter
    Millington, an assistant director employed by the Home Office, and  one
    Rebecca Collings,  a  Home  Office  civil  servant.   Those  statements
    addressed aspects of the English language  testing  system,  compliance
    measures which had been taken to protect their integrity  and  evidence
    of abuse of the system.  The content of those statements is,  in  fact,
    now quite widely known as  they  have  been  used  in  judicial  review
    proceedings and other appeals which have addressed similar  issues  and
    concerns.  There was some further  documentation  handed  in  with  the
    statements, being a printout  of  an  online  search  relating  to  the
    Appellant and a MIDA matched data printout.

 5.  The  judge,  having  considered  the  evidence  and  having   received
    submissions from the representatives, concluded that it  had  not  been
    shown that the claimant had been involved in any deception and had  not
    used a proxy test taker.  The judge said that he  had  found  the  oral
    evidence of the claimant and his spouse  to  be  "very  credible".   He
    allowed the appeal.

 6. An application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal followed.
     The grounds contained assertions that the judge had erred  in  finding
    the witness statements and the other documentary evidence unpersuasive,
    in failing to give "due consideration to the specific  evidence"  which
    it was said identified the Appellant as an individual who had exercised
    deception and in failing to provide adequate reasons for rejecting  the
    Secretary of State's arguments.  The application was initially  refused
    by a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal but was then granted by the Upper
    Tribunal.  The salient part of the grant reads as follows;

         "In the determination  at  [18]-[21]  the  judge  referred  to  the
         further evidence provided by the Respondent.  Specifically at  [21]
         there is reference to an on-line search document and a 'MIDA'  data
         sheet.  As to the latter, the  judge  concluded  that  although  it
         refers to some numbers, there is no indication as to whom  or  what
         they relate.  However, on the other side  of  that  data  sheet  is
         details of the Appellant's test, with his name  and  other  details
         and the word 'invalid' recorded in one of the columns.  It  may  be
         that the judge in fact overlooked that part of  the  document,  and
         therefore did not appreciate its arguable significance.

         It is arguable therefore, that unlike in some  other  cases,  there
         was  before  the  First-tier  Judge  specific  evidence  from   the
         Respondent in relation to the two 'general' witness statements, the
         data sheet indicating that the test taken by the Appellant on  15th
         January 2013 was invalid.  Notwithstanding the other reasons  given
         by the judge for resolving the appeal in favour of the Appellant in
         terms of the allegation of deception, I consider it  arguable  that
         the First-tier Judge erred in law in overlooking evidence  specific
         to this Appellant in relation to the allegation of deception in the
         obtaining of the English language test certificate".

 7. There was then a hearing before  the  Upper  Tribunal  (before  me)  to
    consider whether the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained  an
    error of law and, if so, what should follow from that.  I was addressed
    by both representatives and have taken into account what each  of  them
    has had to say.

 8. The judge, in addressing the new evidence which had  been  provided  to
    him on the day of the hearing, said this;

         "19. The first statement is that of  Peter  Millington  who  is  an
             assistant  director  employed  by  the  Home  Office  who   is
             responsible for the Network of Sponsor Compliance Officers  in
             the Midlands and North.  It is a general statement  explaining
             the history of English language testing and the measures taken
             in respect of compliance with the requirements  of  evidential
             practice.  There is no reference to this Appellant or  to  his
             testing centre.

         20.  The second witness statement made in the same  proceedings  is
             that of Rebecca Collings a Home Office civil  servant  working
             within the UK Visa and Immigration  Directorate  who  supports
             the delivery of decisions to grant or refuse leave to enter or
             stay in the UK.  Part of her role is to  oversee  delivery  of
             Secure English Language Testing (SELT) on behalf of  the  Home
             Office.  Her statement provides a background to  this  system;
             she also refers to abuse  at  test  centres  and  Home  Office
             response.  She concludes by referring to deception and Section
             10 decisions.  However in her statement she makes no reference
             to this Appellant.  The witness  makes  no  reference  to  the
             Appellant's English language test or the test centre.

         21.  The third document provided on the day of the hearing  appears
             to be a printout of an online search giving Trinity ID; giving
             the Appellant's name and date of birth and the  third  one  is
             just his name.  It shows no records found matching your search
             criteria.  Attached to that is a MIDA matched data.  It refers
             to some numbers but there is no indication as to who  or  what
             these refer to.  I find that these documents do not in any way
             establish that the Appellant has used deception in his English
             language test".

 9. The judge then went on  to  observe  that  the  claimant  had  provided
    evidence to the effect that he had sat an ESOL test on  6th  June  2014
    which he had passed, that the claimant had, in the view of  the  judge,
    acted in the way an innocent individual accused of deception would have
    done and that he had, in the view of the judge, provided credible  oral
    evidence.  In concluding his  analysis  of  the  evidence  relevant  to
    deception the judge said this;

         "27. I find the Appellant to be a credible witness and I form  this
             decision after reading his statement, examining the  documents
             before me and listening to his evidence.

         28.  I find that  there  is  no  credible  evidence  before  me  to
             indicate that this Appellant was not the person who  took  the
             test.  There is no evidence of his using a proxy.

         29.  I find that the Respondent's allegation that the Appellant has
             submitted false information in the form of fraudulent  English
             language certificates and therefore he has attempted to obtain
             leave by deception has not been established".

10. The judge then went on to consider the various  other  aspects  of  the
    Immigration Rules relevant to the claimant's application and appeal and
    resolved all of those in the claimant's  favour.   There  has  been  no
    challenge to that part of his determination.

11. It does appear, in looking at paragraph 21 of the  determination,  that
    the judge only had regard to one side of a two page document which  had
    been handed in to him on the morning of the hearing and which comprised
    the "MIDA" document.  I  say  that  because  the  judge  describes  the
    document as simply being one which "refers to some numbers"  and  which
    gives no indication "as to who or what  these  refer  to".   That  does
    appear to be an apt  and  accurate  description  of  one  side  of  the
    document but the other  side  does,  as  was  noted  in  the  grant  of
    permission, contain the  Appellant's  name,  his  date  of  birth,  his
    nationality, the date of the relevant English  language  test  and  the
    word "invalid".  I suppose  that  if  a  party  chooses  only  to  hand
    documentary evidence to a judge on the morning of the hearing then that
    party does run the risk  of  such  evidence  not  being  considered  as
    carefully as  it  would  have  been  had  it  been  submitted  earlier.
    Nevertheless, as I say, it does seem to me  that  the  judge  erred  in
    failing to consider both sides of the document.  However, it  does  not
    seem to me that that really  takes  matters  very  much  further.   Mrs
    Pettersen  was  not  able  to  assist  me  by  demonstrating  that  the
    information in the document which the judge seemed to have  overlooked,
    could viably have led to any different outcome.  The document indicates
    that the verification systems used by the Home Office  had  flagged  up
    the particular test as one  which  had  given  concerns  but  there  is
    nothing in the document to indicate, specifically, what those  concerns
    were or why there had been concerns.  The judge had clearly given  very
    careful consideration to the evidence of the claimant and had reached a
    clear view that his oral and written evidence was credible.  The  judge
    had attached some weight to his having subsequently passed a  different
    test which appeared to be of a  similar  standard  though  I  note  Mrs
    Pettersen's observation that that  was  taken  some  considerable  time
    after the initial test.  However, the judge did not treat  the  passing
    of that test as decisive but, merely, one factor  amongst  others.   It
    was open to the judge to accord importance to the point  that  much  of
    the new evidence provided was of  a  general  rather  than  a  specific
    nature and, in my judgment, even if he had  considered  the  full  MIDA
    document his concerns would have remained bearing in mind  the  limited
    assistance that document was capable of  giving.   I  accept  that  the
    generalised information contained in the witness  statements  has  some
    force and I accept that other judges might have given more weight to it
    than did this judge.  However,  that  is  not  the  point.   The  judge
    reached findings and conclusions which were open to him  and  which  he
    adequately explained.   His  failure  to  consider  the  whole  of  the
    documentation, as noted above, does not, in my judgment, translate into
    an error of law, and even if it did, it  would  not  translate  into  a
    material one.

12. In light of the above, therefore, my conclusion is to the  effect  that
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve an error of law
    and its decision should, therefore, stand.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  an  error  of  law.
Its decision shall stand.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make any  anonymity  direction,  I  was  not
invited to make such a direction and I do not do so.

Signed                              Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The First-tier Tribunal made a full fee award.  I make the same award.


Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway


