
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/44277/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24 July 2014                               |On 28th July 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE LEWIS
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MISS RADHIKA THAPA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr H Shoeb instructed by Howe & Co Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. This is an  appeal  against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    promulgated on 14 March 2014.  By that decision the First-tier Tribunal
    allowed an appeal by Miss Radhika Thapa against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department refusing her leave to remain
    in the United Kingdom.  The basis of that decision was Article 8 of the
    European Convention on  Human  Rights.   The  Secretary  of  State  now
    appeals against that decision.

 2. Ms Thapa, the respondent, is a citizen of Nepal and she was born  on  1
    August 1986.  Her father was a Gurkha who served  with  distinction  in
    the British Army in the Second World War.  He was discharged  from  the
    British Army in 1953.  He had always, as the First-tier Tribunal found,
    intended to settle in the United Kingdom and he did so in 2009 with his
    wife and younger daughter.  Sadly, he died in July 2011.  His wife, the
    respondent's mother, then moved in to live with  the  younger  daughter
    and her husband in February 2013.

 3. The respondent came to the United Kingdom on 23 March 2013 to visit her
    mother and her sister.  She had previously always lived in Nepal.   Her
    evidence was, and the First-tier Tribunal accepted it,  that  when  she
    came to England the position in relation to her mother was sadly  worse
    than she expected.  Her mother was depressed after  the  death  of  her
    husband and had a number of medical problems as well.  After less  than
    one year in the United Kingdom Miss Thapa applied for leave to  remain.
    The Secretary of State  refused  that  application.   So  far  as  Miss
    Thapa's private life in the United Kingdom is  concerned  she  did  not
    satisfy paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.  Miss Thapa did  not
    have the requisite period of residence in the United Kingdom to qualify
    under that Rule.

 4. The question then arose as  to  whether  there  were  other  compelling
    circumstances such as would exceptionally justify the grant of leave to
    remain  outside  the  Immigration  Rules.   In  relation  to  that  the
    Secretary of State said this in her decision letter of 11 October 2013:

         "It has also been considered whether the  particular  circumstances
         set out in your application  constitute  exceptional  circumstances
         which, consistent with the right to respect for private and  family
         life contained in Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
         Rights, might warrant consideration by the Secretary of State of  a
         grant of  leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  outside  the
         requirements of the Immigration Rules.  It has  been  decided  that
         they do not, because although you have mentioned that your mother's
         health is deteriorating, no evidence has been provided  to  support
         this claim.  In addition  your  mother  has  lived  in  the  United
         Kingdom for two years on her own since your father died and managed
         to cope.  Finally your sister lives in the United Kingdom  and  can
         provide care and assistance to  your  mother  if  and  when  it  is
         needed.  With reference to your financial and emotional  dependence
         on your mother, this is not  considered  to  be  a  compelling  and
         compassionate reason to be granted as you are 27 years old and able
         to support yourself with a job.  Lastly, it  has  been  noted  that
         your father was a Gurkha and granted leave to remain in the  United
         Kingdom towards the end of his life.  You  state  that  if  he  was
         granted this right before then you yourself would have been born in
         Britain  and  a  British  citizen.   However,  this  is  a   purely
         hypothetical argument and  therefore  not  considered  exceptional.
         Your application for leave to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  is
         therefore refused."

 5. The respondent appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   She  contended
    first that she was indeed enjoying family life with her mother and that
    family life fell within the scope  of  Article  8(1).   Secondly,  Miss
    Thapa contended that removal would be  disproportionate  under  Article
    8(2) of the European Convention on Human Rights.  One of the facts upon
    which Miss Thapa sought to rely was this.  Her father had been a Gurkha
    serving in the British Army.  Unlike others who served in  the  British
    Army, Gurkhas  were  not  allowed  to  settle  in  the  United  Kingdom
    following their discharge from the army.  That policy  changed  in,  we
    believe,  about  1997.   The  respondent  contended  that  Gurkhas  had
    suffered an historic injustice in that if  they  had  been  allowed  to
    settle in the United Kingdom before the change in  the  law  permitting
    them to do so then her father would have come to the United Kingdom and
    settled here much earlier.  As his then dependent daughter, Miss  Thapa
    says she too would have been able to come here and settle.  Miss  Thapa
    contended  that  that  amounts  to   an   exceptional   or   compelling
    circumstance justifying the grant of leave to remain and  submits  that
    it would be disproportionate to refuse her leave to remain.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal found that the respondent could not satisfy the
    requirement for leave under the  Immigration  Rules  and  there  is  no
    challenge to that finding.  The First-tier Tribunal then turned to  the
    question of Article 8.

 7. First the Tribunal considered whether in fact the relationship  between
    the respondent and her mother did amount to family life falling  within
    the scope of Article 8(1).  It considered that issue in accordance with
    the first decision of the Upper Tribunal in Ghising [2012] UKUT  00160.
    It considered whether the relationship between  the  respondent  as  an
    adult child and her  mother  did  constitute  family  life  within  the
    meaning of Article 8(1).  In very many instances  of  course  the  fact
    that there are emotional bonds between a parent and another child  will
    not constitute the enjoyment of family life within the Article.   There
    will however be cases where an adult child  does  have  a  relationship
    with a parent which  does  constitute  the  enjoyment  of  family  life
    falling within Article  8(1).   Applying  that  guidance  the  Tribunal
    considered the particular  factors  in  the  relationship  between  the
    respondent and her mother.   It  considered  the  mother's  health,  it
    considered the extent to which the respondent provided  assistance  and
    care to her mother and they considered the bonds between the mother and
    the child.  The Tribunal concluded that it was  satisfied,  just,  that
    the respondent had established that family life existed between her and
    her mother for the purposes of  Article  8  of  the  Convention.   That
    finding is not challenged by the Secretary of State on appeal.

 8. The Tribunal then turned to Article 8(2) to  consider  whether  or  not
    removal, which would involve an interference with that family life, was
    justified.  At paragraph 32 the Tribunal  recognised  that  refusal  of
    leave pursued a legitimate aim, in this case  the  economic  well-being
    achieved through effective immigration control.  The next question then
    is whether the refusal decision in this case was proportionate to  that
    legitimate aim.  The Tribunal referred to the well-known case of Gurung
    & Others [2013] 1 WLR 2546.  That dealt with  the  position  of  family
    members of Gurkhas who had been unable to settle in the United  Kingdom
    until a time at which their child was not eligible  to  settle  in  the
    United Kingdom.

 9. At paragraph 34 the Tribunal said this:

         "In Ghising the Upper Tribunal, following the Court  of  Appeal  in
         Gurung, stated that where it is found that  Article  8  is  engaged
         and, but for the historic wrong,  the  appellant  would  have  been
         settled in the  United  Kingdom  long  ago,  this  will  ordinarily
         determine the outcome of the Article 8  proportionality  assessment
         in an appellant's favour,  where  the  matters  relied  on  by  the
         Secretary of State or Entry Clearance Officer consist solely of the
         public interest in maintaining a firm immigration policy.   It  can
         therefore be  seen  that  the  appellants  in  Gurkha  and  British
         Overseas Citizens cases will not necessarily succeed,  even  though
         their family life engages Article 8(1) and the evidence shows  that
         they would have come to the United Kingdom with their  father,  but
         for the injustice that prevented  the  latter  from  settling  here
         earlier.  If the respondent can point to matters over and above the
         public interest in maintaining  a  firm  immigration  policy  which
         argue in favour of removal of the refusal of leave to enter,  these
         matters must be given appropriate weight  in  the  balance  in  the
         respondent's favour."

10. The Tribunal then gave example  of  some  of  the  factors  that  might
    outweigh the interests of the person in being allowed to  remain  here.
    It refers for example to the person having a bad immigration history or
    to criminal behaviour.  There may well be other factors  that  may  tip
    the  balance.   The  Tribunal  considered  the  respondent's   position
    carefully.  It considered the fact that she had come as a  visitor  and
    then made this application for  settlement  rather  than  returning  to
    Nepal.  However the Tribunal was satisfied that that  was  because  she
    had discovered that the mother was unwell and was  much  more  ill  and
    depressed than the respondent had thought. These are  the  findings  of
    fact that the Tribunal made and which it was entitled to reach  on  the
    evidence before them.  It therefore concluded this was not a case where
    the respondent was seeking to manipulate the immigration system or  had
    a bad immigration history.  It was  a  case  where  she  came  to  this
    country and her mother's condition was simply worse than she thought it
    was.  The Tribunal therefore concluded that it was satisfied  that  the
    respondent's father and his family were the victims  of  the  injustice
    identified in the case of Gurung. In all those circumstances  therefore
    the  Tribunal  considered  that  it   would   be   a   disproportionate
    interference with her right to a family life under Article 8  and  with
    the rights of her mother to refuse permission to remain.

11. The Secretary of State challenges  this  decision  on  essentially  one
    ground and says that the judge erred in law by failing to consider  the
    decision in Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct  approach)  [2013]
    UKUT 640 (IAC) and failing to consider whether there were good  grounds
    for granting leave outside the Immigration Rules.  We bear in mind  the
    law  generally  in  relation  to  Article  8(2)   and   assessment   of
    proportionality.  That is now settled by the decisions such as those in
    The Queen (on the application of Nagre) v SSHD, MF  (Nigeria)  [2014  1
    WLR 544 and most recently confirmed again by the  Court  of  Appeal  in
    Haleemudeen  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  558.   There  is  no  doubt  that   the
    maintenance of effective immigration control is a  legitimate  aim  and
    the question is whether removal is proportionate.  The  starting  point
    for that assessment is the Immigration Rules which set out the  context
    whereby the interests of immigration control are balanced  against  the
    interests of those who wish to come to this country.   The  respondent,
    Miss Thapa, does not qualify under the Immigration Rules.  There  would
    therefore need to be compelling circumstances outside  those  Rules  to
    justify the consideration  of  the  grant  of  leave  to  remain.   The
    compelling circumstances relied on here is the historic injustice which
    the Court of Appeal recognised in the case of  Gurung.   The  Court  of
    Appeal said in relation to that matter, at paragraph 38 that:

         "The historic injustice is only one of the factors  to  be  weighed
         against the need to maintain a firm and  fair  immigration  policy.
         It is not necessarily determinative"

    and then, at paragraph 42, the Court of Appeal said this:

         "If a Gurkha can show that, but  for  the  historic  injustice,  he
         would have settled in  the  United  Kingdom  at  a  time  when  his
         dependent, now adult child, would have been able to  accompany  him
         as a dependent child under the age of 18, that is a  strong  reason
         for holding that it is proportionate to permit the adult  child  to
         join his family now."

12. Against that background we consider the position in the  present  case.
    First as we say we remind ourselves that the Tribunal found  just  that
    family life was established under Article 8(1)  and  therefore  we  are
    dealing with proportionality under Article 8(2).  It  is  correct  that
    the notice of appeal says that the Tribunal did not refer expressly  to
    the decision in Gulshan but the question for us is whether or  not  the
    Tribunal did in substance address the question of  whether  there  were
    compelling circumstances here, bearing in mind that the respondent  did
    not satisfy the requirements of the Immigration Rules  and  whether  it
    came to a response which was within the range of responses open to  it.
    In our judgment it  is  clear  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  in
    substance  address  the  question  of  whether  there  were  compelling
    circumstances justifying the grant of leave outside the  Rules.   Those
    circumstances were the strong factor that they found,  that  there  had
    been an historic injustice here which had prevented Miss Thapa's father
    and her entering the United Kingdom much earlier.

13. Ms Isherwood for the Secretary of State made a  number  of  submissions
    about why removal might be proportionate,  bearing  in  mind  that  the
    respondent had come on a visit visa, had been here for  only  one  year
    and that the mother had a support  network  with  her  other  daughter.
    Those factors were all factors that the Tribunal did take into  account
    both in assessing family life and in assessing whether or  not  it  was
    proportionate.  In our judgment there was no error of law on  the  part
    of the Tribunal in its determination.  It came to a decision  which  is
    within the range of responses open to it.  It may well  be  that  other
    Tribunals would have reached a decision that is different  and  it  may
    well be that some might regard the  decision  of  this  Tribunal  as  a
    generous decision but we are satisfied that the Tribunal did  correctly
    address itself in law.   It  considered  whether  there  was  a  family
    relationship.    It   considered   whether   there   were   exceptional
    circumstances and it found  that  there  were  because  of  the  strong
    interest in remedying the injustice  to  Gurkhas.   It  considered  the
    relevant factors to see whether or not there was anything  else  to  be
    added to the aim of fair and effective immigration  and  it  ultimately
    concluded that it would be disproportionate to  refuse  leave  to  Miss
    Thapa.  In our judgment there is no error of law in that  decision  and
    we therefore dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.







Signed                                  Date


Mr Justice Lewis


