
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/44099/2014
                                                               IA/44100/2014
                                                               IA/44112/2014
                                                               IA/44117/2014
                                                               IA/44135/2014
                                                               IA/44142/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th November 2015                |On 16th December 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     deputy upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                             Amtul Siraj Gazala
                            Mohammed Kaleemullah
                                     MH
                                     MR
                                     AU
                                     AJ
                         (ANONYMITY orders not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Z Malik, Counsel instructed by Malik Law Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellants are all citizens of Pakistan.  They comprise Amtul Siraj
    Gazala born on 19th June 1979, her husband Mohammed Kaleemullah born on
    15th March 1968, and their  four  children  born  respectively  on  6th
    September 2000, 28th June 2005, and 10th  June  2013.   The  two  elder
    children are twins.  The first Appellant arrived in the UK in September
    2006 when she was given leave to enter as a student until 31st  January
    2008.   This  was  subsequently  extended  until   31st   March   2009.
    Subsequent applications for further leave to remain were refused.   The
    remaining Appellants with the exception of the  youngest  child  joined
    the first Appellant in the UK on 16th January 2007.  They were  granted
    leave to enter and remain  in  line  with  the  first  Appellant.   The
    youngest child was born in the UK.  Eventually on 7th  April  2014  all
    the Appellants made an application for leave to remain on the basis  of
    their human rights.  These applications were all  refused  for  reasons
    given in Notices of Decision dated 17th October 2014.  At the same time
    the Respondent decided to remove the Appellants under the provisions of
    Section 10  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  1999.   All  the  Appellants
    appealed, and their appeals were heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Eldridge (the Judge) sitting  at  Richmond  on  21st  April  2015.   He
    decided to dismiss the appeals for the reasons given  in  his  Decision
    dated 6th May  2015.   The  Appellants  sought  leave  to  appeal  that
    Decision, and on 16th July 2015 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the Decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Judge dismissed the appeals for these reasons.   He  accepted  that
    this was a family unit which would be allowed to remain in  the  UK  or
    removed together.  The case for the Appellants was that the three elder
    children have lived continuously in the UK since January 2007, a period
    in excess of eight years.  They could therefore qualify  for  leave  to
    remain under the provisions  of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  of  HC  395,
    particularly as it would not be reasonable to expect  those  Appellants
    to leave the UK.  The  Judge  made  appropriate  findings  of  fact  in
    respect of that issue.  He found that  Haseeb  was  "an  above  average
    pupil scholastically, doing well at school and is adaptable".  His twin
    brother Requeeb was "a gifted sportsman, achieving well at table tennis
    and cricket".  Their brother Uzair was in Year 5 at primary school  and
    was "achieving above the national curriculum expectations".   They  had
    effectively received all of their education in  English,  and  if  they
    returned to India, their education would be in Hindi.  The family could
    not afford the cost of international schools.  The family had lived  in
    Saudi Arabia prior to coming to the UK, and the children of the  family
    had only ever spent one  month  in  India.   The  children  were  fully
    integrated into the British way of life.  However, the  Judge  was  not
    satisfied that the children had no  understanding  of  Hindi  owing  to
    their background.

 4. The Judge considered the best  interests  of  all  the  children  as  a
    primary consideration, and concluded that it was in the best  interests
    of the three older children that  they  remained  and  continued  their
    education in the  UK.   The  Judge  then  considered  if  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect those Appellants to leave the UK.   He  took  into
    account the factors to be considered as given in EV  (Philippines)  and
    Others  v  SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  874  and  Azimi-Moayed  and  Others
    (Decisions affecting children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT  197  (IAC).
    However, the Judge concluded that the  public  interest  considerations
    outweighed all others and therefore it was reasonable to expect all the
    Appellants to leave the UK.  In this connection, the  Judge  took  into
    account the factors given in Section 117B Nationality, Immigration  and
    Asylum Act  2002.   In  particular,  he  took  into  account  the  poor
    immigration history of the family and the cost to the economy of the UK
    of the family remaining.

 5. The grounds of application argued that the Judge had erred  in  law  in
    coming to his conclusion in that he had failed to take  the  initiative
    and cause enquiries to be made to ascertain the best interests  of  the
    minor Appellants.  At the hearing before me, Mr Malik did not rely upon
    these grounds, but instead argued that the  Judge  had  relied  upon  a
    perverse finding as to the ability of the relevant children to gain  an
    understanding of Hindi on their return to India.  Likewise,  the  Judge
    had made a finding not based in evidence about the  ability  of  Haseeb
    and Requeeb to pursue their interest in cricket in India.  Further, the
    Judge had erred in law by taking into account the provisions of Section
    117B(4) and (5) of the 2002 Act because those provisions  related  only
    to a "person" which did not include children.  Finally, the  Judge  had
    erred in law by considering the  proportionality  of  the  Respondent's
    Decision and not whether it was reasonable for the three elder children
    to leave the UK.  The Judge had asked himself the wrong question.

 6. In response, Mr Whitwell referred to the Rule 24 response and submitted
    that there had been no error of law in the Decision of the  Judge.   He
    pointed out that the grounds of application relied  upon  by  Mr  Malik
    today had not been mentioned in the written grounds submitted with  the
    application for leave to appeal.  In any event, the Judge had carefully
    analysed the relevant evidence and directed himself appropriately.   He
    had found that it would be  in  the  best  interests  of  the  relevant
    children to remain in the UK, but nevertheless  his  Decision  that  it
    would not be reasonable for the relevant minor Appellants to remain  in
    the UK was not irrational nor perverse, and was a Decision open to him.
     The Judge had given adequate reasons for that Decision.

 7. I find no error of law in the Decision  of  the  Judge.   The  original
    written grounds of application have no merit.  They complain  that  the
    Judge did not investigate sufficiently himself in order to decide  upon
    the best interests of the minor Appellants.   In  the  context  of  the
    Decision of the Judge, this complaint is irrelevant.  The  Judge  found
    that it would be in the best interests of the three elder  children  to
    remain in the UK, and decided the appeals on that basis.

 8. As regards the  grounds  argued  at  the  hearing,  I  agree  with  the
    submissions of Mr Whitwell.  The Judge made findings of fact which were
    open to him, and he explained at paragraph 31 of the  Decision  why  he
    was not satisfied that the elder children had no understanding  at  all
    of Hindi which would put them at a  great  disadvantage  in  continuing
    their education in India.  The Judge found that it would be in the best
    interests of the three elder children to remain in the UK,  but  as  he
    stated at paragraph 37 of the Decision,  this  factor  was  not  to  be
    treated as a trump card.  The Judge correctly went on to weigh the best
    interests of the children against  the  public  interest  in  order  to
    consider the reasonableness or proportionality of them remaining in the
    UK.  In this connection, there was no error of law in the Judge  taking
    account of the relevant factors amongst those set out in  Section  117B
    of the 2002 Act.  The Judge came to a conclusion which was open to  him
    and which he adequately explained.  There was no error of law.

Notice of Decision

The making of the Decisions of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside those Decisions.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did make orders  for  anonymity  but  there  was  no
application made to me for those orders  to  be  continued  and  I  find  no
reason to do so.  I lift the orders for anonymity  made  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

