
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)               Appeal Number: IA/44287/2013


                                                  IA/46964/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                   |Determination Promulgated|
|On: 7th July 2014                      |On 21st July 2014        |
|                                       |                         |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Dominic Itodo + 3
                              David Oche Itodo
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                 Respondents

For the Appellant:     Ms Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr Ceesay, IAS Manchester


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1.  The  Respondents  are  all  nationals  of  Nigeria.  The  first
       Respondent was born on the 27th May 1967 and he is the father of
       the second Respondent born on the 30th  March  2004.  The  three
       dependents to his appeal are his wife and other two children. On
       the 20th March 2014 the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  VA  Lowe)
       allowed their linked appeals against the  Secretary  of  State's
       decision to refuse to vary their leave to remain and  to  remove
       them from the United Kingdom pursuant to s47 of the Immigration,
       Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  The Secretary of State now has
       permission to appeal against the decision.

    2. The First Respondent had been in the UK since  2008  with  valid
       leave, his family having joined him in 2009.  He had  come  here
       as  a  student.  He  was  already  a  qualified  doctor,  having
       graduated in medicine in Nigeria. He  is  not  however  able  to
       practice in the UK, furthering his career and  gaining  clinical
       experience, until he has passed his  PLAB  exams.  He  has  been
       pursuing this, and  in  2011  was  awarded  an  MPhil  from  the
       University of Manchester in Clinical Neuroscience.    He had, at
       some point prior to the completion of that degree, been  refused
       an extension  of  his  leave  to  remain  and  had  successfully
       appealed  this   decision   on   human   rights   grounds.   The
       determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  in  that  appeal  (by
       Judge Simpson) had found the removal  of  the  family  to  be  a
       disproportionate interference with their private  lives,  having
       particular regard to the fact that the First Respondent was part
       way through his PLABS, he had invested a considerable amount  of
       money in his education here, he and his wife were  both  working
       and contributing to the economy,  their  children  were  settled
       here and it would be contrary to their best interests to  remove
       them. The Secretary of State accordingly granted  further  leave
       to remain, valid until the 16th August 2013.

    3. The family then made a further application for leave  to  remain
       that is the subject of the appeal before  me.  The  applications
       were refused with reference to Appendix FM and paragraph  276ADE
       of the Rules. None of  those  provisions  availed  this  family.
       Their submission was that  they  should  be  given  a  grant  of
       further leave outside of the rules inter  alia   to  enable  the
       First Respondent to complete his PLABS.  The Secretary of  State
       was not  however  satisfied  that  there  were  any  exceptional
       circumstances and rejected the applications.

    4. On appeal the Respondents gave numerous reasons why they did not
       want to return to Nigeria at present.  Apart  from  the  private
       life arguments surrounding the First Respondent's education  and
       career in the UK (in which respect they relied  heavily  on  the
       earlier determination of Judge Simpson), there was the  on-going
       inter-religious violence in their native northern  Nigeria,  the
       evidence that the children were very  unsettled  and  afraid  of
       returning to their home town because of  Boko  Haram,  and  that
       they were settled at school. It was submitted that it  would  in
       all the circumstances be contrary to their  best  interests  for
       them to leave the UK at the moment.  There  was  a  considerable
       amount of country background  evidence  submitted,  relied  upon
       because the family are from Kaduna and the First Respondent is a
       church leader.

    5. The determination sets out the evidence with great care.  It was
       accepted by the Respondents that they met neither the provisions
       of Appendix FM nor paragraph 276ADE. This application had always
       been  for  'leave  outside  of  the  rules'  because  the  rules
       contained  no  provision   that   addressed   their   particular
       situation.  The First-tier Tribunal nevertheless dealt in detail
       (at paragraphs 20-22) with why the Respondents did  not  qualify
       under any of the 'Article 8' provisions  in  the  Rules.  Having
       done so Judge Lowe states "I also note  that  the  reference  to
       discretionary  leave  outside  the   immigration   rules   where
       warranted by family and/or private life is a tacit acceptance by
       the decision-maker  that  there  are  some  circumstances  where
       Appendix FM and para 276ADE do not cover all  the  eventualities
       envisaged by Article 8". Finding that Article  8  still  has  "a
       role to play", the determination goes on to consider it  outside
       of the Rules and in line with the  approach  advocated  by  Lord
       Bingham in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.

    6. The determination sets out the legitimate Article 8(2) aims that
       the Secretary of  State  pursues  in  making  the  decision  and
       acknowledges the weight to  be  attached  to  the  Secretary  of
       State's right to control our borders.  It goes on to discuss the
       scope of the Tribunal's power  to  review,  the  authorities  of
       Izuazu, Nagre, and Gulshan and the "two part test" suggested  by
       the latter two. Having done that the determination  goes  on  to
       identify a number of factors which taken cumulatively, amount to
       "arguable good grounds" to look at Article 8 (paragraph 30)  and
       ultimately to render the decision  disproportionate  (paragraphs
       31-34).   These are i) that the couple have  always  had  lawful
       leave to remain and may  have  been  badly  advised  about  what
       applications to  make  because  it  seems  that  they  may  have
       qualified  for  leave  under  a  different  points-based  system
       category, ii) that the Secretary of State paid inadequate regard
       to the First Respondent's largely self-funded  medical  research
       at two UK universities and his research contract with  the  NHS,
       iii) the fact that both adults  were  working  in  the  NHS  and
       contributing in tax payments,  iv)  that  the  family  are  well
       integrated into their community, that v) Judge Simpson had found
       removal to be contrary to the children's best interests and that
       it would be disproportionate to remove  them.    In  respect  of
       that last matter Judge Lowe noted that the family's private life
       had only grown "stronger and deeper" in the  three  years  since
       Judge Simpson's decision.  In conclusion Judge Lowe found  there
       to be "genuinely exceptional circumstances" and that there would
       be "unjustifiably harsh consequences for the family  concerned".
       He allowed the appeal on Article 8 grounds.

    7. The Secretary of State now appeals on  the  grounds  that  Judge
       Lowe failed to clearly identify why there  were  "arguable  good
       grounds" to go on to examine Razgar Article 8 per Gulshan.


Error of Law

    8. The grounds of appeal are entirely without merit and  amount  to
       no more than a disagreement with  the  findings  made  by  Judge
       Lowe. This determination clearly identified the  relevant  case-
       law and the Judge directed himself to give careful consideration
       to the evidence.  He was  clearly  aware  of  the  Secretary  of
       State's view about the weight to be attached to the  Rules,  and
       that the number of cases that were likely to succeed outside  of
       the Rules would be small in number.

    9. I note that the grounds of appeal take no issue with the  actual
       proportionality balancing exercise. It is in these circumstances
       nonsensical to challenge the decision on  the  basis  that  some
       additional hurdle was not  surmounted  first.  The  guidance  in
       Nagre and Gulshan does  not  in  fact  introduce  an  additional
       hurdle. There is no "two stage test". All these decisions say is
       that where there is no arguably good case it is not necessary to
       go to on conduct a full Razgar proportionality assessment.  They
       do not introduce any prohibition to so doing. They underline the
       very great weight to be attached to  the  Secretary  of  State's
       view about where the balance should be struck.  Judge  Lowe  has
       done  that   in   the   course   of   a   perfectly   reasonable
       proportionality assessment as well as in  assessing,  as  he  in
       fact does at paragraph 30, whether there is  "an  arguable  good
       case".

   10. The determination contains no error of law.


Decisions

   11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error of law
       and it is upheld.





                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                              17th July 2014




Post-Script

This is the written determination of  my  oral  decision  delivered  in
court on the 7th July. Since the hearing my decision has been fortified
by the decision in MM and Ors v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 985 at paras 127 -
134 where Aikens LJ holds that there is  no  utility  in  imposing  the
"further, intermediary test" thought to have been introduced  by  Nagre
and Gulshan.


