
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/44392/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|on 15 September 2015                 |On 17 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                         Florence Abuor Okoh OKONKWO
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Byrne, Advocate, instructed by Drummond Miller,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, born on 28 November  1965.   She
    appeals against a determination by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Morrison,
    promulgated on 26 January 2015.  Judge Morrison recorded the appeal  as
    taken against the respondent's decisions of 30 September 2014 to refuse
    her leave to remain in the UK and to remove her to Nigeria.

 2. The appellant says that she entered the UK unlawfully  in  August  2001
    with her daughter, Esther Onyeka Okonkwo, also a  citizen  of  Nigeria,
    born on 7 October 1995.  An application was made for leave to remain in
    the UK on 11 May 2010, apparently on the basis of Article  8  of  ECHR,
    outside the Immigration Rules.

 3. After reaching the age of 18,  the  appellant's  daughter  was  granted
    leave to remain on the basis of meeting the requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

 4. On 4 November 2014 the appellant filed notice  of  appeal  to  the  FtT
    against a decision by the respondent served on her on 22 October  2014.
    She attaches copies of a decision to remove her dated 20th  and  served
    on 22 October 2014 and of an explanatory letter by the respondent  also
    dated 20 October 2014.  The letter deals with the case in terms of  the
    Immigration Rules  Appendix  FM  (family  life)  and  paragraph  276ADE
    (private life) of the Rules as they came into effect on  9  July  2012.
    The  respondent  finds  that  the  appellant  does   not   meet   those
    requirements, that there are  no  exceptional  circumstances  to  grant
    leave outside the Rules, and no reasons in terms of paragraph 353B such
    that her removal would not be appropriate.

 5. It appears from the file that the appellant may have attached copies of
    both the September and October decisions to her notice of appeal.   The
    appeal  should  properly  have  been  considered  against   the   later
    decisions.  However, this makes no difference to the substance  of  the
    case and the matter was not mentioned either in the FtT or in the UT.

 6. In her grounds of appeal to the FtT  the  appellant  relied  only  upon
    Article 8 of ECHR, outwith the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

 7. In his determination Judge  Morrison  acknowledged  that  this  was  an
    unusual case in that the appellant's daughter had  discretionary  leave
    to remain and that  the  return  of  the  appellant  would  be  a  very
    disappointing result for both of them, but concluded  at  paragraph  28
    that "... while there will be a substantial interference to the  family
    life which exists between Esther and the appellant ... the decision  is
    proportionate."

 8. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal,  on  2
    grounds:

         (i) The respondent's decision of 20 October 2014 was  ultra  vires,
         on the authority of Edgehill v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ  1241.   Having
         submitted her original application in 2010 and claiming  to  having
         entered in 2001, the appellant might have qualified under the  "old
         Rules" in terms of "the long  residence  rule  requiring  14  years
         continuous lawful  residence.   While  the  period  of  time  stops
         following issuance of a notice of liability to remove, the issuance
         of that notice in this  case  on  20  October  2014  was  unlawful,
         predicated upon for its lawful authority the ultra  vires  decision
         under paragraph 276ADE."   The point was not raised before the FtT,
         but was of such jurisdictional and obvious importance as to merit a
         grant of permission.

         (ii) The FtT failed to have regard to the length of the applicant's
         residence which was "on or around 14 years".

 9. On 19 March 2014 FtT Judge Osborne  granted  permission,  in  light  of
    Edgehill.

10. On 26 March 2014 the respondent made a written response to the grant of
    permission.  This is based on Singh v SSHD [2015] EWCA  Civ  74,  which
    resolved the conflict between Edgehill and Haleemudeen  v  SSHD  [2014]
    EWCA Civ 558.

11. It is common ground that applying Singh, this case would not  fall  for
    consideration under the "old" Rules.

12. The appellant's case moved on as set out in a supplementary submission,
    as follows.  Singh was wrongly decided insofar as it sought to overturn
    Edgehill.  The correct interpretation of transitional provisions  would
    give the appellant the benefit of the old Rules.  In terms of fairness,
    the appellant was told that her application "would be dealt with  under
    the existing Rules, and then the respondent  changed  her  mind."   The
    outcome of Singh was arbitrariness, inconsistent with  the  appellant's
    ECHR  rights.   The  decision  should  revert  to  the  respondent  for
    consideration in line with her policies as at the date of  application,
    including "the common law on the interpretation of Article 8 ... by the
    time  the  decision  got  round  to  being  made,  the  applicant   had
    accumulated 14 years residence without issuance  of  removal  decision.
    Correspondingly, she would be entitled to indefinite  leave  to  remain
    ..."

13. The respondent countered again in a note of  argument.   The  appellant
    was served with notice of liability to removal on 10 December 2013  and
    on 12 December 2013 with a notice of decision to remove.  The notice of
    liability to removal remains in place.  The appellant was served with a
    further decision to remove on 20 October 2014.   Thus,  any  period  of
    residence  has  been  interrupted  for  purposes  of   long   residence
    provisions.  Singh was correctly decided and should be applied.   There
    was no implied undertaking  to  consider  the  appellant's  application
    under existing Rules because she made no application under  the  Rules,
    only outside, and did not request leave on the basis of long residence.
     In any event, she could not have qualified because the  continuity  of
    her residence was interrupted by service of notification  of  liability
    to  removal.   There  was  no  error  in  the  outcome  in   terms   of
    proportionality.

14. The respondent produces  a  copy  page  from  the  application  by  the
    appellant leading to these proceedings.  Asked to tick a box  selecting
    the category in which she is applying for an  extension  of  stay,  she
    chooses "other purposes/reasons not covered by other application forms"
     and explains:

           "I wish to apply for extension of stay under Article  8  of  the
           Human Rights Act 1998.  I have established  private  and  family
           life here in the UK and have no-one to return to in Nigeria  and
           also fear for me and my daughters lives if returned."

15. Mr Byrne in oral submissions acknowledged that the original grounds had
    been overtaken by Singh, and that in light of further  information  now
    emerging, it might be doubtful whether, even on the analysis that Singh
    was wrongly decided, the appellant would reap any benefit from the  old
    Rules.  However, he maintained that the FtT  decision  could  still  be
    seen to have been made in the shadow of an incorrect  understanding  of
    the Article 8 exercise, which  had  been  different  before  and  after
    amendment of the Rules.  If the decision were to be remade, there was a
    new matter to be borne in mind.  The Judge gave  some  significance  to
    the fact that the appellant's daughter might be  leaving  Edinburgh  to
    attend University and so moving away from her mother.  In fact she  did
    not intend to leave Edinburgh, had not told the FtT that she was likely
    to do so, and if she were likely to study anywhere it would  be  at  an
    institution in Edinburgh.  The FtT read into the case an element  which
    was not there.  Although the appellant had  not  made  her  application
    under the 14 year long residence rule, if she did in fact have  a  good
    case on that basis, the  respondent  or  the  Tribunal  ought  to  have
    recognised it.

16. Mr  Mullen's  submissions  were  along  the  lines  of  the  note.   He
    emphasised that the appellant in her grounds and submissions in the FtT
    had tacitly and correctly accepted the basis of the  refusal  decision,
    namely that her case could not meet the requirements of the Rules,  and
    fell for consideration only outside the Rules.

17. I reserved my determination.

18. I have no difficulty in preferring the respondent's  analysis  of  this
    case, as it has emerged above.  While the decision in Edgehill held out
    some apparent hope, that was always illusory.  The  appellant  did  not
    apply and would not have qualified under the "old Rules".   Any  debate
    about the analysis of the Court of Appeal in Singh is irrelevant.

19. It is not clear whether  ground  (ii)  was  covered  by  the  grant  of
    permission.   It has not been insisted upon and  is  ill-founded.   The
    FtT plainly did have regard to the time the appellant had spent in  the
    UK.

20. Mr Byrne in closing submissions mentioned a letter from the appellant's
    solicitors seeking to add a further ground, and  said  he  had  nothing
    further to add to it.  There is among the papers on file a letter  from
    those solicitors dated 1 June 2015 asking  to  add  a  further  ground,
    "Failure to  properly  assess  the  proportionality  of  requiring  the
    appellant's daughter to return to Nigeria to maintain her  family  life
    with her mother in the light of her grant of status under  the  private
    life rules."  The judge's decision plainly incorporated that matter.

21. There is no significant point of distinction between  the  approach  to
    proportionality taken by the judge and  which  might  have  been  taken
    prior to amendment of the Rules.  The grounds all resolve into no  more
    than disagreement with a proportionality assessment properly reached.

22. The appellant has not shown that  the  making  of  the  FtT's  decision
    involved the making of any error on a point of law.  The  determination
    shall stand.

23. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.




           [pic]
           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


           15 September 2015
