


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                Appeal
Numbers: IA/44682/2013

                                                          IA/47515/2013

                                                          IA/47516/2013

                                                          IA/47517/2013

                                                          IA/47518/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 1 October 2014                             |On 2 October 2014            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                     HR
                                     FA
                                     RR
                                     FR
                                     RR
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONS MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Solanki (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr McVitty (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

       1.  The  appellants  are  citizens  of  Libya.   They   appeal   with
          permission  against  a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge
          Crawford dated 13 March 2014 in which  he  dismissed  the  appeals
          under the Immigration Rules and under Articles 2, 3 and 8  of  the
          ECHR.

       2. At the beginning of the hearing Mr McVitty indicated  he  did  not
          oppose the appellants' appeals or that they should be remitted  to
          the First-tier Tribunal.  I have no hesitation in concluding  that
          Mr McVitty was entirely correct to  adopt  this  approach.   Judge
          Crawford  seems  to  have   entirely   misunderstood   the   first
          appellant's claimed background and how that is  reasonably  likely
          to give rise to a real  risk  of  harm  in  Libya.   Although  the
          determination runs to some 24 pages, the Judge  addresses  Article
          3 in a single paragraph [22].  The Judge has wrongly  stated  that
          "there is no evidence that the first appellant is on a  wanted  or
          targeted list.  The first appellant is simply somebody that  would
          have been required to show  loyalty  to  the  Gaddafi  regime...".
          This finding is wholly inconsistent with  clear  evidence  in  the
          appellants' bundle: (1) in his statement the first appellant  said
          that he "was a very active member of the  Revolutionary  Committee
          in  Libya"  under  the  Gaddafi  regime  and  it  is   his   close
          involvement which facilitated his UK scholarship;  (2)  the  first
          appellant's name is included in a  wanted  list  (pg  D86  of  the
          bundle before the Judge).

       3. It follows that the Judge's findings on Article 3 wholly  fail  to
          take into account relevant,  significant  evidence  going  to  the
          very heart of the first appellant's Article 3 claim.  I note  that
          the grounds of appeal against the  respondent's  decision  do  not
          raise Article 3 of the ECHR.  Mr McVitty  indicated  that  he  did
          not wish to take any point regarding this however this  should  be
          rectified in accordance with my directions below.

       4. The Judge also erred in law in failing to take  the  evidence  set
          out in paragraph 2  into  account  before  concluding  that  there
          would be no insurmountable obstacles for any  of  the  appellants,
          and the family including the first appellant  could  simply  adapt
          into Libyan life.

Remedy

       5.  This  is  a  case  in  which  the  First-tier  Tribunal  made   a
          fundamental error of law going to the heart of the key issues  for
          determination under Articles 3 and 8.  There has  simply  been  no
          fact finding in relation  to  the  first  appellant's  background.
          With the agreement of the  parties,  I  have  concluded  that  the
          decision should be remitted to a First-tier Tribunal  Judge  other
          than First-tier Tribunal Judge Crawford to  determine  the  appeal
          afresh, with all issues at large, at Manchester Piccadilly.


       6. I am satisfied that there are highly compelling  factors,  falling
          within  paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the  Senior  President's   Practice
          Statement that the decision should not be  re-made  by  the  Upper
          Tribunal.  It is clearly in the  interests  of  justice  that  the
          appeal of  the  appellants  be  heard  afresh  in  the  First-tier
          Tribunal.

Decision

       7. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve
          the making of an error on a point of  law  and  I  set  aside  the
          decision.

Anonymity

       8. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity order but  I  do
          so  because  this  determination  refers  to   sensitive   matters
          relevant to the appellants' asylum claims.

Directions

       9.  Within  28  days  of  the  promulgation  of  this  decision   the
          appellants shall:

               1) file and serve  a  comprehensive  paginated  and  indexed
                  bundle containing only those matters currently considered
                  relevant to their appeals;


               2) file and serve amended grounds challenging the  decisions
                  of the respondent dated 14 October 2013.


      10. Five days prior to the hearing date the  appellant  shall  file  a
          skeleton  argument  cross-referencing  to  the  bundle  and  where
          relevant AT Libya CG [2014] UKUT 318.

      11. There shall be an Arabic interpreter with a time estimate  of  2.5
          hours.



Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
1 October 2014
