
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/44871/2014
                                                               IA/44874/2014
                                                               IA/44879/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6th January, 2016                 |On 26th January, 2016                |
|Given extempore                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                        Mrs Priyanga Iroshi Pelawatta
                Mr Deepthi Pathirana Manadi Pathirannehelage
                                     G P
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr S Pinder, Counsel instructed by Theva Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The  three  appellants  are  all  citizens  of  Sri  Lanka  and  their
    respective dates of birth are 2nd July, 1978, 29th  January,  1972  and
    3rd February, 2004.  They have lived in the  United  Kingdom  for  some
    five and a half years.

2.   On 4th July, 2014 the first appellant made an application  on  her  own
    behalf and also in respect of her daughter and husband for the issue of
    a residence card on the  basis  that  they  were  the  extended  family
    members of the first appellant's cousin, Mrs Priyaharsani  Jansen,  who
    is a German national born on 8th June, 1957.  It  was  not  in  dispute
    that Mrs Jansen, to whom I shall make reference as the  sponsor,  is  a
    worker and an EEA national exercising treaty rights.

3.   On 22nd October the  respondent  refused  to  issue  a  residence  card
    because it was not  accepted  that  the  appellants  and  sponsor  were
    related as claimed, nor was any evidence of dependency disclosed.   The
    appellants appealed the decision and their appeal was heard at Richmond
    Magistrates' Court on 2nd July, 2015.

4.   The judge noted the Tribunal's decision in Dauhoo  (EEA  Regulations  -
    reg  8(2))  [2012]  UKUT  00079  and  said  in  paragraph  16  of   the
    determination that in these appeals it has never  been  suggested  that
    the sponsor, and the appellants enjoyed prior membership  of  the  same
    household before coming to the United Kingdom.  In fact that is  wrong.
    The judge fails to record even a synopsis of the evidence he heard, but
    it is clear from his Record of Proceedings that the  appellant  adopted
    her statement in paragraph 3 of which, she points out that she and  the
    sponsor lived together in the same household  in  Sri  Lanka  in  1996.
    That error on the part of the judge is not, however, a  material  error
    which affects the outcome of the appeal.

5.   Mr Tufan has provided a copy of the Tribunal's decision in Moneke  (EEA
    - OFMs) Nigeria [2011]  UKUT  00341  and  from  paragraph  40  of  that
    determination it is clear that a person  claiming  to  be  an  OFM  may
    either be a dependant,  or  a  member  of  the  household  of  the  EEA
    national, and in the case of dependency or membership of the household,
    it must be on a person who was an EEA national at  the  material  time.
    The sponsor in this case became an EEA national when she  obtained  her
    German nationality in 2007, so that she was not an EEA national at  the
    time that she and the appellants lived together in Sri Lanka.

6.   Counsel has in my view very properly agreed that in  the  circumstances
    this appeal cannot succeed.  I find that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    did err in law, but such error was not material to the outcome  of  the
    appeal because the appellant could not succeed.

Notice of Decision

The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  dismissed  the  appeals.   I  uphold   his
decision.


[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
