





Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
IA/44778/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                   |     Decision & Reasons         |
|                                      |Promulgated                     |
|On 29 January 2016                    |     On 7 April 2016            |
|                                      |                                |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD


                                   Between

                             MR Muhammad Ashraf
                        (NO anonymity direction mADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I. Hussain, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr D. Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION ON ERROR LAW

   1. The Appellant had appealed against the decision of First-tier Tribunal
      Judge E. M.M. Smith whereby he had dismissed the  Appellant's  appeals
      against the Respondent's decision to refuse leave to remain under  the
      Immigration Rules and Article 8 of the European  Convention  on  Human
      Rights.


   2. Permission to appeal was granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Chalkley
      stating that,


       "I hope that I do not raise the  appellant's  hopes  unduly,  but  I
       believe that the First Tier Tribunal Judge may have  erred  for  the
       reasons set out in the application  at  paragraph  3.  Whether  that
       error was material in all the circumstances, is  a  matter  for  the
       Upper Tribunal".


   3. Paragraph 3 of the Appellant's grounds of appeal refer  to  paragraphs
      38 and 29 of the First-tier Tribunal Judge's  decision.  The  specific
      matter raised in the grounds of appeal is,


       "It is clear from this statement that FTTJ considers that an outside
       rules second stage should only be  considered  in  the  presence  of
       exceptional circumstances. FTTJ...."


   4. It is said further in the grounds of appeal that the Judge  relied  on
      an Administrative Court authority whereas he should have  referred  to
      more recent Court of Appeal and other authorities.


   5. The background to the matter concerns the Appellant having arrived  in
      the United Kingdom as a student in 2002. He has  remained  here  since
      having made various applications. These applications have included one
      based on the EEA regulations, an application for leave outside of  the
      Rules and finally after Judicial Review proceedings,  the  application
      which led to the Respondent's decision on appeal  to  the  First  Tier
      Tribunal.


   6. The Judge had considered the evidence of the Appellant's marriage  and
      his genuine and subsisting relationship with Sarrat Wazir,  a  British
      citizen. He noted  Ms  Wazir's  health  conditions.   The  Judge  also
      considered the appeal in respect of the caring duties by the Appellant
      (and by his  wife)  of  his  brother-in-law  Usman  who  has  advanced
      Multiple Sclerosis and requires 24 hour care.


   7. The Judge concluded that he did not believe  that  Ms  Wazir  was  not
      aware that the  Appellant  was  an  overstayer  at  the  time  of  the
      marriage. His decision was that the Appellant could return to Pakistan
      and apply to re-enter as a spouse noting that the  current  processing
      time for such applications is 120 days.


   8. The Judge concluded that Appendix FM EX.1 and  the  Immigration  Rules
      more generally could not be satisfied.


   9. The Judge then went on to consider Article 8 ECHR. He set this out  in
      particular at paragraph 38 of his decision that the  appeal  had  been
      put on the alternative basis that consideration be given to Article  8
      outside of the Rules. He also set out that there were  submissions  in
      respect of Section 117 Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.


  10. The Appellant's argument is that a combination of paragraphs 39 and 42
      of the Judge's decision makes it clear that he had  been  looking  for
      exceptional circumstances.  Further  reliance  on  the  Administrative
      Court's decision in R on the application of Ganesebalan v Secretary of
      State for the Home Department [2014] EWHC 2712 (Admin) showed  that  a
      second stage test was always necessary.


  11. In sum the Appellant has submitted that it was a material error of law
      by the Judge in failing to consider the Claimant's case outside of the
      Rules on  a  proportionality  basis.   The  Appellant  refers  in  his
      skeleton argument to cases such as Beoku-Betts v  Secretary  of  State
      for the Home Department [2008] UKHL 39, Chikwamba and Hyaat.


  12. Mr Mills said in his submissions that he relied on the Rule 24  Reply.
      He did not consider that the grant of permission was restricted in any
      way. In respect of Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  v  SS
      (Congo) and others [2015] EWCA Civ 387 at paragraphs 41 and 42 it  was
      clear that exceptionality was referred to  by  the  Court  of  Appeal.
      There was no point in considering the factors again once they had been
      considered under the Rules.  Further, at  paragraph  29  it  was  made
      clear that it was said that in certain  specific  contexts,  a  proper
      application of Article 8 may itself make it clear that the legal  test
      for grant of LTR or LTE outside the Rules should indeed be a  test  of
      exceptionality test.


  13. Mr Mills said that at paragraph 31 the Court of Appeal was saying that
      in precarious family life cases there is a  strict  test  but  earlier
      Court of Appeal had said differently. The Beoku  Betts  considerations
      only needed to be considered if they had not been considered under the
      Rules. Yes, Article 8 can succeed if  an  Appellant  fails  under  the
      Immigration Rules, but this was not such a case. It was impossible  to
      say that there was a material error of law. It was open to  the  Judge
      to conclude that the  factors  were  not  sufficiently  compelling  or
      exceptional. Perhaps it would have been helpful for the Judge to  have
      set them out, but the result would have been the same.


  14. Having considered the grounds of appeal and the matters raised, I come
      to the view that there is a material error of law in the  decision  of
      the First-tier Tribunal.


  15. The aspect which concerns me, despite Mr Mills'  able  and  structured
      submissions, relates to the assessment of proportionality and  section
      117 NIAA 2002. The issues in this case did not relate only to what one
      could term the usual husband and wife case, but also in respect of the
      care for another British citizen.


  16. I consider that the error of law  in  respect  of  the  assessment  of
      Article  8  outside  of  the  Rules  and  the  apparent   absence   of
      consideration of section 117 NIAA 2002 are material errors of law.


  17. The Upper Tribunal in Bossade (ss117A-D-relationship with  the  Rules)
      [2015] UKUT 00415 (IAC) said,


           "34.      In  the  first  place,  the  application  of  Part  5A
           considerations presupposes that the decision-maker  has  reached
           the  stage   in   an   Article   8   assessment   of   assessing
           proportionality. Part 5A considerations are not a complete  code
           of the general law on Article 8.  Sections  117A-D  do  not  for
           example deal with the meaning of family life or private life  or
           with the issue of interference with the  right  to  respect  for
           private and family life or whether the decision is in accordance
           with the law. Put in Razgar,  R  (on  the  Application  of)  v.
           Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004] UKHL 27 terms,
           ss.117A-D are concerned only with Question 5: as stated in Dube
           (ss.117A-117D) [2015] UKUT 90 (IAC) at [25]: "in effect ss.117A-
           117D are essentially a further elaboration of Razgar's Question
           5 which is essentially about proportionality  and  justification
           (Lord Bingham's Question 5  asks,  assuming  that  in  reply  to
           previous questions it has been established that there  had  been
           an interference with the right to respect for private and family
           life, " [i]f so,  is  such  interference  proportionate  to  the
           legitimate public end sought to be achieved?"). In addition, the
           Part 5A considerations are not  and  do  not  purport  to  be  a
           complete code for the conduct of the proportionality  assessment
           enjoined by Razgar Question 5. They do not purport  to  be  an
           exhaustive set of the considerations that  must  be  taken  into
           account when assessing proportionality: section 117A(2) provides
           that the court or tribunal "must (in particular) have regard  to
           . . . considerations" that are then  enumerated:  see Dube, AM
           (S.117B)[2015] UKUT 260 (IAC)."


  18. In my judgment it was incumbent for the Judge to set out  the  factors
      in respect  of  the  assessment  of  proportionality  outside  of  the
      Immigration Rules and in respect of section 117 NIAA 2002. As  I  have
      said although the Judge  considered  the  issues  in  respect  of  the
      "usual" husband and wife case, the broader issues in  respect  of  the
      brother-in-law also needed to be evaluated in that balancing exercise.
      Therefore, noting the initial grant of permission, in my judgment, the
      error of law was material.



Notice of Decision

15.   The original appeal involved the making of a material  error  of  law.
    Therefore the decision is set aside. The findings of fact  remain.  The
    Appellant can seek to rely on up-to-date matters in respect of  Article
    8 if so advised. The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for
    hearing.

      There is no anonymity order made.


Signed                                             Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood


