
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
Immigration and Asylum Chamber    Appeal Number: IA/44530/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 26 February 2016                 |On: 8 March 2016                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   BETWEEN

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                              MR NASIR BASHEER
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Jafar, counsel instructed by Lee Valley
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision, promulgated on 2 September 2015
    of FTTJ Birk (hereinafter referred  to  as  the  FTTJ).  Permission  to
    appeal was granted by FTTJ Frankish on 14 January 2016.

Background

 2. On 6 August 2014, Mr Basheer, the respondent to this appeal  sought  an
    EEA Residence Card as confirmation of a right to reside in  the  United
    Kingdom as the extended family member of an EA national.  Specifically,
    he applied  on  the  basis  that  his  brother,  Quaisar  (a  Pakistani
    national) is married to Salsbeet (a French national).

 3. The respondent resided in the United Kingdom, since 2005,  with  either
    leave to enter or remain as a student/under Tier 4. That leave  expired
    on 7 August 2014.

 4.  According  to  the  marriage  certificate  enclosed   with   the   EEA
    application, Qaisar married the said EEA national on 27 March  2009  in
    Pakistan.

 5. The respondent's application was refused owing  to  the  absence  of  a
    translation of the marriage certificate as well as what  was  described
    as insufficient evidence that he was dependent upon  the  EEA  national
    either before entering  the  United  Kingdom  or  since  entering  this
    country.

 6. At the hearing before the FTTJ, the respondent's evidence was that  his
    uncle supported him at the time he came to the United Kingdom  in  2005
    and that the EEA sponsor supported him currently. He said that  he  did
    not live with the EEA sponsor in the  United  Kingdom.  The  respondent
    also mentioned that he previously worked in Pakistan and was  dependent
    upon others in Pakistan, including the EEA sponsor.

 7. The oral evidence of the EEA was  that  the  respondent's  brother  and
    sister supported him in Pakistan and that she was doing so currently.

 8. The respondent's brother told the FTTJ that his wife (the EEA  sponsor)
    had been supporting the respondent only during 2004 and after his  visa
    ran out in August 2014.

 9. The Secretary of State advised the FTTJ that  reliance  was  no  longer
    placed on the issue of translation of the marriage certificate.

10. The FTTJ considered that money transfer receipts dating from  2004  and
    2005 from the EEA  sponsor  to  the  respondent  amounted  to  reliable
    evidence that the appellant was dependent upon her before coming to the
    United Kingdom and she also accepted that he  was  currently  dependent
    upon her. The FTTJ thus concluded; "I find that the Appellant meets the
    Immigration rules under the EEA Regulations..." and  she  proceeded  to
    allow the appeal under the said Regulations.

11. The grounds of  application  raise  one  matter,  that  of  the  FTTJ's
    decision to allow the appeal outright  rather  than  as  not  being  in
    accordance with the law.  Reference was made to the decision in Ihemedu
    (OFMs - meaning) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00340 (IAC) and it was stated that
    the Secretary of State had yet to exercise her discretion in this  case
    under Regulation 17(4). Thus, as the respondent had been found to be an
    extended/other family member, it was argued that the FTTJ ought to have
    remitted the case to the Secretary of State for further consideration.

12. FTTJ Frankish granted permission, noting  that  Ihemedu  had  not  been
    referred to in the decision and reasons.

13. Those representing the respondent did not lodge a Rule 24 response.

    The hearing

14. At the hearing before me, Mr Avery argued that there were  two  aspects
    to this appeal, firstly an applicant needed to establish that he was an
    extended family member and secondly, there was the issue of whether  he
    should be issued with a Residence Card.

15.  Mr  Avery  submitted  that  the  FTTJ  found  that  the  Regulation  8
    requirements were satisfied and proceeded to allow the  appeal  without
    saying anything about Regulation 17. She was wrong to  allow  it  under
    the Regulations when the Secretary  of  State  had  not  exercised  her
    discretion, applying Ihemedu.

16. Mr Jafar accepted that Mr Avery had "hit the  nail  on  the  head"  but
    argued that the FTTJ did not step into the Secretary of  State's  shoes
    by stating that the respondent was entitled to  a  Residence  Card.  He
    argued that the FTTJ followed what was said  in  Ihemedu  and  gave  no
    directions for the issue of a Residence Card.

17. In reply, Mr Avery submitted that the problem was  that  the  FTTJ  had
    allowed the appeal under the EEA Regulations. There was no other way of
    interpreting that and the case  should  have  been  sent  back  to  the
    Secretary of State for the exercise of her discretion.

Decision on error of law

18. I found that the FTTJ erred, materially, in relation to her decision to
    allow the appeal under the EEA Regulations, which I will address below.

19. In Ihemedu (OFMs - meaning) Nigeria [2011]  UKUT  00340  (IAC)  it  was
    found that Regulation 17(4) made the issue of a residence  card  to  an
    extended family member a matter of discretion. As in this  case,  where
    the Secretary of State has yet to exercise  that  discretion,  a  judge
    allowing the appeal can do no more than find that the decision was  not
    in accordance with the law.

20. At [15] the FTTJ says that the Secretary of State's decision was not in
    accordance with the law. Yet  elsewhere  she  also  comments  that  the
    respondent "is entitled to the issue of a  Residence  Card."  She  then
    proceeded to allow the appeal under the Regulations  and  in  this  she
    materially erred. I therefore allow the Secretary of State's appeal  on
    this basis alone.

21. With the agreement of the parties, I  remake  the  FTTJ's  decision  by
    substituting a decision to allow the  appeal  on  the  basis  that  the
    Secretary of State's decision was not in accordance with the  law.  The
    FTTJ's findings on dependency went unchallenged  by  the  Secretary  of
    State and therefore are not disturbed. Therefore it is now a matter for
    the Secretary of State to exercise her discretion as to whether or  not
    to issue the respondent with a residence card.

    Conclusions

    The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision to be re-made.

    I substitute a decision allowing the  appeal  on  the  basis  that  the
    Secretary of State's decision was not in accordance with the law.

    No application for anonymity was made and I saw no reason to make  such
    a direction.




    Signed:      Date: 28 February 2016


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara
