
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/44834/2013
     IA/44835/2013
     IA/44836/2013
     IA/44838/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 18th June 2014                               |On 1st July 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD

                                   Between

                    Mr muhammad akhtar houssein bheekhoo
                          Mrs adeelah ismet atchia
                                    j h b
                                    a H b

                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Paul Turner QC instructed by Raj Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms L Kenny, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants are citizens of Mauritius whose appeals  were  dismissed
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Shamash in a determination promulgated  on
    15th April 2014.

 2. The judge found that the Appellants did not meet  the  requirements  of
    Appendix FM and the first Appellant did not  meet  the  long  residence
    requirement under paragraph 276B-C of the Immigration Rules.  The judge
    also considered Article 8 outside the Rules and dismissed the appeal on
    all grounds.

 3. Grounds of application were lodged stating that the judge had erred  in
    finding that the  first  Appellant  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the
    Appellant) did not meet the  long  residence  requirement  because  the
    Appellant did not  meet  the  ten  year  requirement  at  the  date  of
    application.  The judge had fallen into error because the relevant date
    was not the date of application but rather the date of  decision.   The
    date of decision was October 2013 and the Appellant  had  been  in  the
    United Kingdom lawfully for ten years as at that date and as  such  met
    the terms of the Immigration Rules.  Further documents were said to  be
    attached to the grounds (in fact they were not) and it  was  said  that
    the decision turned on whether or not the Appellant  had  acquired  ten
    years' lawful residence here.  It was submitted that as at the date  of
    decision the Appellant had and that the judge by considering  that  the
    relevant date was the date of application had fallen into error.

 4. The Respondent opposed the Appellant's appeal  and  lodged  a  Rule  24
    notice stating  that  the  Respondent  maintained  that  the  Appellant
    entered in 2004 and therefore did not have at the date of  the  hearing
    ten years' residence.  As such any error was not material.

 5. Before me Mr Turner relied on his grounds and also produced the  letter
    from the Home Office said to be attached to the  Grounds    dated  11th
    February 2010 confirming that the Appellant entered the UK as a student
    in September 2013.  The refusal in this case was dated 8th October 2013
    and accordingly the Appellant had been here for ten years.   It  was  a
    stateable argument that the crucial date was the date  of  hearing  and
    not the date of decision but nothing turned on that  and  applying  the
    date of decision the decision of the judge should be set aside  as  she
    had fallen into material error of law in determining the matter  as  at
    the date of application.  If I was not prepared  to  allow  the  appeal
    outright then the judge had nevertheless made a material error  of  law
    in failing to record the length of time the Appellant had been  in  the
    United Kingdom and the matter should  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  If that was the  outcome  then  that  would  permit  further
    documentation to be lodged on behalf of the  Appellant  which  was  not
    available to the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

 6. For the Home Office Ms Kenny agreed that the crucial date was the  date
    of decision. It did appear that the  Appellant  was  granted  leave  to
    enter the United Kingdom as a student on 13th September  2003  as  that
    was what was stated in the letter from the UK Border Agency dated  11th
    February 2010.  However there was no error in  law  by  the  judge  who
    found that the  first  Appellant  had  not  discharged  the  burden  of
    establishing when he first entered the United Kingdom and there was  no
    evidence of the periods when he was out of the country or of his status
    in 2003.

 7. I reserved my decision.

Discussion

 8. Given that Ms Kenny agreed that the  critical  date  was  the  date  of
    decision (see Odelola v SSHD [2009] HKHL 25) it is  plain  enough  that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred  in  law  in  concluding  that  the
    Appellant failed under the Rules because at the date of application  he
    had not met the ten year Rule.

 9. The judge had the benefit of hearing oral evidence from  the  Appellant
    who adopted his statement.  That statement says he first arrived in the
    United Kingdom in September 2003 and was granted leave to  enter  as  a
    student.  He was granted further leave in August 2004.  The  judge  did
    record in the immigration history at paragraph 4  that  he  appears  to
    have re-entered the United Kingdom on 13th September 2003  and  it  was
    "not clear" whether he left the UK in  April  2004  before  then.   The
    judge noted that he "appears to have re-entered" the United Kingdom  on
    13th/14th May 2004 but  it  was  unclear  from  the  photocopy  of  the
    passport when he left.

10. Ms Kenny was obliged to accept that, contrary to the  Rule  24  notice,
    the Appellant was granted leave  to  enter  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    student on 13th September 2003.  Given that date and the fact that  the
    date of decision was 8th October 2013 then it could be  said  that  the
    Appellant had been here for "at  least  ten  years'  continuous  lawful
    residence in the United Kingdom" as required by paragraph 276B  of  the
    Rules.

11. Unfortunately the position is  simply  not  that  clear.   The  witness
    statement of the Appellant does not say whether or not he did leave the
    United Kingdom in April 2004 or before then.   The  statement  is  also
    silent on whether he did re-enter the United Kingdom on  13th/14th  May
    2004 as the judge noted in paragraph 4 of her determination.  The judge
    made  no  findings  in  that  regard.   Perhaps  surprisingly   neither
    representative of either  party  saw  fit  to  ask  the  Appellant  any
    questions about whether he did leave the  country  in  2004  or  before
    then. It follows that a critical factual issue remains unclear.

12. As indicated above Mr Turner said that if the matter  was  remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal he would have further documents  to  lodge;  Ms
    Kenny said she was  probably  in  the  same  position.   Whilst  it  is
    unfortunate that a re-hearing appears to be required  in  this  case  I
    cannot see  an  alternative  as  a  further  fact-finding  exercise  is
    necessary and this is best carried out by the First-tier Tribunal.

13. As such the determination of the First-tier Tribunal is  set  aside  in
    its entirety.  No findings of the First-tier  Tribunal  are  to  stand.
    Under Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and of Practice Statement 7.2
    the nature and  extent  of  judicial  fact-finding  necessary  for  the
    decision to be remade is such that it is appropriate to remit the  case
    to the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

14. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

15. I set aside the decision.

16. I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald



