
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/44379/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 2 February 2016                       |On 27 April 2016                    |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                     AD
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Khan, instructed by Howells, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, AD, was born in 1982 and is a male  citizen  of  Poland.
    On 27 September 2013 at Leeds Crown Court the appellant  was  sentenced
    to 40 months on  account  of  his  conviction  for  dangerous  driving,
    causing grievous bodily harm to  those  injured  in  a  collision,  and
    driving whilst over the prescribed alcohol limit.  He was  disqualified
    from driving or obtaining a driving licence for a period of five years.
     On 29 October 2015, a decision was made to remove the  appellant  from
    the United Kingdom under Regulation  9  of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006.  The appellant appealed to the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Kelly) which, in a decision promulgated on 12 June
    2015,  dismissed  the  appeal.   The  appellant   now   appeals,   with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There are two grounds of appeal, supplemented  by  a  third  ground  on
    renewal to the Upper Tribunal.

 3. Ground 1:

    The appellant asserts that the judge erred in law by  finding  that  he
    represented  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently   serious   threat
    affecting the fundamental interests of society (Regulation  21  of  the
    EEA Regulations).  At [22], Judge Kelly found that  the  appellant  was
    assessed by the Probation Service as "low risk of proven reoffending of
    any kind (violent or otherwise) within the next two  years".   He  went
    on, however, to find that

         "If the possibility of the appellant being proved to have committed
         (that is to say been convicted of) the criminal  offence  is  taken
         out of the equation, 'full risk' of him causing serious harm to the
         public rises to the level of high [page 43 of the OASys Report]."

    The appellant also notes that  Judge  Kelly  recorded  the  appellant's
    "genuine remorse" for his offending and noted also that he had not  had
    the opportunity to undertake a course to address "substance misuse".

 4. I find the text of Judge Kelly's decision to be  a  little  obscure  in
    places but his reasoning is sound.  As regards the  OASys  Report,  the
    judge has looked carefully at this document and noted that, whilst  the
    overall risk of reoffending or causing serious  harm,  may  remain  low
    such reports generally also consider the so-called "full risk" of harm;
    rates of conviction remain low and the OASys Report has considered  the
    risk of harm to the public of the  appellant  reoffending  rather  than
    necessarily being convicted following such reoffending.  I consider  it
    was legitimate for Judge Kelly to make that assessment.  Moreover,  the
    assessment has been based upon the personal conduct of the appellant as
    Regulation 21(b) provides must be the case.

 5. Secondly, the judge does indeed record the fact that the appellant  was
    "very motivated" to address  his  offending  behaviour  [22]  and  also
    accepted the appellant had not  had  the  opportunity  to  undertake  a
    course to address his  substance  misuse.   However,  the  grounds  are
    misguided in suggesting that this was in some way a positive finding in
    the appellant's favour in the judge's consideration as to  whether  the
    appellant  represents  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
    threat.  Put bluntly, the  appellant  may  well  wish  to  address  his
    substance misuse and it may not be his fault that he has  not  had  the
    opportunity to do so, but the fact remains that he  has  not  addressed
    it. That is a fact going to his conduct and character which  the  judge
    was entitled to consider. It is also a  "present"  fact  in  the  sense
    that, whilst he may in the future address his substance abuse,  he  has
    not yet done so and the level of the threat which he poses now is, as a
    consequence, greater.

 6. Ground 2:

    This ground asserts the judge has failed to give proper reasons for his
    decision.  At [25], the judge wrote,

         "Given my findings at paragraph 22 above, I am satisfied  that  the
         personal conduct of the appellant represents a genuine, present and
         sufficiently threat affecting the fundamental interest  of  society
         in maintaining law and order by removing foreign criminals."

    The findings at [22] were those just referred to above, namely the high
    "full risk" of the appellant causing serious harm to the public and the
    appellant's failure (for whatever  reason)  to  address  his  substance
    misuse.  The grounds ask how Judge Kelly, having assessed the appellant
    as being at low risk of reoffending and being remorseful and  generally
    motivated to seek to address his offending can possibly be  a  genuine,
    present and sufficiently serious threat.   However,  as  I  have  noted
    above, the grounds here fall into the trap (possibly  assisted  by  the
    manner in which Judge Kelly has chosen to express himself) of  equating
    the appellant's acceptance of  problems and the need  to  address  them
    with the purely objective assessment of the  level  of  present  threat
    posed by the appellant which Judge Kelly was required to  undertake  by
    Regulation 21.

 7. The appellant also draws attention to Judge Kelly's conclusion [28]:

         "Albeit due to somewhat wider ranging considerations, I  have  thus
         ultimately come to precisely the same conclusion  under  Regulation
         21  of  the  [EEA  Regulations]  as  I  did  when  considering  the
         appellant's case under Article 8 [ECHR].  My conclusion is that, in
         the particular circumstances of this appeal, the public interest in
         removing foreign criminals prevails over the rights  and  interests
         of the appellant and his family members."

 8. Judge Kelly has dealt with Article 8 first at [23] and has  then  moved
    on to deal with Regulation 21 at [24].  The last sentence of [28] which
    I have quoted above  appears  to  be  relevant  to  the  assessment  of
    proportionality under Article 8  rather  than  the  factors  which  the
    Tribunal was obliged to consider under Regulation 21.  Ms Khan referred
    me to the decision of the Court of Appeal in  Straszewski  [2015]  EWCA
    Civ 1245 at [14].  Moore-Bick LJ held at [14] that "on the face of  it,
    therefore, deterrence in the sense of measures designed to deter others
    from committing similar offences has of itself no part to play  in  the
    decision to remove the individual offender [under Regulation 21]".   In
    the light of that statement of the law,  the  last  sentence  of  Judge
    Kelly's  decision   is   problematic.    However,   having   read   the
    determination as a whole, I find that Judge Kelly is  either  referring
    to Article 8 in the last sentence of his decision or  he  is  referring
    very generally to the law concerning  the  deportation  of  foreigners,
    either from other countries within the European Union or beyond,  which
    he considers generally seeks to strike  a  balance  between  individual
    rights and the wider right of United Kingdom citizens in  this  country
    to be protected from criminality.  I am not satisfied, as the appellant
    asserts, that the judge has departed from a proper consideration of the
    factors under the EEA Regulations  at  [28]  notwithstanding  the  last
    sentence of that paragraph.  I find that the judge has  given  adequate
    reasons for reaching his findings and I find that  those  findings  are
    not perverse in the sense that they were open to him on  the  basis  of
    the factual matrix in this appeal.

    Notice of Decision

          This appeal is dismissed.

    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 20 March 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane



I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Date 20 March 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

