
                                                      [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal
Number: IA/44335 /2014

                              THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 3 December 2015                 |On 4 January 2016                     |
|                                   |                                      |
|                                   |                                      |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA

                                   Between

                              MR KULWANT SINGH
                        (No anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr T Tabori of Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is a citizen of India born on 27 June 1988. He appealed  to
   the Upper Tribunal against the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge
   Cohen of 1  May  2015  dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
   decision of the respondent dated 29 August 2014 curtailing his  leave  to
   remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  pursuant  to  paragraph  321A  of   the
   Immigration Rules.

2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Lambert granted  the  appellant  permission  to
   appeal on 18 August 2015, stating that it  is  arguable  that  the  Judge
   materially erred in law in not establishing a connection between the test
   taken by this appellant and the declared invalidity of the result by  the
   ETS.




   First-tier Tribunal Judge's findings


3. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appellant's appeal for the
   following reasons:


4. The appellant's immigration history is that he arrived  in  the  UK  with
   entry clearance as a  Tier  4  (General)  student  25  August  2009.  The
   appellant's leave was subsequently curtailed and he was granted an out of
   country right of appeal only. The appellant however, raises human  rights
   grounds so has an in country right of appeal. The notice  of  curtailment
   and removal states that during the review  process  and  the  educational
   testing  service  (ETS)  routinely  reviews  testing  irregularities  and
   questions test results believed to  be  earned  under  abnormal  or  non-
   standard circumstances.


5. The ETS score cancellation policy states that ETS reserves the  right  to
   cancel scores and/or take other action deemed  appropriate,  when  it  is
   determined that the test centre was not following established  guidelines
   set fall in the DoE the program. During an administrative review process,
   ETS  confirmed  that  the  appellant's  test  results  were  obtained  to
   deception through the presence of a proxy  test  taker.  Because  of  the
   above, his course from the test taken had been  cancelled.  As  deception
   had been used in relation to the appellant's application the  appellant's
   leave was curtailed and removal directions set for him.


6.  In  respect  of  the  affidavit  evidence,  I  find  it  compelling.   I
   particularly note the contents of Rebecca Collings affidavit  in  respect
   of the judicial review proceedings. She  indicates  that  in  late  March
   2014, ETS advised that it had been able to identify  impersonation  proxy
   testing using voice recognition software and she refers to the  processes
   used set out in the witness statement of Peter  Millington  at  paragraph
   35,  39  and  45.  She  indicated  that  ETS  described  that  any  tests
   categorised as cancelled which later become known  as  invalid,  had  the
   same voice for multiple test takers. On  questioning  they  advised  that
   they  were  certain  there  was  evidence  of  proxy   test   taking   of
   impersonation in those cases. Such a test  score  had  been  obtained  by
   deception. It was indicated that the appellant was one of the  candidates
   identified as having used such deception. His details were  contained  in
   an appendix. Peter Millington in his witness statement at  paragraph  35,
   39 and 45 indicates the technical processes utilised in order to identify
   the proxy test takers using voice biometric technology and flagging those
   matches and further testing the same using human verification.


7. In light of the evidence provided by the respondent, which I find  to  be
   compelling, I find that the respondent has destroyed the higher burden of
   proof based upon her in respect of an allegation  of  deception.  I  find
   that the respondent has indicated the basis on which the appellant's test
   results were considered to have been  obtained  utilising  deception  and
   proxy test takers. I therefore find that the appellant's appeal fails  to
   be refuse with reference to paragraph 322 (1A) of the Immigration  Rules.
   In all the circumstances the respondent's curtailment of the  appellant's
   leave to remain was correct.


8. I am un-persuaded by the generic expert report obtained  by  five  months
   and submitted as part of the appellant's bundle which does not relate  to
   the appellant's case specifically.


9. The appellant demonstrated a poor level of English before me and  I  find
   this to be  further  indicative  of  the  fact  that  the  appellant  had
   motivated to rely on a proxy test taker.


   Grounds of appeal


10. The grounds of appeal state the following which I summarise. Neither  of
   the witnesses, Mr Peter Millington and Miss Rebecca Collings do not refer
   to  the  appellant  specifically.  The   decision   was   taken   without
   establishing the precedent fact of deception. Furthermore, the report  on
   testing of samples undertaken by ETS, drafted on 5 February  2015  by  Dr
   Philip Harrison states that "to assess the degree of reliability  of  the
   system and in his  performance  must  be  measured  by  conducting  large
   numbers of comparisons of pairs of the same speaker in different  speaker
   recordings where the ground to  answer  was  known."  The  UKBA  has  not
   provided confirmation of  the  reliability  of  the  performance  of  the
   automatic speaker recognition system used by the ETS. The Harrison report
   further states that "the very best performance for  the  state-of-the-art
   systems, expressed in equal error rate, is typically between 1%  and  3%.
   There is no confirmation of the equal error rate of the ETS  ASR  system.
   Essentially the Harrison report provides many examples for  why  the  ETS
   system is not reliable.


   The hearing

11. At the hearing I heard submissions as to whether there is a material
   error of law in the determination.


Decision on error of law

  12. The respondent did not in  her  rule  24  response  and  nor  did  the
      permission Judge take issue as to the appellant in  country  right  of
      appeal. I accept the submissions made by the appellant's  counsel  who
      placed reliance on CD (s 10 curtailment: right of appeal) India [2008]
      UKAIT 00055 which states that a  decision  under  section  10  of  the
      immigration and Asylum act 1999 that involves the invalidation of  any
      leave to enter or remain is to be treated for the purposes of the 2000
      and to act as a curtailment of that leave within  section  8  (2)  (e)
      with the result that a person may appeal against that decision  whilst
      in the United Kingdom, whether or not he has made an asylum claim or a
      human rights claim. I find that the appellant has an in country  right
      of appeal.


  13. I have given anxious  scrutiny  to  the  determination  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge  who  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
      respondent's decision cancelling his leave under paragraph 321A of the
      Immigration The Judge essentially found that the respondent,  on  whom
      the burden lies, had  proved  that  the  appellant's  application  was
      correctly refused under paragraph 321A of  the  Immigration  Rules  in
      respect of the evidence of proxy taking of the English  language  test
      and as such,  the  respondent  had  demonstrated  that  the  appellant
      employed fraud.


14. The Judge correctly identified that  the  burden  of  proof  is  on  the
   respondent and it is on a balance of  probability.  In  fact,  the  Judge
   applied the higher end of the spectrum of  balance  of  probability.  The
   Judge took into account all the evidence provided by the  respondent  and
   gave  appropriate  weight  to  that  evidence  and  came  to  a   legally
   sustainable conclusion.


15. There was no dispute that the  appellant's  test  results  were  amongst
   10,000's test scores analysed and his test was  deemed  to  be  "invalid"
   i.e. that the ETS was certain there was evidence of proxy test taking  or
   impersonation in her case. The respondent has the burden of  proving  the
   existence of the factors upon which  reliance  is  placed  to  found  the
   exercise of the power conferred by  paragraph  321A  of  the  Immigration
   Rules. The Judge found that the stringent civil  standard  applicable  in
   cases of fraud has been achieved by the respondent's evidence.


16. The evidence provided  by  the  respondent  was  a  statement  from  Mrs
   Rebecca  Collings  who  stated  that  "ETS  described   that   any   test
   characterised as cancelled (which later became known as invalid) had  the
   same voice for multiple test takes. On  questioning  the  respondent  was
   advised that they were certain that there  was  evidence  of  proxy  test
   taking or impersonation in those cases.  The  Judge  did  not  give  good
   reasons for why the witness statement of Mr Peter Millington could not be
   relied on in respect of this particular appellant.  Mr  Peter  Millington
   stated, "it is clear that in order to be characterised  as  'invalid'  on
   the spreadsheet provided to the Home Office the case  has  to  have  gone
   through a computer program analysing  speech  and  then  two  independent
   voice analysts. If all three are in agreement that a proxy has been used,
   then the test would be characterised as 'invalid'".


17. In respect of paragraph  321A(ii),  the  precedent  fact  on  which  the
   application of this provision depends is that the  appellant  produced  a
   false English test  result  with  his  application,  and  the  burden  of
   establishing this fact lies on the respondent. The Judge was entitled  to
   rely on the evidence provided by the respondent in the form of statements
   from two witnesses that there was evidence  of  fraud  at  the  ETS  test
   centres. It is evident that ETS informed the Home Office  that  they  had
   been able  to  identify  impersonation  and  proxy  testing  using  voice
   recognition software. ETS sent the  Home  Office  the  results  of  their
   analysis of the first batch of test centres on 24 and 28 March  2014.  Ms
   Rebecca Collings in her statement stated that any test categorised by ETS
   as cancelled, which later became known as "invalid", had the  same  voice
   for multiple test takers. On questioning, ETS  "advised  that  they  were
   certain there was evidence of proxy test taking of impersonation in those
   cases". [Emphasis mine]


18. Although the Judge stated at paragraph 16 he is  "un-persuaded"  by  the
   generic expert report of Mr Harrison, this is not a material error of law
   and nor can it be seen on  the  reading  of  the  determination  that  he
   applied the wrong burden of proof.  The  Judge  considered  the  Harrison
   report very carefully and it was a matter for  the  Judge  to  place  the
   relevant weight on this evidence. For  clear  reasons  given,  the  Judge
   found that it was a generic expert report  and  did  not  relate  to  the
   appellant's case specifically. He was entitled to so find and there is no
   material error of law in that finding. The Judge was  entitled  to  place
   reliance on the respondent's case which he found met the relevant  burden
   of proof.


19. The grounds of appeal argue that the Harrison report  states  that  "the
   very best performance for  the  state-of-the-art  systems,  expressed  in
   equal  error  rate,  is  typically  between  1%  and  3%.  There  is   no
   confirmation of the equal error rate of the ETS ASR system. That  is  not
   accurate because in his statement Mr Millington stated in  his  statement
   that the technology used entailed over 70,000 pairings  of  non  matching
   comparisons and that the  matching  samples  produced  values  that  were
   higher than values from the non-matching  samples  the  majority  of  the
   time, with a less than 2% error rate. The Judge  therefore  was  entitled
   not to place much weight on the Harrison report.


  20. The Judge discharge his duty to enquire, and determine, whether  there
      is  sufficient  evidence  to  justify  the  respondent's  belief  that
      appellant English language test  was  taken  by  proxy  and  therefore
      through deception. He  had  to  consider  the  evidence  against  this
      specific appellant which he did and  conducted  this  enquiry  on  the
      evidence applying a standard at the, he found that the respondent  has
      established the precedent fact of the production of  a  false  English
      test result. The burden therefore now shifts to the appellant to  show
      that the respondent's decision to exercise her power  under  paragraph
      321A is improper.


21. The appellant's case before the Judge was that he denies that he took  a
   test by proxy. There was no  other  credible  evidence  provided  by  the
   appellant to challenge the  respondent's  case  other  than  the  generic
   expert by Mister Harrison which the Judge  was  entitled  to  place  very
   little reliance as it was not specific  to  him.  The  Judge  essentially
   found that the witness statements, when  read  in  conjunction  with  one
   another, details extensively the investigation undertaken by ETS on  this
   appellant's case, along with  thousands  of  other  applicants,  and  the
   process of identifying those tests found to be  "invalid".  It  is  clear
   from the statements that ETS identified this appellant  after  a  lengthy
   and systematic investigation with an error rate of only 3%.


  22. The Judge also took into account that the  appellant  "demonstrated  a
      poor level of English before me and I find this the further indicative
      of the fact that the appellant had intention to rely on a  proxy  test
      taker". Given that the English-language skills of the appellant are at
      the core of this appeal,  the  Judge  was  entitled  to  rely  on  the
      appellant's  poor  English  language  skills  at  the  hearing  as  an
      indicator as to whether he would need a proxy to  take  his  test  for
      him.


  23. The Judge's decision is bolstered by the fact that at the  hearing  Mr
      Kondala  produced  the  appellant's  English-language  results   which
      reflect that the appellant  received  200  out  of  200  for  English-
      language speaking skills. These full marks  for  his  English-language
      speaking skills, is at odds  with  the  Judges  observation  that  the
      appellant had poor English language skills at the hearing. A Judge  is
      entitled to make such an observation on the quality of an  appellant's
      language skills which he observes before him. Therefore, I find on the
      evidence,  no  differently  constituted  Tribunal  would  come  to   a
      different conclusion.

24. The Judge was entitled to find that that the appellant fraudulently,  in
   an attempt to mislead the respondent, provided his English-language  test
   results which he knew to be obtained by  fraud  and  the  respondent  had
   discharged her burden of proof. The Judge found that the  respondent  has
   demonstrated on the requisite standard  of  proof  that  the  appellant's
   appeal falls to be refused pursuant to paragraph 321A of the  Immigration
   Rules and there is no material error of law in  this  finding  which  the
   Judge made taking into account the totality of the evidence before him.


25. I therefore uphold the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing
   the appellant's appeal.


DECISION

I dismiss the appellant's appeal.

Signed by



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana                  Dated this  15th  day  of
    December 2015










