
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/44915/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 17 March 2016                   |On 12 August 2016                 |
|                                   |                                  |
|                                   |                                  |



                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MR ZAHEER ARIF

                          (No anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    Ms J Victor-Mazeli of Counsel



                            DECISION AND REASONS





Rule 43 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

1. On 20 April 2016, my decision  in  this  appeal  was  promulgated  and  I
   remitted this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal. However,  I  erroneously
   recorded in my decision that there was no  appearance  for  the  claimant
   when in fact Ms Victor-Mazeli of Counsel appeared for the claimant at the
   hearing. It was also recorded in my decision that the  claimant  did  not
   give evidence before the First-tier Tribunal when  in  fact  he  and  his
   spouse provided written witness statements.

2. Rule 43(1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008  states
   that the Upper Tribunal may  set  aside  a  decision  which  disposes  of
   proceedings, or part of such a decision, and remake the decision  or  the
   relevant part of it, if the Upper Tribunal considers that it  is  in  the
   interests of justice to do so and  one  or  more  of  the  conditions  in
   paragraph (2) are satisfied.   One  of  these  conditions,  in  paragraph
   (2)(d), is where there has been some other procedural irregularity in the
   proceedings.

3. A letter dated 3 May 2016 from Buckley's Solicitors requests that  my  20
   April 2016 decision be set aside under rule 43. I consider this letter as
   the claimant's application to set aside the decision. It  is  established
   in Jan (Upper Tribunal: set aside powers) [2016] UKUT  00336  (IAC)  that
   the Upper Tribunal's powers to set aside its own decisions are limited to
   those in rules 43 and 45-6 of the Upper Tribunal Rules.  Paragraph  7  of
   Jan states that the power under rule 43 is limited  to  cases  where  the
   decision to be set aside is one which disposes of proceedings  and  where
   the decision is to be set aside for procedural reasons.

4. I find that the matters referred to in paragraph  1  above  amount  to  a
   procedural irregularity, and I find it is in the interests of justice  to
   set aside the 20 April 2016 decision and remake the error of law decision
   as follows.

Error of law decision and reasons

5. The appellant in this appeal is the Secretary of State. The  claimant  is
   Mr Arif, a national of Pakistan born on 13 April 1983.

6. The Secretary of  State  appealed  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  against  the
   determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge McDade allowing the claimant's
   appeal against the decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  refusing  him
   further leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
   Student, under the points-based system pursuant to paragraph 321A of  the
   Immigration Rules.

7. First-tier Tribunal Judge  PJM  Hollingworth  granted  the  Secretary  of
   State permission to appeal in a decision dated 19 January  2016,  stating
   that it is arguable that an error of law has arisen in  relation  to  the
   construction placed by the First-tier Tribunal Judge on the evidence made
   available by the Secretary of State.


First-tier Tribunal Judge's findings


8. The First-tier Tribunal allowed the claimant's appeal for  the  following
   reasons which I summarise:


    . The Secretary of State has completely  failed  to  identify  precisely
      what wrongdoing they allege of the  claimant.  It  is  said  that  the
      claimant sat three tests; two are marked "questionable" and the  other
      is marked as invalid. The burden is clearly on the Secretary of  State
      to prove exactly what this claimant was alleged to have done wrong.
    . Time and time again appeals are brought on  the  same  bases  as  this
      without cogent evidence to prove the case to the  requisite  standard,
      namely the balance of probabilities. If a computer  system  throws  up
      irregularity in relation to a voice that appears to have been used  in
      a number of different tests and this voice does not  accord  with  the
      claimant's voice, there was no reason why such evidence could  not  be
      put in a form that can be presented to the Judge at the hearing.  Such
      evidence would then surely show, one way or  the  other,  whether  the
      allegation of fraud was well-founded.
    . The Home Office fell far short of discharging its burden of proof.


9. The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  allowed  the  appeal  stating  that  the
   Secretary of State's decision is not in accordance with the law  and  the
   applicable Immigration Rules.


Grounds of appeal


10. The Secretary of State in her grounds of appeal states as  follows.  The
   First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  made  a  material  error  of  law   in   the
   determination by stating that the Secretary of State has  not  discharged
   the burden of proof in demonstrating that this claimant  used  deception.
   The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  reasoning  for   this   is   entirely
   inadequate.


The hearing

11. At the hearing I heard submissions  from  both  parties  as  to  whether
   there is a material error of law in the decision.


12. Mr Walker on behalf of the Secretary of State  stated  that  the  First-
   tier Tribunal Judge  has  not  considered  adequately  that  the  English
   language test of  the  claimant  was  marked  as  "invalid".  He  further
   submitted that if the witness statements  of  Peter  Millington,  Rebecca
   Collings and Ms Singh which provided  background  information  concerning
   the relationship between the Home Office and ETS  and  their  interaction
   had been taken into account the First-tier Tribunal Judge may  have  come
   to a different conclusion. He  further  submitted  that  the  ETS  is  an
   independent system and that it flags up results which have been taken  by
   a proxy test taker.


13. Miss Victor-Mazeli on behalf of the claimant stated that the  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge  gave  adequate  reasons  for  his  conclusions  that  the
   claimant had not taken the English language text  by  proxy.  She  stated
   that in deception cases the evidence provided by the Secretary  of  State
   must be cogent and independent not consist of mere suspicion as it is  in
   the claimant's case.


Decision on error of law

14. The ETS entity is one of a small number of Home Office suppliers of  so-
   called "Secure English Language Testing" ("SELT") and  was  appointed  in
   2011. The test is taken by an applicant who is notified by the ETS of the
   result and ETS issue  a  certificate  which  is  then  forwarded  to  the
   Secretary of State for further leave to remain.

  15. In the recent case of SM and Qadir v Secretary of State for  the  Home
      Department (ETS - Evidence - Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT (IAC) it was
      stated in the headnote: "The generic evidence upon which the Secretary
      of  State  has  relied  to  date  in  all  ETS  cases  has  been  held
      insufficient to discharge the legal burden of proof on  the  Secretary
      of State of proving that  the  TOEIC  certificates  were  procured  by
      dishonesty in circumstances where this evidence, via  expert  evidence
      and  otherwise,  was   demonstrated   as   suffering   from   multiple
      shortcomings and frailties and,  further,  the  evidence  of  the  two
      students concerned was found by  the  Tribunal  to  be  plausible  and
      truthful".


16. Subsequent to my initial decision, the case of Secretary  of  State  for
   the Home Department v Shehzad and anor [2016] EWCA Civ 61 was decided. In
   this case it was found that the Secretary  of  State  bears  the  initial
   burden of furnishing proof of deception,  and  that  this  burden  is  an
   "evidential burden". That means that if the Secretary of  State  provides
   prima facie evidence of deception, the burden shifts to the individual to
   provide a plausible innocent explanation and that if the individual  does
   so the burden shifts back to the Secretary of State.


17. I find that the First-tier Tribunal Judge has made a material  error  of
   law by failing to properly reason why the witness statements provided  by
   the Secretary of State do not discharge the requisite standard of  proof,
   to the normal civil standard of balance of probabilities.


18. The witness statements make it clear that in order to be categorised  as
   invalid on the spreadsheet provided to the Home Office, the case  has  to
   have gone through a  computer  program  analysing  speech  and  then  two
   independent voice analysts. If all three are in agreement  that  a  proxy
   has been used in the test, the test would be categorised as invalid.


19. The respondent provided three  witness  statements  in  support  of  the
   deception allegation and an ETS lookup tool document. The ETS lookup tool
   document shows the claimant's test  has  been  characterised  by  ETS  as
   invalid.  The  witness  statements   clearly   state   that   tests   are
   characterised as invalid where ETS are certain that there is evidence  of
   proxy test taking or impersonation.


20. There was a failure by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  to  take  into
   account all the evidence in the appeal, including  the  evidence  of  the
   claimant, and to give adequate reasons for why the Secretary of State had
   not discharged her burden of proof that the claimant  used  deception  or
   whether  the  claimant  has  provided  provide   a   plausible   innocent
   explanation in his evidence.


  21. I therefore find, in accordance with section  7.  2(b)(i)  the  Senior
      President's Practice Statement of 25 September 2012, that  the  appeal
      requires judicial fact-finding in that the claimant's and his spouse's
      evidence should be considered by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  together
      with  the  other  evidence  including  the  three  witness  statements
      provided by the Secretary of State.

22. The re-making of the decision on appeal will be undertaken by  a  First-
   tier Judge in the First-tier Tribunal  (other  than  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge McDade) on a date to be fixed.

DECISION

23. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

      The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error on
      a point of law.   I set aside the previous decision.

      The decision will be remade in the First-tier Tribunal on a date to be
      fixed.


Signed by                                    Dated: 12 August 2016
           .............................................
             Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana
