
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
IA/44491/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated |
|On 21 October 2014                       |On 28 October 2014        |
|                                         |                          |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL



                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Harding, Counsel
      (instructed by Howe & Co)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS







      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant (the Secretary of State) appealed with  permission
           granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Page on  2  September  2014
           against the determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Carroll
           who had allowed the Appellant's appeal against removal on asylum
           and human rights (Article 3 ECHR)  grounds  in  a  determination
           promulgated on 13 August 2014.


      2.    The Respondent is a national of  Colombia,  born  on  17  August
           1966.  It is not necessary to  repeat  her  immigration  history
           which is set out at [2] to [4] of Judge Carroll's determination.
            In essence the Respondent had made fresh representations to the
           Secretary of State in 2007 that she would be at risk  on  return
           to Colombia because of her sexual orientation.  The  application
           was not refused by the Secretary of State  until  the  issue  of
           Removal Directions on 26 September 2013.   It  is  important  to
           note  that  the  Respondent's  sexuality  was  accepted  by  the
           Secretary of State.


      3.    Permission to appeal was granted because it was considered  that
           it was arguable that (a) the  judge  had  not  given  sufficient
           reasons for his conclusions that the Appellant would be at  real
           risk  on  return  and  (b)  the  Respondent   had   been   given
           insufficient opportunity to consider the Appellant's late  filed
           expert evidence.


      4.    Standard directions were made by the tribunal,  indicating  that
           the appeal would be reheard immediately if a material  error  of
           law were found.  A rule 24 notice opposing the appeal  had  been
           filed on the Respondent's behalf.




      Submissions - error of law


      5.    Mr Wilding for the Appellant relied on the grounds of onwards of
           appeal and the grant of permission to appeal.  Candidly  and  to
           his credit he accepted that ground (b) (above) was  unworthy  of
           pursuit, because no application for an adjournment had been made
           on the Appellant's behalf at the hearing.  Nevertheless  it  was
           arguable that  the  judge's  findings  and  reasoning  had  been
           superficial and inadequate, such that the  appeal  ought  to  be
           revisited.


      6.    It was not necessary for the tribunal to call  upon  Mr  Harding
           for the Respondent, who had referred to his skeleton argument as
           submitted at the First-tier Tribunal hearing  and  the  rule  24
           notice.


      7.    The tribunal indicated that it found no material  error  of  law
           and reserved its determination which now follows.




      No material error of law finding


      8.    The Secretary of State's delay in considering  the  Respondent's
           fresh claim was deplorable.  There had been ample  time  in  the
           intervening six years to obtain country information  and  indeed
           the Appellant's view of that material was set out in the reasons
           for refusal letter as the judge noted in his determination.  The
           only issue was real risk on return.  The judge set out a summary
           of the country material placed in evidence at  [11]  onwards  of
           the determination, which he discussed, noting that the Appellant
           had been selective in quotation.


      9.    The judge's treatment of both parties' evidence  was  sufficient
           and set out the essence of  his  findings.   .   The  judge  was
           entitled to give weight to the report of the Respondent's expert
           and approached that report in a balanced and critical manner.  A
           lengthier survey was not required.  The findings which the judge
           reached were adequately reasoned and open to him


      10.   The tribunal accordingly finds that there was no material  error
           of  law  in  the  determination  and  there  is  no  basis   for
           interfering with the judge's decision.


      DECISION


      The making of the previous decision did not involve the  making  of  a
material error on a point of law and stands unchanged

      Signed                                  Dated




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell     21 October 2014




