

                                    [pic]
Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
                                                Appeal Number: IA/44238/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Determination Promulgated           |
|On 24 October 2014                  |On 18 November 2014                 |
|                                    |                                    |

                                   Before

              DEPUTY JUDGE DRABU CBE OF THE UPPER TIER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                    I.S.
                                                                   Appellant
                                   and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                         ANONYMITY DIRECTION IS MADE

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Suman Sharma of Counsel instructed by Immigration
Advice Bureau.
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a Pakistani national. She was born on 1 January  1977.
    She is the spouse of a British citizen A.B. She was  refused  leave  to
    remain by the respondent and her appeal against the decision was  heard
    on 9 June 2014 at Columbus House, Newport by Judge Walker, a  Judge  of
    the First Tier Tribunal. In a determination promulgated on 23 June 2014
    Judge Walker determined the  appeal  and  allowed  it.  The  respondent
    sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  alleging  that  the
    determination was infected by material errors  of  law.  Permission  to
    appeal was granted by Judge Landes, a  Judge  of  the  First  Tier  for
    reasons given in the decision dated 1 September 2014. When  the  matter
    came before me the  appellant  was  the  Secretary  of  State  and  the
    respondent was I.S. However for the sake of convenience I have retained
    their titles in this determination as they were before the  First  Tier
    i.e. describing I.S.  as  appellant  and  the  Secretary  of  State  as
    respondent.

 2. In granting permission to appeal Judge Landes inter alia  said,  "There
    is force in paragraph 1 of the grounds. The judge  allowed  the  appeal
    under immigration rules  on  the  basis  that  the  appellant  met  the
    requirements of EX.1 but the appellant had leave as a visitor when  she
    made the application for leave to remain and the case of  Sabir  [2014]
    UKUT 0006 holds that in such a case EX.1 does not apply. It seems  very
    likely given the Judge's factual findings that  the  judge  would  have
    allowed the appeal under Article 8 ECHR (or  possibly  even  Article  3
    ECHR (see [37]) in her findings. But she did not analyse  the  case  in
    this way or even refer to Article 8 ECHR in her findings. As the  judge
    was clear that she was allowing  the  appeal  under  immigration  rules
    rather than on any other basis, I do not think it can be said that  any
    error is unarguably immaterial.

 3. Having heard arguments from Mr Nath and Ms Sharma, I was satisfied that
    the decision of Judge Walker was in material error of law as alluded to
    by Judge Landes in her grant of permission decision. Judge  Walker  was
    wrong to allow the appeal under Immigration Rules as was held in  Sabir
    [2014] UKUT 0006. I announced my decision  in  open  court.  I  invited
    parties to make any submissions they wished to assist me  in  re-making
    the decision. In  their  addresses  to  me  both  representatives  were
    content with findings of  fact  made  by  Judge  Walker  and  posed  no
    challenge to any of these.

 4. In re-making the decision, I have therefore  adopted  the  findings  of
    fact made by Judge Walker. The Judge  noted  in  Paragraph  31  of  the
    decision that "there was no serious challenge by the respondent to  the
    fact that the appellant and sponsor are in a  married  relationship.  I
    found that the appellant and the sponsor both spoke very warmly of each
    other and showed a degree of care and concern for each other  which  is
    commensurate with them being in a married relationship. It follows that
    they have a family life together".

 5. Judge Walker had heard oral evidence from the appellant as well as  the
    sponsor.  The  sponsor  was  described  as  "an  extremely   impressive
    witness". The Judge accepted that there are insurmountable obstacles to
    the sponsor and the appellant returning to Pakistan because  they  have
    an inter caste marriage and the community in Pakistan  and  her  family
    will not accept this and that the appellant fears  possible  threat  of
    physical harm. The Judge also accepted the  appellant's  evidence  that
    her family had threatened her and these threats were of  prime  concern
    to the sponsor. The Judge also went on to find, "I  am  satisfied  that
    the appellant and the sponsor will not be able to sustain themselves in
    Pakistan, that the appellant's and the sponsor's fears are well founded
    because  of  their  marriage  and  the  fact  that  the  appellant  was
    previously engaged to someone else in Pakistan  which  arrangement  had
    only been  broken  by  the  marriage  to  the  sponsor."  After  making
    reference to the decision of the Upper Tribunal in Gulshan (Article 8 -
    Rules - Correct approach [2013]  UKUT  (IAC).  The  Judge  allowed  the
    appeal saying, "The inability of the sponsor to  be  able  to  earn  in
    Pakistan, the extremely limited earning  capacity  of  the  sponsor  in
    Pakistan, their anxiety and fearfulness of return to Pakistan and their
    need to relocate to an area where they have no contacts  and  therefore
    no support amount to the appellant having insurmountable  obstacles  to
    family life with the sponsor continuing  outside  the  UK."  The  Judge
    allowed the appeal stating that this was done "as the  appellant  meets
    the requirements of Para EX1 (b) of the Rules which is an exception  to
    the limiting requirements of para276 ADE".

6.   The facts of this  case  are  rare  and  exceptional  and  clearly  and
    undoubtedly engage Article  8  (1)  of  the  Article  8  of  the  ECHR.
    Reminding myself of the leading jurisprudence  on  the  application  of
    Article 8 such as the decisions in Razgar and Huang, I  find  that  the
    preponderance of probabilities establish that it would be  unreasonable
    and disproportionate to remove  the  appellant  from  the  UK  as  such
    removal would bring an end to the  appellants'  family  like  with  the
    sponsor - her husband.  I also remind myself that post  July  2014  pre
    2014 principles set down by case law are diluted. This is  demonstrated
    by the judgement in R (on the application  of  Nagre)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department  [2013]  EWHC  720  (Admin)  wherein  Mr.
    Justice Sales held that Lord Bingham had  not  intended  to  be  unduly
    prescriptive  in  EB  (Kosovo)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2008] UKHL 41 when he said that it was rarely proportionate
    to uphold an order for removal where spouses had a  close  and  genuine
    bond, and the resident spouse  could  not  reasonably  be  expected  to
    follow the removed spouse to the country of removal." The  Court  found
    that that reference was a loose summary of how the ECtHR tended to look
    at the issue rather than an authoritative  expression  of  the  correct
    approach. In the appeal before me I remind myself that  the  Judge  had
    made her findings of fact after  having  considered  all  the  evidence
    including the relevant objective evidence on Pakistan.

 7. In the circumstances this appeal is allowed.


K Drabu CBE
Judge of the First Tier Tribunal.
16 November 2014




TO THE RESPONDENT:

As I have allowed the appeal and for the reasons given  I  concur  with  the
view of Judge Walker that the impugned decision should have been  different,
I make a full award of the fees paid by the appellant.


K Drabu CBE
Judge of the First Tier Tribunal.
16 November 2014

