
[pic]
IAC-PE-SW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/44512/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14th January 2016                 |On 21st January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAIRD


                                   Between

                                MD MOIN UDDIN
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No representation
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by MD Moin Uddin, a citizen if Bangladesh  born  20th
    June 1997.  He appeals against the determination of First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Edwards issued on 14th January 2015  dismissing  on  asylum  and
    human rights grounds the Appellant's appeal against the decision of the
    Respondent made on 3rd October 2014 to refuse to grant  asylum  and  to
    remove him from the United Kingdom.

 2. On 12th March 2015  a  Designated  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    refused permission to appeal.  He noted that  central  to  the  Judge's
    reasons for dismissing the appeal was the notion that  the  Appellant's
    mother and brother had returned to the source of  the  alleged  danger.
    With regard to the best interests of the  Appellant  he  said  that  no
    human rights points were taken at the appeal and there therefore  could
    be no basis for saying that the Judge erred in not dealing with them at
    the hearing.   He  took  into  account  that  the  Appellant  had  been
    represented at the hearing.  The application  was  renewed  before  the
    Upper Tribunal and the Judge granted permission saying:

         "The findings of the First-tier Tribunal are clear and  sustainable
         concerning the asylum plus humanitarian protection  issue  and  the
         grounds do not  demonstrate  any  arguable  error  of  law  in  the
         findings reached in this respect which were open to  the  judge  to
         make on the evidence that was before  him.   However,  the  renewed
         grounds make reference to the Judge's failure to properly  consider
         Article 8 of the ECHR bearing in mind  that  the  Appellant  was  a
         minor who had been living in the  United  Kingdom  since  2009.   I
         consider this as arguable.  Whilst the judge recorded at  paragraph
         30 that no Article 8 point arose in the case this is not consistent
         with the submission made at paragraph 20  although  that  does  not
         seem to reflect the Appellant's circumstances or  at  paragraph  31
         where the Judge recorded the Appellant to be a minor but found that
         he should be reunited with his family in Bangladesh.   Consequently
         there is an arguable issue relating  to  Article  8  of  the  EHCR.
         Permission is granted on that ground only."

 3. The Secretary of State  in  a  Rule  24  Notice  said  that  it  cannot
    reasonably be read down from the contents of paragraph 20 that  Article
    8 was argued in respect of the Appellant's private life.  It  is  clear
    from the determination and  the  application  that  the  Appellant  had
    family in Bangladesh and that his account was  thoroughly  discredited.
    Additionally it is also clear that Article 8 was not relied upon by the
    Appellant via his representatives nor the drafter of the grounds.

 4. The Appellant appeared  before  me.   He  was  unrepresented.   It  was
    submitted in the grounds to the Upper Tribunal that paragraph 276ADE of
    the Immigration Rules ought to have  been  considered  given  that  the
    Appellant has been in the UK for almost six  years.   The  grounds  say
    that it is not disputed that Article 8 of the ECHR was not pursued.  It
    says "probably the reason could  be  that  there  were  no  exceptional
    circumstances".

 5. The fact of the matter is that the  Appellant  was  represented  before
    Judge Edwards.  It is clear from the determination and from the grounds
    that Article 8 was not relied upon.  He said at paragraph 30:

         "Mr Muhammad (the Appellant's  representative)  confirmed  that  no
         Article 8 point arose in this case, I agree."

    The Upper Tribunal Judge who granted permission relies on paragraph  20
    in which reference  is  made  by  Judge  Edwards  to  the  'Appellant's
    daughters' in the UK. This does not make sense  as  the  Appellant  was
    only 17 years old  and  there  is  no  mention  anywhere  else  of  any
    children. This was presumably an  error.  Judge  Edwards  did  consider
    Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009  having
    noted that the Appellant was at the date of the hearing  a  minor.   He
    said that he would be able to be reunited with his family in Bangladesh
    which would facilitate his welfare.

 6. I have given careful consideration to this matter.  I accept that there
    is a little confusion in the determination  but  I  am  satisfied  that
    Article 8 was not raised before the Judge.  There is no evidence in the
    papers before me of any element of a private life in the UK  to  compel
    any Judge to make a finding  that  the  Appellant's  removal  would  be
    disproportionate to the need for effective  immigration  control.   His
    asylum appeal was dismissed.  Permission to appeal  that  decision  was
    refused.  His mother and brother have returned to Bangladesh.   In  all
    these circumstances I find that there was no material error of  law  in
    the determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  that  decision  is
    upheld.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand. The Appellant's  appeal
is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 14th January 2016

N A Baird
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
