

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/44409/2014
                                                               IA/44419/2014
                                                               IA/44437/2014
                                                               IA/44442/2014
                                                               IA/44444/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Stoke                                |    Determination Promulgated|
|on 21st July 2015                             |    On 27th July 2015        |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                           OMOWUNMI OLUWASEUN KAKA
                            TEMITOPE REYIKAT KAKA
                         FARUK PRECIOUS AYOMINE KAKA
                            SHERIFF PROMISE KAKA
                                AYISHAH KAKA
                       (Anonymity direction not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: No attendance
For the Respondent: Mrs Johnstone - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        E.E.M Smith promulgated on the  5th  February  2015  in  which  the
        appeals of this mother and her  four  children,  all  nationals  of
        Nigeria, born on 9th September 1984,  10th  April  2004,  2nd  June
        2006,  8th  June  2014  and  2nd  August  2010  respectively   were
        dismissed. The application is dated 1st November 2013.  Following a
        judicial review of the original refusal the Respondent reconsidered
        the decision and re-refused  on  22nd  October  2014.  It  is  this
        decision that was the subject of the appeal.



Preliminary issue


     2. An application for permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  was
        lodged and limited permission granted on 11th June  2015.  Standard
        directions were  sent  to  the  parties  together  with  notice  of
        hearing. The letter being posted on 23rd June by first  class  post
        to  each  appellant  and  their  representative  Burton  &   Burton
        Solicitors.
     3. The case was called on at 10.00AM, the listed time, but  there  was
        no attendance from the  appellant  nor  any  representative.  As  a
        result of enquiries made the court clerk was advised  by  Burton  &
        Burton that a letter had been sent to Field House in London seeking
        an adjournment. No such letter had been forwarded to Stoke and so a
        duplicate copy was requested. Later in the day, at 13:46, a copy of
        a letter received from Burton & Burton was e-mailed showing  a  fax
        transmission time of 10:14 from  Burton  &  Burton.  The  delay  is
        explained by the fact the fax cover sheet  failed  to  mention  the
        hearing date and so was not  expedited.   A  further  copy  of  the
        letter was received at Stoke at 12:49.
     4. The request is in the following terms:


        We hereby request an urgent adjournment for the above appeal  which
        was due to be heard today at IAC Stoke.


        Unfortunately, counsel has been very  ill  with  fever  since  last
        night and is not able to attend due to  this.   We  have  contacted
        numerous chambers to try and arrange alternative  counsel  but  our
        attempts have been unsuccessful.


        We would be very grateful if an adjournment can be granted  in  the
        interest of fairness and justice as it is  extremely  crucial  that
        counsel is present to put forward the case for the Appellant.


        We look forward to receiving confirmation that an  adjournment  has
        been granted.


     5. No such confirmation was transmitted  and  so  the  representatives
        were aware that the appeal remained as listed.
     6. There is no medical evidence of  illness  or  of  the  attempts  to
        secure alternative representation, which is not  determinative.  It
        is also noted that the  letter  fails  to  explain  why  the  first
        appellant failed to  attend,  if  she  intended  to,  and  why  the
        solicitor advocate who attended  the  First-tier  Tribunal  or  any
        other with conduct of the case failed to attend.
     7. It is important to recognise that the test to be applied is that of
        fairness:  will there be a  deprivation  of  the  affected  party's
        right to a fair hearing if the adjournment request is refused.
     8. The only basis on which permission to appeal  was  granted  in  the
        renewed application is:


        6.    However,  it  is  arguable  that  the  judge  has  erred   in
             considering paragraph 276ADE (iv) of  the  Rules  and  Section
             117(B)(6) of the 2002 Act because it is arguable that  he  did
             not consider reasonableness in this context.  It  is  arguable
             that  he  did  not  properly  consider  the  children's   best
             interests and it follows that it is arguable that that  art  8
             assessment is flawed. Permission granted on this basis only.



Discussion



     9. The assessment of any material legal error has to be  made  on  the
        basis of the evidence made available to the First-tier Tribunal and
        the findings made upon that material. An example of an  attempt  to
        suggest arguable legal error based upon other issues is  the  claim
        in the grounds seeking permission to appeal that the children  have
        contact with their father in the UK whereas there was  no  evidence
        of this available to First-tier Tribunal. Failure to consider  such
        a claim cannot amount to legal error if the First-tier Tribunal was
        unaware of it, hence permission on this basis being refused.  If  a
        claim can be founded on this basis a fresh application can be made.
    10. The basis of the claim before the First-tier Tribunal is set out in
        paragraph 22 of the decision. It was said that the third  appellant
        has resided in the UK for seven years  and  should  be  allowed  to
        remain under the Rules or in the alternative outside the Rules with
        the rights of the remaining appellants cascading from this.
    11. It was not disputed before the First-tier Tribunal that  the  first
        appellant cannot satisfy the requirements of R-LTRPT 1.1  (a-c)  as
        she fails to meet the requirements of paragraph E-LTRPT 3.2 in that
        she has overstayed in the UK of longer than 28  days,  although  as
        the third appellant has been in the UK for longer than seven  years
        it was stated that consideration must  be  given  to  whether  EX.1
        applies.
    12. The First-tier Judge found the best interests of the  children  had
        been considered by the Respondent [para 26].
    13. It  was  not  found  that  the  family  are  able  to  satisfy  the
        requirements of the Rules for reasons that are in  accordance  with
        the evidence. The first appellant was found to be an  'unimpressive
        witness' [para 31]. Her evidence was said to be 'unreliable'.
    14. The Judge found:


           i. If the appellant is removed she will have people to rely upon
              who are more likely to be relatives [35].
          ii. There is  no  suggestion  that  the  health  of  any  of  the
              appellants constitute reasons why  they  could  not  live  in
              Nigeria [36].
         iii. The basis of the first appellant's appeal is that the  third,
              fourth and fifth appellants' have been brought up in  the  UK
              and the second appellant lived for many years in the  UK  and
              that they are integrated [36].
          iv. It is for the appellant to prove her case and  discharge  the
              burden of proof [37].
           v. "I must also take into account of the accepted fact that  the
              1st appellant remained in the UK illegally, did not come as a
              genuine visitor but came intending to  remain.  She  made  no
              attempt to regularise her status before she had her  children
              or  at  any  time  thereafter  until  this  application.  She
              arranged for the 2nd appellant to travel to the  UK  falsely.
              Throughout that time she has been  fully  aware  despite  her
              evidence she was not, that her position in the UK and that of
              her children was at best precarious. [37].
          vi.  "It is accepted ... that the starting point is that the best
              interests of the children are to be with their parents if the
              parent is being removed from  the  UK.  I  am  satisfied  the
              appellant  has  not  discharged  the  burden  of  proof   and
              established there are any insurmountable  obstacles  for  her
              and her children returning to  Nigeria.  They  have  cultural
              ties, there are,  I  am  satisfied,  relatives  and/or  close
              friends who will assist with their integration and not  least
              she has the support of her church that will no doubt help.  I
              have no evidence before me that returning the  children  with
              their mother will have an adverse impact upon  their  health,
              schooling or ability to make friends.  Each is  young  enough
              to adapt as the 2nd appellant adapted when he came to the UK.
               It follows that the appellants do not satisfy the provisions
              of paragraph EX1.1 in Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE.  I  am
              further satisfied the respondent has not failed to follow her
              own guidance" [38].
         vii. In the instant case,  no  good  arguable  grounds  have  been
              advanced that  there  had  been  factors  particular  to  the
              appellants that had not been capable of being  assessed  from
              within the framework of the Rules. The Respondent  considered
              all relevant factors. [40]
        viii. Taking into account the facts surrounding the appellants, the
              case law, the findings made under the Rule and not least  the
              best interests of the children, there are  no  compelling  or
              exceptional circumstances that justify consideration  outside
              the Rules. There is nothing exceptional  in  the  appellants'
              case. [41]


    15. The grounds assert  the  judge  erred  for  in  the  assessment  of
        proportionality the burden rests upon the Respondent. This  may  be
        so under ECHR but the actual finding was that all  relevant  issues
        had been considered within the Rules meaning there was no  need  to
        undertake a freestanding Article 8 assessment. This is an  approach
        confirmed in the recent Court of Appeal decision of  Singh  v  SSHD
        [2015] EWCA Civ 74. As no freestanding  Article  8  assessment  was
        required the issue does not arise.
    16. It is accepted the language used in 276ADE and section 117B of  the
        2002  Act  is  that  of  'reasonableness'.  The  judge  refers   to
        insurmountable  obstacles  which  is  the  test  in  EX.1(b).   The
        definition of this term  is,  however,  relevant:  "EX.2.  For  the
        purposes of paragraph  EX.1.(b)  "insurmountable  obstacles"  means
        there are very significant difficulties which would be faced by the
        appellant or their partner in continuing their family life together
        outside the UK and which could not be overcome or would  result  in
        very serious hardship for the appellant or their  partner".  It  is
        not realistically disputed such a test cannot be satisfied, even if
        the issue was not a grant of leave as a partner.
    17. It is also important to consider the guidance provided in the  case
        of Dube (ss 117A-117D) [2015] UKUT 00090 in which it was found that
        what matters is substance not form. A reading of the decision shows
        the judge was fully aware of the facts  and  circumstances  of  the
        family unit in relation to its connection and ties to  the  UK  and
        Nigeria, the  immigration  history,  and  available  assistance  on
        return. The judge found there was nothing to support a claim it was
        not in the best interests of the  children  to  return  with  their
        mother.  It can be inferred it was found that it was reasonable  in
        all the circumstances for them to do so.
    18. The judge was aware of the time the children have been  in  the  UK
        but on the basis of the evidence relied upon it was not shown  that
        the impact upon them of removal would result in  consequences  that
        support a finding that their best interests required them to remain
        in the UK.
    19. A reading of the evidence relied upon shows  the  findings  of  the
        judge, while not expressed by  reference  to  the  correct  'test',
        shows that it had not been shown to  be  unreasonable  in  all  the
        circumstance for the appellant to return to the  country  of  which
        they are nationals and where family support was found to exist.  As
        in all cases it is accepted that when any person has to relocate  a
        degree of hardship will be experienced but that is not the test. It
        was not proved that the impact was sufficient.  As  the  judge  put
        it, there are simply no compelling or exceptional circumstances  in
        the appellants' cases.
    20. There are no realistic prospects of success on  the  basis  of  the
        evidence provided and pleadings filed.  No  skeleton  argument  has
        been provided to show how this is not so. Other than by a claim the
        children should be entitled to stay in  the  UK  as  the  education
        system is better, they have ties here, and have been here for  some
        time, all of which was considered by the judge, and  which  is  not
        the determinative factor, there is little to be advanced  on  their
        behalf that was not considered at the hearing.  No  arguable  basis
        for delaying the assessment of the making of any  legal  error  has
        been made out.
    21. On the basis of the evidence it is found the Appellants have failed
        to establish that any error the judge may have made is material  to
        the decision to dismiss the appeal.
Decision

    22. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


Anonymity


    23. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 24th July 2015


