
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/44357/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 10 July 2014                               |On 16 July 2014              |
|Extempore judgment                            |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               YASIN TENGIOGLU

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mrs T Starr, Counsel, instructed by Virgo Solicitors



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is the Secretary of State's appeal against a decision by Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Roopnarine-Davies who allowed the appeal of  Mr
    Yasin Tengioglu on Article 8 grounds on 5 April 2014.    Permission  to
    appeal was sought on the grounds that the judge had failed to  consider
    the guidance in the case of Gulshan [2013] UKUT 640  and  had  made  no
    findings  as  to  whether  there  were  compelling  circumstances   not
    sufficiently recognised under the Rules and that she had  proceeded  to
    undertake a freestanding Article 8 assessment. There was  no  challenge
    in the grounds seeking permission to appeal to the assessment  under  a
    freestanding Article 8 assessment in as much as the Secretary of  State
    did not assert that had the decision been taken under  what  could   be
    described as pure Article 8 then there was fault in that assessment.

2.   The claimant arrived in the UK on 21 April  2002  and  claimed  asylum.
    It seems that that asylum claim was refused. It seems that there was no
    appeal against that rejection of his asylum claim.

3.   In December 2004 he sought leave to remain in the UK  on  compassionate
    grounds.  Nothing appears to have happened until the Secretary of State
    took a decision on 3 May 2013 to refuse him leave to remain the UK.  He
    was an illegal entrant.  In a determination promulgated on 1 July  2013
    Immigration Judge Pedro allowed the appeal as not  in  accordance  with
    the law because the human  rights  element  of  that  appeal  had  been
    considered under HC194 which had been introduced  with  effect  from  9
    July 2012.   The  appellant's  application  had  been  made  in  either
    December 2004  or  possibly  November  2009  when  an  application  for
    indefinite leave to remain was submitted on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

4.   The transitional provisions of HC 194 were considered in  the  case  of
    Halimudeen and it was held that where an application  on  human  rights
    grounds was made prior to the introduction of HC 194  and  prior  to  9
    July 2012 then it was to be considered under the old regime.   Although
    this decision contradicts  a  similar  consideration  in  the  case  of
    Edgehill, Halimudeen is the more recent case and I  am  thus  bound  to
    follow that reasoning.

5.   The Secretary of State then went on to consider  that  application  for
    indefinite leave which had been remitted to her by Judge Pedro.

6.   On 10 October 2013 she again refused him leave to remain in the  UK  or
    leave to enter because he is an illegal entrant on the basis of looking
    at his claim on the basis of Appendix FM.  It was on  that  basis  that
    that Judge Pedro had sent it back to the Secretary of State, namely  to
    consider it under the old regime and not the new regime. She had failed
    to consider it on the basis of the very reason it had been sent back to
    her.

7.   Mr Tarlow before me recognised that he had some difficulties given  the
    Court of Appeal decision in Halimudeen and although he  relies  on  the
    grounds seeking permission to appeal upon which permission was granted,
    he could add nothing further.   The difficulties that Mr Tarlow  is  in
    are explicitly because of Halimudeen. Clearly the  Secretary  of  State
    should have considered the application  under  the  "old  regime."   In
    paragraph 10 of the determination  by  Judge  Roopnarine-Davies  it  is
    agreed by the parties that the  issue  in  this  case  is  whether  the
    decision is proportionate to the legitimate aims. Clearly  the  parties
    before Judge Roopnarine-Davies recognised that the assessment was under
    the "old regime" and not the "new regime" and that is how she proceeded
    to reach her decision.  She allowed the appeal.  I can see no error  of
    law in that decision sufficient to set aside the decision.

8.   I therefore dismiss the appeal of the Secretary of State. The  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal stands and the appeal against  the  decision
    of the Secretary of State of 10 October 2013 is allowed on human rights
    grounds.





Signed                                  Date 15th July 2014

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker

