
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/44998/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 August 2016                       |On 10 August 2016                    |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     ZOS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms L Dickinson, Solicitor


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the appeal of the Secretary of State but I will  refer  to  the
    original appellant, a citizen of Nigeria born  on  [  ]  1973,  as  the
    appellant herein.

2.   On 23 October 2014  the  respondent  took  a  decision  to  remove  the
    appellant from the United Kingdom.  She appealed against  the  decision
    and her appeal came before a First-tier  Judge  on  5  May  2015.   The
    appellant was acting in person on that occasion.   There  was  no  Home
    Office Presenting Officer.

3.   The judge accepted the appellant's account.  The judge found  that  the
    respondent's decision was in accordance with the  Rules  and  that  the
    Rules had been appropriately applied.  However he  concluded  that  the
    decision to remove the appellant was not proportionate in the light  of
    the fact, in particular, of her relationship with her long-term partner
    and because there were three children of the family, one  of  whom  was
    British.  He found that the appellant had been credible and  honest  in
    her evidence as regards  her  immigration  history  and  she  had  been
    supported by her partner and  had  numerous  letters  of  support  from
    friends and family.  The judge accordingly  allowed  the  appeal  under
    Article 8.

4.   The Secretary of State appealed and permission to  appeal  was  granted
    on 20 July 2015.  The matter came before Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    McClure on 19 October 2015.  In a decision dated 26  January  2016  and
    sent to the parties on 17 February 2016  the  judge  found  a  material
    error of law in the decision.  He found that the judge  had  failed  to
    have regard to the guidance given in EV (Philippines)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874.   Consideration  had
    to be given to the best interests of the children in the light  of  the
    facts as they were - it appeared that neither  the  appellant  nor  her
    partner had any right under the Immigration Rules to be in the UK.  The
    children's best interests would have to be assessed  in  that  context.
    The question was whether other factors in the interests of the children
    were so strong as to override the circumstances with  regard  to  their
    parents.  In assessing the position of the parent consideration had  to
    be given as to whether or not it was reasonable to expect the  children
    to go to Nigeria.

5.   The judge accordingly directed a fresh  hearing  and  the  hearing  was
    transferred to be heard by me.

6.   The appellant attended.  As previously, her  partner  did  not  attend.
    There were no updating witness statements and  no  further  bundles  or
    evidence.  The position was identical to the position as  it  had  been
    before the First-tier Judge.

7.   I noted that the respondent's notice of  the  decision  on  23  October
    2014 referred to an accompanying letter.  This letter did not appear in
    the bundle.

8.   The appellant produced a passport for  her  child  born  on  15  August
    2014.  This child was born of a relationship which  was  not  with  her
    current partner during a rift in that relationship.   However  she  and
    her partner were reconciled and  it  was  her  evidence  as  stated  in
    paragraph 5 of her witness statement before the First-tier  Judge  that
    her partner had looked after her son as he did her two daughters.   The
    judge found that  the  appellant  had  been  credible  and  honest  and
    accepted all aspects of  the  account  of  her  relationship  with  her
    partner.

9.   The appellant's son's British passport was issued  on  3  October  2014
    prior to the decision, the subject of challenge.  Mr Tarlow was able to
    produce the letter accompanying the  refusal  on  27  March  2013.   Of
    course at that stage the child had not been born.  By the time  of  the
    2014 decision the child had been  born  and  had  been  issued  with  a
    British citizen passport.

10.  I adjourned the matter to enable Mr Tarlow to take instructions.

11.  It transpired that he was unable to identify  any  letter  accompanying
    the 2014 decision.  In the absence for any reasons for the decision  he
    suggested that the matter should be dealt with by allowing  the  appeal
    on the basis that the matter should be remitted  to  the  Secretary  of
    State to give further consideration to the question given that  it  was
    clear that a British citizen child was involved.  It would be  open  to
    the appellant to submit such further evidence as was required about her
    current circumstances and the circumstances of her partner.

12.  It does appear that there is a difficulty in  dealing  with  this  case
    given the absence of a letter which was said to accompany the decision.
     This was accepted by Mr Tarlow.  At the date of that  decision,  as  I
    have said, the appellant did have a child who  had  a  British  citizen
    passport.  It was accepted that the respondent's decision was flawed as
    being  apparently  unreasoned.   The  letter  giving  reasons  for  the
    decision did not accompany the decision and it had not been possible to
    recover it.  Ms Dickinson had no objection to the suggestion  that  the
    appeal be allowed  and  remitted  to  the  respondent  for  a  properly
    reasoned decision to be made.  It does appear important  that  where  a
    child, particularly a British citizen child,  is  involved  appropriate
    care and scrutiny is given to  the  decision  and  the  decision-making
    process.

13.  The appeal is allowed  to  the  extent  that  it  is  remitted  to  the
    respondent for a fresh decision to be made.

Notice of Decision

14.  Appeal allowed as indicated.

Anonymity Order

15.   Judge  McClure  made  an  anonymity  order  in  this  matter.   It  is
    appropriate to make such an order in the light of the fact  that  three
    children are involved.

Fee Award

16.  The First-tier Judge made a fee award in favour of the  appellant.   In
    the circumstances of this case I see no reason to interfere  with  that
    award.

Signed                                  Date 9 August 2016

G Warr
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
