

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/44089/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |             Decision and Reasons       |
|                                         |Promulgated                             |
|On 2 December 2015                       |             On 8 December 2015         |
|                                         |                                        |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL

                                   Between

|           |Kwaku Agyenim-Boateng                             |Appellant    |
|           |(Anonymity Order Not Made)                        |             |
|                                                                            |
|and                                                                         |
|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department    |Respondent   |


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R. Youssefian, of Counsel, instructed by D J Webb
                    & Co Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr Staunton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction and background facts:


 1. The appellant is a national of Ghana, born on 1 November 1972.  He  has
    been granted permission to appeal the decision of Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal ("FtT") Kelly who, following a hearing on  15  May  2015,
    dismissed his appeal under the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 (the "2006 Regulations") against  a  decision  of  the
    respondent of 17 October 2014 to refuse to issue him with  a  permanent
    residence card as the spouse of an EEA national  (a  Ms  Asantewaa  Ama
    Adae, the "sponsor") exercising Treaty rights.

 2. The respondent refused the application for  a  residence  card  because
    enquiries received by the respondent revealed that the  Dutch  identity
    card which the appellant had submitted with his application in order to
    establish the identity of his EEA spouse  had  been  reported  lost  or
    stolen to the relevant authorities. The  respondent  therefore  decided
    that the appellant had failed to provide the necessary evidence to show
    that his spouse was an EEA national as  claimed.  The  decision  letter
    proceeds to state as follows:

             "In  making   the   decision   to   refuse   your   application
             consideration has been given to the following:
                 ...
                 ...
                 ...
                 ...
                 Evidence of the EEA sponsor exercising treaty rights
                 ..."

 3. The applicable provisions are described by the judge at para 4  of  his
    decision. The appellant relied upon regulation  15(1)(b)  of  the  2006
    Regulations which provides for  the  grant  of  a  permanent  right  of
    residence in the UK to a non-EEA national spouse of an EEA national  if
    he/she has resided in the UK with the EEA national in  accordance  with
    the 2006 Regulations for a continuous period of five years.

The decision of the FtT

 4. The sponsor did not attend the hearing before the  judge.  The  judge's
    Record of Proceedings shows that Ms A Torr, a legal  representative  of
    DJ Webb & Co Solicitors, informed the judge at the commencement of  the
    hearing that the sponsor had worked late the night before and could not
    attend the hearing. Ms Torr  informed  the  judge  that  there  was  no
    application for an adjournment.

 5. The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant and  submissions  from
    the parties' representatives. The evidence and the submissions are  set
    out at paras 9 to 16.

 6. The judge found that the appellant had not established that the sponsor
    was exercising Treaty rights. His reasons are given at paras 18-22.

The grounds

 7. The grounds may be summarised as follows:

    i)      (Ground 1) The judge had failed to attach proper weight to  the
        documentary evidence. There were over 90  pages  of  documents.  He
        failed to make findings on the documentary evidence. He  failed  to
        say why the documentary evidence could not be relied  upon.  It  is
        contended that, given the wealth of the documentation, the  judge's
        conclusion that the appellant had  failed  to  establish  that  his
        sponsor was exercising Treaty rights was perverse.

    ii)     (Ground 2) The judge erred  by  placing  undue  weight  on  the
        appellant's lack of knowledge about the sponsor's  employment.  The
        appellant had explained that the reason why he had little knowledge
        of his wife's employment  was  at  the  time  was  because  he  had
        suffered a stroke in 2012 and was  in  recovery.  Furthermore,  the
        absence of the sponsor did not diminish the weight  or  credibility
        of the documentary evidence in the appellant's bundle.

    iii)    (Ground 3)  The  respondent  had  the  burden  of  proving  her
        allegation that the documents relied upon  by  the  appellant  were
        forged. The judge erred in failing to state whether he accepted the
        respondent's allegation that the documents were false.

    iv)     (Ground 4) There was procedural unfairness. The decision letter
        did not raise the issue of the sponsor  exercising  Treaty  rights.
        The sole basis of the  refusal  was  that  the  appellant  had  not
        provided adequate evidence  to  show  that  his  wife  was  an  EEA
        national. The respondent raised the issue of  whether  the  sponsor
        was exercising Treaty rights for the first time at the hearing. The
        appellant was not put on notice that this was a live issue.

 8. Ground 4  was  developed  further  at  the  hearing  by  Mr  Youssefian
    submission that the respondent had conceded in the decision letter that
    the sponsor was exercising Treaty rights for a continuous period  of  5
    years.  In this respect, Mr Youssefian relied upon  that  part  of  the
    decision letter that is quoted at my para 2 above.

The grounds

 9. At the commencement of the hearing, I gave the parties  copies  of  the
    decisions of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal in RM (Kwok  On  Tong:
    HC395 para 320) India [2006] UKAIT 00039 and CP (Section 86(3) and (5);
    wrong immigration rule) Dominica [2006] UKAIT 00040.

10. Mr Youssefian  asked  me  to  consider  the  grounds  cumulatively.  In
    relation  to  ground  2,  Mr  Youssefian  drew  my  attention  to   the
    appellant's explanation before the judge for not being able to  provide
    information about the sponsor's employment, i.e. that he  had  recently
    had a stroke which was affecting his memory (para  10  of  the  judge's
    decision). Mr Youssefian submitted that this ties  in  with  ground  4,
    that the appellant had not been given notice that it was a  live  issue
    as to whether the sponsor was exercising Treaty rights and he therefore
    had not been given a fair opportunity to deal with the issue.

11. Initially Mr Youssefian agreed that the decision letter did not concede
    that the sponsor was exercising Treaty rights,  making  the  submission
    initially that there was no need for an express  concession  given  the
    terms of that part of the decision letter quoted at  my  para  2  above
    which Mr Youssefian submitted made it clear  that  the  respondent  had
    considered  the  evidence  that  was  submitted  as  to  the  sponsor's
    employment. However, by the end of the hearing, Mr Youssefian  accepted
    that he was in effect saying that the decision letter conceded that the
    sponsor had been exercising Treaty rights for a continuous period of  5
    years. He submitted that the appellant had no notice that  this  was  a
    live issue and that it only became clear in the course of  the  closing
    submissions on the respondent's behalf before the judge.

12. I asked Mr Youssefian why  there  were  any  documents  concerning  the
    sponsor's employment in the appellant's bundle if it was not considered
    by the appellant and his representatives that it was necessary for  the
    appellant to establish that the sponsor was exercising  Treaty  rights.
    In addition, it was argued in the skeleton argument that was before the
    judge that the evidence  adduced  showed  that  the  sponsor  had  been
    exercising Treaty rights  for  a  continuous  period  of  5  years.  Mr
    Youssefian informed me that the documents were included by way of  good
    practice.

13. Mr Youssefian submitted that, although not in  his  grounds,  the  fact
    that the judge had not made a finding on the issue whether the  sponsor
    was an EEA national notwithstanding that this was the core issue in the
    decision letter shows that the decision of the judge  as  a  whole  was
    vitiated by errors. If he  had  found  that  the  sponsor  was  an  EEA
    national, the proper course would have been to allow the appeal on  the
    ground that the decision was not in accordance with the law  and  remit
    the case to the respondent for a decision on the question  whether  the
    sponsor was exercising Treaty rights.

14. In this respect, I referred Mr Youssefian to Greenwood  (No.  2)  (para
    398 considered) [2015] UKUT 00629 (IAC), in which a panel  led  by  the
    President of the Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum  Chamber)  held
    that the Tribunal no longer has power to remit a case to the  Secretary
    of State.  Furthermore,  it  appeared  from  the  appellant's  skeleton
    argument that was before the judge that it was not argued that the case
    should be remitted to the Secretary of State.

15. In relation to ground 3, Mr Youssefian submitted that it was not  clear
    whether the respondent had contended at the hearing that the  documents
    concerning the sponsor's employment were false or whether it  was  said
    that their contents were not reliable. The judge did not make a finding
    on this point.

16. In response and in relation to grounds 1 and 2, Mr  Staunton  submitted
    that it was fully open to the judge to assess the evidence  and  decide
    what weight was to be given to the documentary evidence and what weight
    was to be given to the oral evidence. He was entitled to place  greater
    weight on the oral evidence.

17. In relation to ground 3, Mr Staunton said that it was the  respondent's
    position that she had not made an allegation that  the  documents  were
    false. The submission advanced on the respondent's  behalf  before  the
    judge was that the documents were not reliable as  to  their  contents.
    Accordingly, the respondent did not have  the  burden  of  establishing
    that the documents were false. It was open to the judge to decide  that
    the documents were not reliable as to their contents.

18. In relation to ground 4, Mr Staunton drew my attention to the fact that
    para 10 of the appellant's witness statement stated  that  the  sponsor
    was  exercising  Treaty  rights.  It  as  open  to   the   respondent's
    representative  before  the  judge  to  question  the  appellant  about
    documentary evidence that had not been  placed  before  the  respondent
    when she made her decision. The respondent's decision  letter  did  not
    concede the issue.  In the part of the decision letter relied  upon  by
    Mr Youssefian, the respondent had  merely  listed  the  nature  of  the
    documents that were before her. This did not amount to a concession. It
    was clear  from  the  first  page  of  the  decision  letter  that  the
    application was refused because the identity card  submitted  had  been
    reported lost or stolen and that the respondent  had  not  gone  on  to
    consider  the  remainder  of  the  documents.  In  other   words,   the
    application failed to the first hurdle.

19. Mr Youssefian  submitted  that  even  if  I  was  against  him  on  his
    submission that the appellant had not been given sufficient notice that
    it was necessary for him to show that the sponsor was exercising Treaty
    rights, the judge had failed to give adequate reasons  as  to  why  the
    documents could not be relied upon. There were 90 pages  of  documents.
    The judge had failed to consider the fact that the  appellant  was  not
    able to provide answers about the sponsor's employment because  he  had
    problems with his memory due to the stroke he had suffered. At para  20
    of  his  decision,  the  judge  had  only  mentioned  the   applicant's
    explanation. Para 20 does not show that the judge  had  considered  the
    explanation properly nor did the judge  indicate  the  weight  that  he
    attached to the explanation.

20. I reserved my decision.



Assessment

21. I will first deal with grounds 3 and 4.

22. Ground 3 is misconceived. It is plain that it was not the  respondent's
    case before the judge that the documents were false. It is only if  the
    respondent had made such an allegation that the burden would have  been
    upon her to establish that the documents were false. It is  plain  from
    the  judge's  summary  of   the   submissions   of   the   respondent's
    representative (para 15) that the  submission  advanced  was  that  the
    documents and the other evidence to the effect that  sponsor  had  been
    exercising Treaty rights for a continuous period of 5  years  were  not
    reliable.

23. Ground 4 is also misconceived. In the first place, any concession needs
    to be clearly stated. A concession on the  part  of  the  Secretary  of
    State that a particular requirement is satisfied cannot be inferred.

24. I agree with Mr Staunton that it is clear when the decision  letter  is
    read as a whole that the decision maker had refused the application  on
    the single ground that the  appellant  had  not  established  that  his
    spouse was an EEA national;  the  decision  maker  had  not  considered
    whether  the  remaining  requirements  of  regulation   15(1)(b)   were
    satisfied. It is clear from RM and CP that absent a specific acceptance
    by the respondent that particular requirements are satisfied  (and,  in
    that respect, there was such acceptance by the respondent), it  remains
    for an appellant  to  establish  that  he  does  satisfy  any  relevant
    requirements. This would have been apparent to the  appellant  and  his
    representatives.

25. I do not accept that the appellant was not in fact aware that he had to
    establish that the sponsor had been  exercising  Treaty  rights  for  a
    continuous period of 5 years. His witness  statement  stated  that  the
    sponsor had been exercising Treaty rights. The skeleton argument relied
    upon before the judge argued that the  documentary  evidence  submitted
    showed  that  the  sponsor  had  been  exercising  Treaty  rights.  The
    appellant's two bundles contained many documents as  to  the  sponsor's
    employment over some years. Mr Youssefian submitted that it only became
    apparent during the  submissions  of  the  respondent's  representative
    before the judge that it was a  live  issue  whether  the  sponsor  was
    exercising Treaty rights for a continuous period of 5 years.  I  reject
    this submission. It is clear  from  the  appellant's  cross-examination
    that he was being cross-examined on this issue.  At  no  point  did  Ms
    Torr, who represented the appellant, object to the questioning  on  the
    basis that the appellant had not been given notice of this being a live
    issue. She did not say anything in  her  closing  submissions  to  that
    effect, nor did she at any point request the judge for  an  adjournment
    to enable the appellant to  deal  with  the  issue.  It  has  not  been
    suggested before me that, if the appellant had been given such  notice,
    he would have produced more evidence.

26. In all of the circumstances, I have  no  hesitation  in  rejecting  the
    submission of Mr Youssefian, who did not appear on  appellant's  behalf
    before the judge, that the documents in  the  appellant's  two  bundles
    were submitted as a matter of good practice and that the appellant  did
    not  have  any  notice  that  the  requirement  that  the  sponsor  was
    exercising Treaty rights for a continuous period of 5 years was a  live
    issue.

27. In any event, the relevant part of  the  decision  letter  relied  upon
    (quoted at my para 2) reads:  "In making the decision  to  refuse  your
    application consideration has been  given  to  ....  Evidence  of   EEA
    sponsor  exercising  Treaty  rights".   All  that  this  refers  to  is
    "evidence that the sponsor is exercising Treaty rights". Thus, even  if
    I am wrong in what I say at my paras 23 and 24,  it  simply  cannot  be
    inferred from this quote that the  respondent  had  conceded  that  the
    sponsor was exercising Treaty rights  for  a  continuous  period  of  5
    years. I therefore reject ground 4. This is sufficient to reject ground
    4, whatever may be said about my reasoning in paras 23-26 above.

28. I therefore reject ground 4.

29. Before turning to the remaining grounds, this is a convenient point  at
    which to deal with Mr Youssefian's submission,  raised  for  the  first
    time at the hearing, that the judge had erred  in  failing  to  make  a
    finding as to whether the sponsor was an EEA national and that,  if  he
    had found that she was an  EEA  national,  the  appropriate  course  of
    action would have been to remit the case to the Secretary of State  for
    her to consider whether the sponsor had been exercising Treaty  rights.
    This ground was not in the grounds of  application  for  permission  to
    appeal. No application was made for the grounds to be amended.  In  any
    event, it was held in Greenwood No. 2 that the Tribunal does  not  have
    power to remit a case. Furthermore, and by analogy with  the  reasoning
    of the Court of Appeal at paras 18-23 of the judgment in AJ (India), SP
    (India) and EJ (Nigeria) v. Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2011] EWCA Civ 1191, the judge was entitled to proceed  and  determine
    all the issues.

30. In relation to ground 2, the judge had  considered  (at  para  20)  the
    appellant's evidence that he had experienced problems with  his  memory
    following the stroke he had suffered. It is obvious  from  the  judge's
    reasoning as a whole that he was not prepared to place much  weight  on
    the appellant's explanation. He was entitled to place little weight  on
    the explanation, especially given that it  was  not  supported  by  any
    medical evidence to the  effect  that  his  memory  of  events  at  the
    relevant time was affected by his stroke. Equally, it would  have  been
    open to another judge to have accepted the explanation. In my judgment,
    there is nothing of substance in ground 2.

31. In relation to ground 1, I have considered the documentary evidence  in
    the appellant's bundle. There  are  documents,  for  example,  from  HM
    Revenue & Customs and from various employers, including Tesco Metro and
    the Imperial London Hotels Limited, which appear to cover the  relevant
    5-year period and which, if reliable, do show that the sponsor has been
    exercising Treaty rights for the relevant period.  When  seen  in  that
    context, the judge's reasoning  at  paras  29  and  30  shows  that  he
    rejected the documentary evidence of the sponsor's  employment  in  the
    main because she had not attended the hearing.

32. I do not consider that, even if the judge had attached little weight to
    the appellant's explanation for not being able to give  evidence  about
    her employment since his stroke, this is adequate by way of explanation
    to deal with  the  documents  in  the  two  bundles  submitted  on  the
    appellant's behalf. This is because of the large number  of  documents,
    that they appear to cover the  entirety  of  the  relevant  period  and
    because the judge did not say that there were any difficulties with the
    documents. In my judgment, in  the  particular  circumstances  of  this
    case, the judge did not adequately deal with the documents contained in
    the appellant's bundles.

33. Given the failure of the judge to descend into any detail about any  of
    the  documents  in  the  two  bundles  of  documents,  the  inescapable
    conclusion is that the judge did not  consider  it  necessary  to  even
    embark upon a consideration of any of the documents.   I  am  satisfied
    that he effectively ignored the documents simply  because  (or  largely
    because) the sponsor had not attended to give evidence.

34. I have therefore concluded that the judge did err in law  as  contended
    in ground 1. I am satisfied that, given that the  documents  appear  to
    cover the relevant 5-year period, the error was material.

35. I have therefore decided to set aside the decision of the judge in  its
    entirety.

36. The effect of Practice Statement 7 of the Senior  President's  Practice
    Statement of 25 September 2012 is such that,  in  most  cases  where  a
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal  (FtT)  is  set  aside,  the  Upper
    Tribunal will go on to re-make the decision, instead of  remitting  the
    case  to  the  FtT.  The  position  is,  however,  otherwise   in   the
    circumstances described in Practice Statement  7.2(a)  and  (b).  These
    circumstances are where (a) the effect of the error  of  law  has  been
    that a party has been deprived of a fair hearing or  other  opportunity
    for that party's case to be put to and considered by the FTT;  or  (b),
    there are highly compelling reasons why the decision should not be  re-
    made by the UT (these will be rare).

37. Having regard to para 7 of the Practice  Statement  and  the  Court  of
    Appeal's judgment in JD (Congo) & Others [2012] EWCA Civ 327, I  am  of
    the view that in this case Practice Statement 7(2)(a) applies. This  is
    because the appeal needs to be heard afresh with all issues at large.

38. Accordingly, pursuant to s.12 of the Tribunals, Courts and  Enforcement
    Act 2007, read together with the above Practice Statement, I find  that
    Judge Kelly erred in law. I set aside his decision and remit  the  case
    to the FtT with the direction that it not be dealt with by Judge Kelly.



39. Paras 9 to 13 of the determination of Judge Kelly stand as a record  of
    the oral evidence given at the hearing before the judge.

40. The following directions are issued to the parties:

Directions

      The appellant to produce at the hearing the originals of  all  of  the
    documents in his bundles submitted under cover of a letter dated 11 May
    2015 and a letter dated 12 May 2015 from DJ Webb & Co Solicitors.





Signed                                             Date:  7 December 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill
