
[pic]
st

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/44106/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At Field House                       |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 29th October 2015                 |On 21st December 2015                 |
|                                     |                                      |


                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                           MR MUHAMMAD UMAIR SAEED
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S. Hosein, Counsel, instructed by Simon Noble,
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr C. Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. Although it is the respondent who is appealing for convenience  I  will
    continue to refer to  the  parties  as  they  were  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a national of Pakistan born on the 16th  August  1987.
    He came to the United Kingdom as a student on 23 June 2011.  His  leave
    was extended until 30 October 2014. Meantime, on 18  December  2013  he
    married a UK citizen, Ms Priest.

 3. On 29 August 2014 he applied for leave to remain as a spouse. This  was
    refused on 20 October 2014. The respondent  accused  him  of  arranging
    personation for an English test taken on 21st August 2012.  In  support
    of  this  the  respondent  relied  upon  two  generic  statements  from
    officials in relation to personation at English  tests  and  a  screen-
    print of a  spreadsheet  stating  the  appellant's  test  results  were
    invalid or questionable. Consequently, the application was  refused  on
    the basis of suitability-S.LTR 2.2 of appendix FM.

 4. It was accepted the appellant's marriage was genuine and subsisting and
    his wife was a British citizen. Consequently, he  met  the  eligibility
    requirements. EX1 was considered and the conclusion was there  were  no
    insurmountable obstacles to the relationship continuing overseas.

 5. Regard was had to his private life under paragraph 276 ADE (1) (vi) and
    the respondent did not accept there would be very significant obstacles
    to his reintegration into Pakistan.

 6. The respondent did not find any  exceptional  circumstances.  Reference
    was made to the alleged personation as well as the  fact  he  had  been
    arrested for handling stolen goods on 30 January 2014.

The First-tier Tribunal

 7. The appellant's appeal was heard by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Povey at Newport on the 27 February 2015.  Mr  Hosein  represented  the
    appellant, as he does now. In a decision promulgated on 13  March  2015
    the appeal was allowed on freestanding article 8 grounds.

 8. The judge did not find the claimed personation established.  The  judge
    found as a fact that the appellant did take and pass the  English  test
    in 2012 and did not engage in deception.

 9. The judge set out the caring responsibilities of the  appellant's  wife
    towards her father. She also works as a full-time carer and her  mother
    and the appellant cared for her father in her absence.  She  has  lived
    in the United Kingdom all her life; is close to her parents,  whom  she
    supports practically and emotionally. However, the judge concluded  the
    circumstances did not meet the high threshold of  EX1.  Similarly,  276
    ADE (1)(vi) did not apply.

10. The judge then went on to conduct a freestanding article 8  assessment.
    Family life was found to exist not only between the appellant  and  his
    wife but also between the appellant and her father. In considering  the
    reasonableness of the appellant's wife leaving the United  Kingdom  the
    judge referred to a lower threshold than under the  immigration  rules.
    The conclusion was that the respondent's decision was disproportionate.
    At paragraph 45 the judge referred to section 117 B  of  the  2002  Act
    stating  the  appellant  spoke  English  and  believed  he   would   be
    financially independent.

The Upper Tribunal.

11. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  was  sought  on  the  basis
    First-tier Tribunal Povey did not apply correctly the burden  of  proof
    in relation to the respondent's allegation of  personation.  The  judge
    had said that the burden of proof was upon the  appellant  whereas  the
    respondent  correctly  states  that  the  initial  burden  of   showing
    deception was on her. It  was  also  contended  that  the  evidence  of
    personation was strong and that the judge's reasoning  and  conclusions
    on this were unsafe. Furthermore, it was contended the judge had failed
    to adequately set out section 117 considerations.

12. Permission to appeal was refused by a judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    and the application was renewed to the Upper  Tribunal.  Permission  to
    appeal was granted in relation to the question of burden  and  standard
    of proof in light of the judge's reference to an  obligation  upon  the
    respondent to act fairly. Permission was also granted  on  whether  the
    judge was right to think that section 117  applied  a  lower  threshold
    than the immigration rules.

Consideration

13. The judge did not set out the shifting burden of  proof  which  applies
    where the Secretary of State claims deception. The judge does refer  to
    the obligation on the respondent to act fairly. I  believe  this  is  a
    reference to the  respondent  not  providing  details  of  the  alleged
    personation to the appellant other than the two generic statements  and
    the screen-print.  Paragraph  32  indicates  the  judge  concluded  the
    respondent  did  not  provide  sufficient  evidence  to   support   the
    allegation.

14. The judge introduced the  public  law  concept  of  fairness.  This  is
    different from setting out the burden of  proof.   The  judge  has  not
    indicated that there is  a  burden  upon  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    demonstrate deception. All the judge states is that the burden of proof
    is on the appellant. Consequently, the judge did not  set  out  clearly
    the shifting burden of proof in play.

15. It might be implied from  the  reference  to  fairness  the  judge  was
    indicating some burden on the respondent. However  this  requires  some
    speculation and had the  appellant  lost  his  appeal  a  challenge  in
    relation to the failure to set out the respective burdens  clearly  has
    greater force. Supposing the judge did err I cannot see how it  made  a
    material difference when the appeal is allowed .The  person  who  could
    have lost out from the failure was the appellant not the respondent.

16. Regarding the judge's comments about the  thresholds:  as  I  read  the
    decision, this is not a reference to section 117  in  relation  to  the
    immigration rules. Rather, the comment relates to the wording  of  EX1,
    namely, the need to show insurmountable obstacles and paragraph 276 ADE
    and significant obstacles to reintegration. The judge deals with  these
    at paragraph 38 and 39.The judge,  whilst  acknowledging  difficulties,
    found the threshold  of  significant  difficulties  or  of  significant
    obstacles to reintegration was not met. The judge then  turned  to  the
    freestanding article 8 assessment and at paragraph  43  refers  to  the
    proportionality test. I understand the judge as alluding to all of  the
    factors involved in this, making it a wider test than that  in  EX1  or
    276 ADE (1)(vi). The proportionality assessment can  include  not  only
    his wife's relationship and support for parents and her career  in  the
    United Kingdom. Consequently, I see no error in law in this.

17. The judge does not refer in detail to section 117 B but  does  indicate
    an awareness of the need to consider it. In Dube (ss.117A-117D)  [2015]
    UKUT 90 (IAC) it was held that Judges are duty-bound to have regard  to
    the specified considerations. It is not an error  of  law  to  fail  to
    refer to ss.117A-117D considerations if the judge has applied the  test
    according to its terms; what matters is substance,  not  form.  In  the
    present case there is no dispute that the appellant was  here  lawfully
    when he met his wife. The judge refers to his command  of  English  and
    his likely financial independence.

18. In conclusion, I do not find any material error of law in Judge Povey's
    decision allowing the appellant's appeal

Decision.

The decision of Judge Povey allowing  Mr  Saeed's  appeal  on  human  rights
grounds shall stand.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly

