
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/44516/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 16th June 2014                             |On 29th August 2014          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL

                                   Between

                             Gloria Reyes Padua

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Maka (Counsel)
For the  Respondent:     Ms  J  Isherwood  (Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant's appeal against  a  decision  to  remove  her  from  the
    United Kingdom was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge K S H  Miller
    ("the judge") in a determination promulgated on 26th February 2014.

2.   The appellant arrived in the United  Kingdom  in  February  2002,  with
    leave valid until April that year.  On 4th April 2012, she applied  for
    leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules ("the  rules").   Over  a
    year later, that application was refused and, in due course, a  removal
    decision was made in October 2013.  The appellant's case  was  advanced
    in reliance upon Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.   The  judge
    took into account Gulshan [2013] UKUT  00640.   He  accepted  that  the
    appellant has played a supportive role in the household of two  British
    citizens and took into account  letters  of  support  written  by  some
    twelve people.  On the other side of the coin, as the judge put it, the
    appellant's leave expired in April 2002 but she remained in the  United
    Kingdom thereafter.  In addition, the appellant took employment without
    permission in the ten years or so before she applied to regularise  her
    position.  In the final, substantive paragraph  of  the  determination,
    the judge concluded that there were no exceptional circumstances in the
    case and found that it would not be unjustifiably harsh to  expect  the
    appellant to return to the Philippines.

3.   In an application for permission to appeal, it was contended  that  the
    judge erred  in  failing  to  consider  whether  the  removal  decision
    breached the appellant's Article 8 rights, particularly in the  private
    life context.  The judge did not consider  whether  an  assessment  was
    required and so did not come to a decision on  the  proportionality  of
    the adverse decision.  Permission to appeal was granted on  15th  April
    2014,  the  judge  granting  permission  noting  that  the  appellant's
    application was made on 4th April 2012, before substantial  changes  to
    the rules came into effect on 9th July 2012.

4.   In a brief Rule  24  response,  the  Secretary  of  State  opposed  the
    appeal.  The judge properly found that the  appellant's  removal  would
    not amount to a disproportionate interference with her  rights.   There
    was no material error.

Submissions on Error of Law

5.   Mr Maka handed up a skeleton argument.   In  refusing  the  appellant's
    application, the Secretary of State noted that her application was made
    before 9th July 2012 and so regard was expressly had to  the  rules  in
    place before that date.  This was the correct approach in the light  of
    the judgment of the Court of Appeal in Edgehill and Another [2014] EWCA
    Civ 402.  The appellant was entitled to  the  benefit  of  transitional
    provisions in the rules and, as the Court of Appeal  held,  it  is  not
    lawful to reject an Article 8 application made before 9th July 2012  in
    consequence of a failure to meet the requirements of the rules in force
    with effect from that date.

6.   In oral submissions, Mr Maka said that the judge erred in  the  Article
    8 assessment.  The appellant's application was made in April 2012.  The
    new rules did not apply.  The  Secretary  of  State,  in  refusing  the
    application, appeared to accept this  but  then  went  on  to  make  an
    assessment under the new rules.  The judge's Article 8  assessment  was
    flawed because, as was clear from his direction in relation to Gulshan,
    the new rules had a substantial, if not  determinative  impact  on  his
    reasoning.  As a matter  of  law,  the  Article  8  assessment  in  the
    appellant's case required no consideration of compelling circumstances.



7.    Secondly,  the  judge  erred  in  finding,  at  paragraph  40  of  the
    determination, that if the appellant were to succeed as  a  person  who
    had worked here unlawfully for some years, this might set a  precedent.
    The law required an Article 8 assessment to be fact specific and to  be
    an overall one which took into account, where relevant, the  impact  of
    removal on other persons.  The assessment made by  the  judge  did  not
    comply  with  these  principles.    In   particular,   there   was   no
    consideration of the impact on the Pars family, for whom the  appellant
    performed valuable service during the loss of Mr and Mrs Pars'  son  in
    May 2012 and following the death of Mrs Pars' mother in  October  2013.
    As at the date of the hearing, the appellant provided care and  support
    to the couple, Mr Pars now requiring a kidney transplant.  These  facts
    were required to be taken into account in the Article 8 assessment.  If
    the  judge  had  realised  that  there  was  no  need  to  search   for
    circumstances not recognised under the rules, he might have carried out
    an Article 8  assessment  in  the  light  of  domestic  and  Strasbourg
    authority, as required.

8.   Ms Isherwood said  that  paragraph  A277C  of  the  rules  fell  to  be
    applied.  Edgehill concerned applications and decisions before 9th July
    2012.  In this case, the Secretary of State's adverse decision was only
    made in the autumn of 2012.  The judge had before him the Secretary  of
    State's decision letter, containing an assessment under the old  rules,
    the new rules and in relation to Article 8.  He properly gave weight to
    the appellant's evasion of immigration control.  He did not accept  the
    account of her circumstances in the Philippines.  He did  not  overlook
    the support given to the Pars family and was entitled to give weight to
    the appellant's conduct, including her  unlawful  employment.   Whether
    the case was considered under the old or the new rules would have  made
    no material  difference.   There  would  have  been  no  difference  in
    relation to the Article 8 assessment.  Relevant in this context was the
    decision of the Court of Appeal in Haleemudeen [2014] EWCA Civ 558,  at
    paragraph  43  and  paragraph  47  in  particular.    The   appellant's
    immigration status was precarious.

9.   In a brief reply, Mr Maka said that  the  error  was  apparent  in  the
    determination.  The starting point for the judge was a requirement  for
    exceptional or compelling circumstances.

Conclusion on Error of Law

10.  I am grateful to Ms Isherwood and Mr Maka  for  their  submissions.   I
    conclude that the judge did materially err, as is shown  by  paragraphs
    34, 35 and 41 of the determination in particular.  In the light of  the
    appellant's inability to meet the requirements of the rules,  in  issue
    was the need for an Article 8  assessment.   The  judge  dismissed  the
    appeal in the absence of compelling or  exceptional  circumstances,  or
    unjustifiably harsh consequences, although none were  required  in  the
    particular circumstances of the case.  In the  light  of  the  guidance
    given by the Court of Appeal in  Edgehill,  what  was  required  was  a
    straightforward Article 8 assessment, applying domestic and  Strasbourg
    authority where appropriate.  The  guidance  given  in  Gulshan,  which
    suggests that an  Article  8  assessment  outside  the  rules  is  only
    required if there are arguably good grounds for granting leave  outside
    the rules, so that a judge would then be required to  consider  whether
    there were compelling circumstances not sufficiently  recognised  under
    the rules, does not apply to applications made  before  9th  July  2014
    which were  undecided by that date.  The appellant was entitled to rely
    on the transitional provisions contained in HC 194.

11.  With great  respect  to  the  very  experienced  judge  who  wrote  the
    determination,  his  conclusion  that   there   were   no   exceptional
    circumstances  or  unjustifiably   harsh   consequences   reveals   the
    application of a threshold that was not required.

12.  I conclude that the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  contains  a
    material error of law and must be remade.

13.  In a discussion with  the  representatives  regarding  the  appropriate
    venue, it became apparent that substantial fact-finding would be needed
    and it was likely that Mr Pars  would  wish  to  give  evidence.   Both
    representatives agreed that  in  these  circumstances  the  appropriate
    course, taking into account the  Presidential  Practice  Statement  and
    section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act  2007,
    would be to remit the appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  at  Taylor
    House, to be remade there before a judge other than First-tier Tribunal
    Judge K S H Miller.   The findings of fact made by the  judge  are  not
    preserved and all issues are at large.






Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell


