
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Numbers:
IA/44914/2014

                                                   IA/44919/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 4 May 2016                             |  On 20 May 2016                  |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

             ms Idayat Busayo Damilola Adebayo (first Appellant)
                mr Abiodun Adewale Fakoya (second Appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms S Pinder, Counsel, instructed by Paul John and Co
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the two Appellants against the decision of  First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  Bart-Stewart  (the  judge),  promulgated  on  16
    September 2015, in which she dismissed their appeals  on  all  grounds.
    The  appeals  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had   been   against   the
    Respondent's  decision  of  20  October  2014,  refusing  to  vary  the
    Appellants' leave to remain and to remove them from the United  Kingdom
    by way of directions under section 47 of the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006.

 2. On 11 April 2014 the first Appellant had applied to the Respondent  for
    further leave to  remain  as  a  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur).   The  second
    Appellant has always been her dependant.  The applications were refused
    on two grounds: first, that no contract for services had been  provided
    with  the  application;  second,  that  there  had  been   no   Current
    Appointment  Report  provided  in  respect  of  the  first  Appellant's
    directorship of her company.   As  a  result  of  these  omissions  the
    Respondent did not award points under Appendix  A  to  the  Immigration
    Rules and the applications were therefore refused.

The judge's decision

 3. The judge was not satisfied that a contract for services  had  in  fact
    been  provided  by  the  first  Appellant  (see  paragraph  14  of  her
    decision).  In addition, the judge found that  the  Appellant  had  not
    provided a Current Appointment Report either (see paragraph  15).   The
    judge notes  that  the  Current  Appointment  Report  was  a  specified
    document, required under paragraph 41-SD(e)(v) of Appendix A, and  that
    a failure to provide it meant that the  appeals  were  bound  to  fail.
    Finally the judge went on and considered the Article 8 claim,  such  as
    it was, and rejected it.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 4. There are two grounds of appeal in respect  of  the  judge's  decision.
    The first relates to an issue of alleged unfairness.  It is  said  that
    evidence provided by the first Appellant to the Respondent had not been
    included in  the  latter's  appeal  bundle,  that  there  had  been  no
    Presenting Officer at the First-tier Tribunal hearing, and therefore it
    had been impossible for the first Appellant to show  that  she  had  in
    fact provided the contract for services as she has claimed  throughout.
    The second ground alleges that although a  Current  Appointment  Report
    had not in fact been provided, the Respondent had  a  discretion  under
    paragraph 245AA of the Rules to seek further evidence  from  the  first
    Appellant or to grant  the  application  exceptionally.   There  is  no
    challenge to the Article 8 conclusions.

 5. Permission to appeal  was  refused  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  but
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede on 30 March  2016.  Whilst  some
    merit was seen in the first ground, less was present in the second. The
    grant of permission was not, however, limited.

The hearing before me

 6. Ms Pinder submitted that a  contract  of  services  had  in  fact  been
    provided with the application.  In respect of the  Current  Appointment
    Report, she accepted that none had in fact been provided.  However, she
    pointed to page 28 of the Appellants' bundle and to a letter  dated  14
    March  2014  from  Companies  House,  which  confirms  that  the  first
    Appellant had been appointed as a director.  Ms Pinder's submission was
    that this letter provided the  same  information  as  would  have  been
    contained within  a  Current  Appointment  Report  and  thus  it  could
    properly be said that the letter in question was  not  in  the  correct
    format, thus  engaging  the  potential  exercise  of  discretion  under
    paragraph 245AA(b)(ii) of the Rules.

 7. Mr  Bramble  submitted  that  the  Current  Appointment  Report  was  a
    mandatory item of evidence (a "specified document") under paragraph 41-
    SD(e)(vi) of Appendix A to the Rules.  Given that it was accepted  that
    no such document had been provided, the judge was bound to  reject  the
    appeals under the Rules.  In respect  of  the  exercise  of  discretion
    under paragraph 245AA, this  could  not  assist  the  first  Appellant.
    First, because the letter provided from Companies House was a different
    type of document and could not be said to be a document in  the  "wrong
    format".  Second, that where a specified document is not provided by an
    applicant  the  Respondent  will  not  request  its  production,   with
    reference  to  paragraph  245AA(c).   Third,  that  the   exercise   of
    discretion is precluded by operation  of  paragraph  245AA(d)  where  a
    specified document has not been provided.

Decision on error of law

 8. I find that there are no material errors of law in the judge's decision
    and that she was entitled to find as she did in respect of the  Current
    Appointment Report.

 9. Dealing with the issue of the contract of services first, I am  willing
    to assume for the purposes of this  appeal  that  such  a  contract  of
    services  was  in  fact  provided  by  the  first  applicant  with  her
    application.  So in that respect the judge (on the assumption that I am
    making) erred in the first of her reasons for dismissing the appeal.

10. However, the judge was fully entitled to conclude that there was simply
    no Current Appointment Report provided by the first  Appellant  at  any
    time.  Ms Pinder accepts this to be the case. Thus, the Respondent  was
    correct in awarding no points under  Appendix  A,  and  the  judge  was
    correct in dismissing the appeal on this basis.

11. Turning next to the  issue  of  evidential  flexibility  and  fairness.
    Having looked at the papers on file it appears  to  me  as  though  the
    paragraph 245AA issue was not even raised before the judge. As much  is
    conceded by Ms Pinder in her grounds of  appeal  (she  did  not  appear
    before the First-tier Tribunal).  If the contention that the  Companies
    House letter could be said to  trigger  the  application  of  paragraph
    245AA was not even put to the judge, it is very difficult  to  see  she
    can be criticised for failing to deal with it, or that it  was  somehow
    "an obvious point", as suggested in the grounds. In my view, the  judge
    is not to be faulted, nor was the issue an obvious one.

12. In any event, I will adopt a 'belt and braces'  approach  and  consider
    the argument on its merits. The Current Appointment Report is indeed  a
    "specified document" within the meaning  of  paragraph  41-SD(e)(v)  of
    Appendix A to the Rules.  It is clearly a particular type of  document.
    The letter from Companies House at page 28 of the Appellants' bundle is
    a different type of document.  Whilst it  does  state  that  the  first
    Appellant had been appointed as a director, it simply  cannot  properly
    be said that it was the relevant "specified document",  albeit  in  the
    "wrong format": it was simply not the relevant  specified  document  at
    all. Therefore paragraph 245AA(b) could not  assist  the  Appellant  in
    this case.

13. I note also that in respect of paragraph 245AA(c), the  Rules  make  it
    very clear that the Respondent will  not  request  further  information
    from an applicant where a "specified document" has not been  submitted.
    As a Current Appointment Report had not been submitted,  there  was  no
    scope for success here either.

14. Finally, paragraph 245AA(d) represents another insurmountable  obstacle
    because of the failure to have submitted a "specified document".

15. The question of whether  any  policy  might  have  assisted  the  first
    Appellant has never been raised (neither in the grounds to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal  against  the  Respondent's  original  decision,  at  the
    hearing before the judge, in the grounds for permission to appeal,  nor
    before me). Any such issue is not before me.

16. In light of the foregoing,  the  first  Appellant's  appeal  was  quite
    properly dismissed by the judge in respect of the Rules.  There  is  no
    issue in respect of the lawfulness  of  the  Respondent's  decision  as
    regards the exercise of discretion under paragraph 245AA and there  has
    been no challenge to the judge's conclusions on Article 8.  The  second
    Appellant's appeal falls with that of his wife.

17. Therefore the judge's decision stands.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

The Appellants' appeals to the Upper Tribunal are dismissed and decision  of
the First-tier Tribunal stands.


No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 17 May 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                                  Date: 17 May 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

