
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/44719/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination promulgated    |
|on 3 July 2014                                |on 25 July 2014              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                            MUHAMMED ARSLAN KHAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:       Ms S Hussain, of R H & Co., Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

No anonymity order requested or made

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born on  1  March  1988.   On  16
   September 2012 she applied for leave to remain in the UK on the basis  of
   family and private life.  The  respondent  refused  that  application  by
   letter dated 4th and notice of decision  dated  8th  October  2013.   The
   appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

2)  Judge  Balloch  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal   by   determination
   promulgated on 6 March 2014.




3) The First-tier  Tribunal  refused  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
   tribunal.  The appellant applied for permission to the Upper Tribunal, on
   the following  grounds:

    2. The judge has not carried out a proper assessment of the appellant's
       Article 8 ECHR family life in the UK in light of the prevailing case
       law and in terms of the exception set down in Appendix  FM,  EX-1(B)
       of the Immigration Rules.


       ... whilst the judge does appear to consider the  cases  of  Gulshan
       (Article 8 - new rules - correct approach) Pakistan [2013] UKUT  640
       (IAC) and MF (Article 8 - new rules) Nigeria [2012] UKUT  393  (IAC)
       at paragraph  41  of  the  Determination,  she  has  not  adequately
       assessed the "insurmountable obstacles" which the  appellant's  wife
       would be faced with  if  she  was  to  relocate  to  Pakistan.   The
       appellant's wife is a British national, who has close family in  the
       UK and has a history of various medical conditions.  The  judge  has
       not adequately considered the impact which a permanent  move  to  an
       alien country will have on the appellant's wife, given she does  not
       speak the native language in  Pakistan,  has  no  knowledge  of  the
       culture, tradition and norms there and will  have  no  close  family
       members nearby.

       At paragraph 42  of  the  Determination  the  judge  held  that  the
       appellant's wife has 'converted to Islam so there  is  no  potential
       difficulty regarding religion.  During  her  previous  marriage  she
       spent a couple of years living in Malaysia so she  has  demonstrated
       an  ability  to  adapt  to  living  in  another  culture.'  ...  the
       appellant's wife  stated  in  her  evidence  (contained  within  her
       witness statement  at  paragraph  18)  that  'Although  I  lived  in
       Malaysia for  2  years  with  my  previous  husband,  I  still  felt
       inhibited there.  I did fully respect the way of life  in  Malaysia,
       but I found there were certain things there I could say or do.'


       ... the appellant's wife is a British citizen who has been diagnosed
       with Graves Disease in  around  August  2013,  which  had  not  been
       diagnosed at the time of  her  residence  in  Malaysia.   Relocating
       permanently to a foreign country where she does not speak the  local
       language, has no knowledge of the  customs  and  culture  there  and
       would not have any  family  members  or  friends  around  her,  when
       considered in the round, would amount to an insurmountable  obstacle
       and would in any event be 'unjustifiably harsh', as per Nagre [2013]
       EWHC 720 (Admin).


       ... the judge has erred in her assessment of Article 8  family  life
       and has thereby erred in law.


       ...  Designated  Judge  Woodcraft  in   refusing   the   appellant's
       application for permission to appeal has not  adequately  considered
       the failure of the judge  to  properly  assess  the  impact  on  the
       appellant's wife's health should she be compelled to  leave  the  UK
       and this amounts to an error in law.

    3. The judge erred in law in paragraph 42 of  her  Determination  where
       she finds that " ... There is no evidence that Ms  Brown  could  not
       retain contact with her family members and there is  no  independent
       evidence that they are reliant on her."  Further,  at  paragraph  54
       the judge reiterates this where she concludes "There  has  not  been
       any supporting evidence that her parents are reliant on her or  that
       she could not remain in contact with her family members if living in
       Pakistan."


       ... Ms Brown gave evidence, as noted in paragraph 21 of her  witness
       statement, that her parents  are  elderly,  she  lives  about  10-15
       minutes away from them and can be there for them at  any  time.   By
       requiring 'independent and supportive evidence' of Ms Brown parents'
       reliance on her the judge is ultimately seeking corroboration.


       ... there is no requirement for corroboration in such cases and  the
       judge has erred in law by requiring  corroboration.


       ... there was no specific reference to this ground of appeal by  the
       Designated Judge who considered the applicant's permission to appeal
       application.


    4. The judge has not given due consideration to  the  medical  evidence
       before her in relation to the appellant's wife's  medical  condition
       ... the following evidence was presented to the judge:


        1) medical form submitted  with  the  appellant's  application  for
           leave  to  remain  dated  27  August  2012   (contained   within
           appellant's bundle at page 114);
        2) letter from Dr Jones, Consultant Neurologist  dated  March  2013
           (contained within the appellant's bundle at page 80);
        3) further letter from the  appellant's  wife  GP,  Dr  Mackintosh,
           dated 6 January 2014 (lodged on the date of the  appeal  hearing
           and referred to in paragraph 57 of the Determination).


        ... the above noted medical evidence presented  to  the  judge  was
        consistent and complete, however the judge's finding  at  paragraph
        57 of the Determination that 'It has not been demonstrated that she
        could not receive treatment' is  not  a  well  reasoned  conclusion
        which would arise  from  a  proper  consideration  of  the  medical
        evidence which was before the judge.


        The letter from Dr Mackintosh clearly states that  the  appellant's
        wife is '... under the care of a consultant endocrinologist and  is
        on  medication  which  requires  close  supervision  and   periodic
        adjustments.  I would be extremely concerned if  his  lady  had  to
        move  to  Pakistan  as  she  requires  ongoing  specialist  medical
        treatment of a standard which I [sic] would be difficult to  attain
        in that country.   I  would  also  be  concerned  that  the  stress
        associated with such a move would have a  negative  impact  on  her
        health.'  ... the appellant's GP has provided  a  professional  and
        independent view of the appellant's medical issues and ongoing care
        she currently receives.


        The judge has failed to properly consider the evidence presented to
        her in the form of the above noted independent evidence  concerning
        the appellant's wife's medical conditions ... the judge should have
        given due regard to said evidence to  allow  her  to  make  a  well
        reasoned and accurate assessment of  proportionality  and  she  has
        erred in law in not doing so.


    5. The Designated Judge  in  refusing  the  appellant's  permission  to
       appeal application has  held  that  ultimately  the  proportionality
       assessment was a matter for the judge who  did  not  find  the  case
       should succeed outside the Immigration Rules.  The Designated  Judge
       has made no clear finding in  respect  of  insurmountable  obstacles
       which the appellant's wife faces in  moving  to  Pakistan  with  the
       appellant, given the fact that she is a British national with  close
       relatives in the UK and would be moving to a foreign  country  where
       she has no knowledge of the culture or language there.

       ... there are insurmountable obstacles which  the  appellant's  wife
       would face if she were to relocate to Pakistan and this has not been
       adequately considered by the judge or the Designated Judge.


4) (It should be observed that judges granting or  refusing  permission  are
   concerned only with whether there is arguable error of law.  They are not
   making findings, factual or legal.  If a case reaches the Upper  Tribunal
   the first question is always  whether  there  is  error  of  law  in  the
   determination; any error in an  earlier  refusal  of  permission  is  not
   relevant.)

5) On 30 April 2014  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Goldstein  granted  permission,
   saying that he was:

       ... just persuaded that paragraph 2 of  the  grounds  in  particular
       raises arguable issues as to the adequacy of the FtT's reasoning and
       whether the judge was entitled in law to reach the  conclusion  that
       she did for the reasons given.





6) The respondent filed a Rule 24 response:

    ...


    2. The respondent will submit inter alia that the judge of  the  First-
       tier Tribunal directed herself appropriately.  The grounds of appeal
       are no more that a disagreement with the adverse  findings  made  by
       the judge on Article 8.  The judge fully considered all the evidence
       available and came to  a  conclusion  open  to  her  based  on  that
       evidence in light of the relevant rules and relevant case law on the
       balance of probability and does not disclose any error.   The  judge
       observes at paragraph 55 and 56 there is limited evidence as to  'Ms
       Brown's medical condition' and symptoms indicating  a  migraine.  At
       paragraph 41  and  42  the  judge  considers  Gulshan  and  MF  when
       determining  the  proportionality  assessment   and   arrived   upon
       considering all the facts, including the short  time  the  applicant
       was in the UK and his relationship with Ms Brown.


7) Ms Hussain's submissions followed the lines of paragraphs 2 and 4 of  the
   grounds.  She said that the crux of the  determination  was  the  finding
   that there were no insurmountable obstacles to family life being  carried
   on outside the UK.  The test was  not  a  literal  one.   The  judge  was
   required to consider the practical possibilities of relocation -  Gulshan
   - and whether the consequences would be unjustifiably harsh - Nagre.  The
   judge did not take in account of the questions  posed  by  the  Court  of
   Appeal in MF and in VW, whether family life could reasonably be  expected
   to be  carried  on  abroad.   The  evidence  was  there  to  satisfy  the
   reasonableness test, in particular regarding medical  conditions  of  the
   appellant's wife.  She suffered a brain  haemorrhage  in  the  past,  has
   Graves Disease, and her GP is regularly monitoring  her  case.   She  has
   family here and none in Pakistan.  It would be unreasonable to expect her
   to relocate permanently to that country.  The judge said at paragraphs 55
   and 57 that the medical information was limited and brief, but  that  was
   factually incorrect.  The judge had before her a letter from  the  wife's
   GP and consultant  endocrinologist  regarding  her  medical  history  and
   treatment.   If  error  were  to  be  found,  the  appellant  sought   an
   adjournment in order to obtain a more detailed medical  report.   Such  a
   report had not been obtained for  Upper  Tribunal  purposes  because  the
   expense would not be covered by legal aid.  However, if a further hearing
   were to be ordered the further report could be obtained.  As  to  whether
   such evidence should have been before the First-tier Tribunal, Ms Hussain
   said that the evidence there had been sufficient, but if there were to be
   further consideration, it could be improved upon.

8) Mr Matthews submitted that the Immigration Rules in respect of Article  8
   and family and private life had been held by the Inner House in MS to  be
   essentially a complete code.  The  concept  of  insurmountable  obstacles
   within the Rules was incorporated as part of the  Article  8  assessment.
   This was a case  where  the  relationship  was  entered  into  while  the
   appellant's immigration status  was  plainly  precarious,  a  significant
   factor.  The grounds went too far in saying the judge had  no  regard  to
   authority such as MF, because she plainly followed the correct up to date
   understanding of the legal approach, in particular at paragraph 41 of the
   determination.  The issue before her was largely one  of  fact,  and  the
   decision was well within the scope was open to  her.   The  grounds  were
   essentially a disagreement on the facts and did not disclose legal error.
    The determination was careful and went into some detail in particular at
   paragraphs 41-43 on the issue of insurmountable obstacles.   Nothing  was
   wrongly taken into or left out of account, and the threshold applied  was
   not literal.  As to paragraph 3 of the grounds (which Ms Hussain had  not
   mentioned), the judge had not fallen into  the  error  of  thinking  that
   corroboration was a legal requirement, and was entitled  to  notice  that
   obvious  supporting  evidence  was  absent.   The  medical  evidence  was
   faithfully recited at paragraphs 55-57 and all the observations made upon
   it by the judge were factually unassailable.  Paragraph 5 of the  grounds
   added nothing.  The determination should stand.   Alternatively,  if  the
   Upper Tribunal did find error, the general principle should  be  followed
   that a fresh decision should be substituted on the evidence the appellant
   had chosen to lead.   Where  there  might  be  a  legal  aid  issue  over
   obtaining a further report at this particular stage, there was no  reason
   why all evidence  should  not  have  been  available  in  the  First-tier
   Tribunal.

9) Ms Hussain in response re-iterated that  the  medical  situation  of  the
   appellant's wife had been crucial in the proportionality assessment,  and
   the judge had gone wrong in law in considering that aspect.

10) I reserved my determination.

11) A judge's decision on Article 8 is not only  a  matter  of  finding  the
   relevant facts.  In the end, it is a  judgment  on  proportionality.   So
   long as a judge correctly directs herself on the law and  gives  adequate
   reasons, error of law cannot be found.

12) In my view the grounds and submissions in this case are almost  entirely
   re-assertion of uncontentious legal  principle  and  of  the  appellant's
   case.  The features of the case upon  which  they  concentrate  were  all
   patently before  the  judge  and  are  reflected  in  the  determination,
   including the medical evidence, referred to several  times  and  in  more
   than adequate detail. There  is  no  error  of  requiring  corroboration.
   There is no  error  of  taking  a  literal  approach  to  "insurmountable
   obstacles".  It could not be argued that  the  outcome  reached  was  not
   within the scope of the First-tier Tribunal.  Although Ms  Hussain  again
   puts the appellant's case as clearly and as strongly as it  can  properly
   bear, this appeal amounts only to disagreement with a  judgment  that  is
   not shown to be affected by any error on a point of law.

13) The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.



                               [pic]
                                4 July 2014
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
