
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/44699/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3rd December 2015                 |On 5th January 2016                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Mr Sajan Koshy
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No Appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                             EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT

 1. The Appellant in these proceedings was the Respondent before the First-
    tier and I shall refer to the parties as they were known at the  First-
    tier for my convenience.

 2. The Respondent appeals with permission a  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal promulgated on 5th June 2015 in which the  judge  allowed  the
    Appellant's appeal to the limited extent that the Respondent had failed
    to consider the application of her policy relevant to students where  a
    Sponsor's licence was revoked in the course of an application and prior
    to decision.

 3. The application was made on the basis that the judge in  reaching  that
    conclusion mistakenly found that the Respondent had failed to apply her
    policy.  The reasons for refusal letter had indicated to the judge that
    in fact on 8th August 2014 the Appellant was informed of the revocation
    of the licence and of the fact that as  a  result  the  Respondent  had
    decided to afford him a further opportunity to obtain a new Sponsor and
    amend his application accordingly.

 4. The Appellant has not provided any Rule 24 response  to  the  grant  of
    permission and has not taken issue with the Respondent's contention.  I
    have before me a copy of the letter, in fact, as Mr Tarlow points  out,
    dated 9th August 2014 which confirms to me that the assertions made  by
    the Respondent in the reasons for refusal letter are established.   The
    Appellant has written with the assistance of legal  representatives  to
    the court inviting the Upper Tribunal to deal with the  appeal  in  his
    absence but that letter does not take any issue with the grounds of the
    application and nor is there any Rule  15  application  to  provide  or
    attach any additional evidence for me to take into account in the event
    of my finding an error and moving to determine and rehear the appeal as
    a result.

 5. In those circumstances I am satisfied that it is in  the  interests  of
    justice that I should exercise my discretion under Rule 38 and  proceed
    to deal with the matter in the absence of the party both  in  terms  of
    the error of law hearing and of moving on to make a decision in respect
    of any rehearing.

 6. I am satisfied that the decision of the  judge  is  vitiated  by  legal
    error for the reasons identified in the  grant  of  permission,  namely
    that the judge proceeded on the grounds of mistaken fact and  that  the
    Respondent had indeed acted in accordance with her policy.

 7. Turning to the rehearing of the substance of  the  Appellant's  appeal:
    the decision was made on the basis that he did not provide a valid  CAS
    as required  under  the  points-based  scheme.   The  evidence  plainly
    establishes that that is correct.  He did not provide a valid CAS,  and
    none of the grounds that the Appellant has  put  forward  disputes  the
    fact that  he  did  not  have  a  valid  CAS.  For  those  reasons  the
    Appellant's appeal on Immigration Rules grounds relating to the points-
    based system, fails.

 8. Turning to the alternative Ground of Appeal raised  by  the  Appellant,
    namely that the decision breaches his Article 8 rights, I note that  no
    evidence was submitted to substantiate  that  position,  the  Appellant
    relying on a broad assertion that having arrived here as a  student  he
    has established a private life which  is  sufficient  to  outweigh  the
    public interest in his removal as a person who does not have any  right
    to remain in the context of the Immigration Rules.

 9. The evidence before me  does  not  establish  that  the  Appellant  has
    established a character and quality of private life that could possibly
    outweigh the public interest in his removal, not only in the context of
    the  Article  8  ECHR  balancing  exercise  required  by   Razgar   but
    specifically with reference to Section 117  of  the  2002  Nationality,
    Immigration and  Asylum  Act  as  recently  amended.   The  Appellant's
    private life has been entirely formed in the context  of  a  precarious
    immigration status and nothing in the evidence indicates that there  is
    any merit in his assertion that he  should  otherwise  be  entitled  to
    remain.

Notice of Decision

10. The decision of the First-tier tribunal is vitiated by error and is set
    aside. I remake the decision by dismissing the appellant's appeal.

11. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   E Davidge     Date 30 December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge

