
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/44931/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 10 March 2014                           |On 14 March 2014           |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

                                MRS KANIZ ALI
                        (No Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:

                            For the Appellant: the appellant
           appeared, accompanied by her son but unrepresented
          For the Respondent: Mr S Whitwell a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who was born on 14  July  1954.
      She has been given permission to appeal the  determination  of  First-
      Tier Tribunal Judge Scobbie ("the  FTTJ")  who  dismissed  her  appeal
      against the respondent's decision of 21 October 2013 to refuse to vary
      her leave to remain in the UK and to remove her by way  of  directions
      under section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.


   2. The appellant came to the UK with her husband on a visit visa to visit
      and stay with their son and daughter-in-law. They arrived on 31  March
      2013. Their visas were valid for a period from 14 March 2013 until  14
      September 2013. He became unwell and applied for and has been  granted
      permission to remain in  the  UK  for  medical  treatment  beyond  the
      original period of his visa. This period of leave expires shortly,  on
      21 April 2014.


   3. On 10 September 2013 the appellant applied for leave  to  remain  with
      her husband so that she could look after him whilst he had psychiatric
      treatment. The respondent refused the application which had been  made
      for a purpose not covered by the Immigration Rules. Her policy was  to
      consider  granting  leave  outside   the   Immigration   Rules   where
      particularly compelling circumstances existed. It was  concluded  that
      the appellant's circumstances  were  not  such  that  such  discretion
      should be exercised.


   4. The appellant appealed and asked for the appeal to  be  determined  on
      the papers which is  what  the  FTTJ  did  on  15  January  2014.  The
      appellant's then solicitors had submitted a bundle of documents.


   5. The FTTJ found that the  appellant's  husband  was  suffering  from  a
      moderate depressive episode  and  was  receiving  private  psychiatric
      treatment as an outpatient including medication. It was said that  the
      appellant and her husband were living with their son and  daughter-in-
      law who had to go to work during  the  day.  The  appellant's  husband
      needed looking after and the  appellant  cooked  for  him.  He  needed
      support going up and down the stairs.


   6. The FTTJ concluded that on the evidence the circumstances were not  so
      compelling that the respondent had failed to exercise  her  discretion
      in a reasonable manner. In relation to the Article 8 grounds the  FTTJ
      said, in paragraph 17;  "Further,  there  is  a  suggestion  that  the
      Article 8 rights of the appellant are breached by  this  decision.  As
      the appellant's husband is going to return to Pakistan as soon as  his
      treatment is over I conclude that there could be  no  prospect  of  an
      Article 8 argument succeeding."


   7. The FTTJ held that the respondent's decision was  in  accordance  with
      the law and the Immigration Rules and that the Appellant's  Article  8
      human rights would not be infringed.  He  dismissed  the  appeal.  The
      appellant appealed, raising Article 8  grounds  only.  The  judge  who
      granted permission to appeal was of the view that the FTTJ  had  dealt
      with the Article 8 grounds cursorily without proper reasoning and that
      this was an arguable error of law.


   8. The appellant attended the hearing before me accompanied by  her  son.
      He spoke good English and told me that his mother was unable to do so.
      Her first language was Urdu. He said that she wanted him to speak  for
      her. I explained the purpose of the hearing  and  said  that  I  would
      assist them as far as I could whilst being even-handed to both sides.


   9. I discovered  that  there  had  been  a  Rule  24  response  from  the
      respondent which had not reached the Tribunal file. Mr  Whitwell  gave
      me a copy. The respondent argues that whilst the FTTJ's  consideration
      of the Article 8 grounds might have been superficial this  was  not  a
      material error which impacted on the outcome. That  was  the  position
      which Mr Whitwell took in his submissions. He provided me with a  copy
      of the Home Office  guidance  in  relation  to  "Visitor  for  Private
      medical treatment" valid from 26 September 2013 and the  determination
      in Shahzad (Art 8: legitimate aim) [2014] UKUT 00085 (IAC).


  10. The appellant's son told me  that  his  father  had  not  applied  for
      further leave to remain and that he would be leaving the UK  with  the
      appellant before his visa expired on 21 April 2014.


  11. I find that the FTTJ erred in law by failing to give any or sufficient
      reasons for dismissing the appeal on Article 8 human  rights  grounds.
      There may not been a great deal of evidence  but  there  were  factors
      which should have been assessed. I informed the parties that this  was
      my decision. Through her son the appellant informed me that  all  that
      she wanted was to be able to stay here with her husband until he  left
      the country which would be before 21 April 2014. His last  appointment
      with the psychiatrist was on 15 April 2013. He had not applied for  an
      extension. I reserved my decision.


  12. There has been no appeal against the respondent's decision  to  refuse
      to exercise her discretion in the appellant's  favour  or  the  FTTJ's
      conclusion that this should be upheld. The only  appeal  has  been  on
      Article 8 human rights grounds. The evidence before the judge included
      all that was in the respondent's bundle including  witness  statements
      and a bundle  submitted  by  the  appellant's  then  solicitors.  This
      included a witness statement from the  appellant,  the  stamp  in  her
      husband's passport recording his extended leave to  remain,  a  letter
      from the psychiatrist treating her husband, a copy of her passport and
      her husband's  passport,  copies  of  her  son  and  daughter-in-law's
      passports, a letter from her  son,  documentary  evidence  as  to  the
      property in Pakistan owned  by  the  appellant  and  her  husband  and
      evidence as to the car they owned Pakistan.


  13. I find that the appellant and her husband  have  a  family  life  with
      their son and daughter-in-law in this  country  but  do  not  wish  to
      continue this by living here. On the contrary, they wish to return  to
      Pakistan as soon as the husband's medical treatment is  completed.  It
      is anticipated that this will be very soon, before his visa expires on
      21 April 2014. I also find that the appellant and her husband  have  a
      limited private life in this country. I find that their  main  private
      and family life is with each other and others  in  Pakistan  which  is
      where they want to live together. As long  as  they  comply  with  the
      existing terms of their visas, and there is no indication that they do
      not, there should be nothing to prevent them making future  visits  to
      their son and daughter-in-law in this country.  I  find  that  it  was
      understandable for the appellant to want to  remain  in  this  country
      with her husband for the duration of his medical  treatment.  Had  the
      evidence  been  clearer,  perhaps  accompanied  by  medical   evidence
      explaining that there were good  medical  reasons  why  the  appellant
      needed to look after her husband, the appellant might have  been  able
      to persuade the respondent that this was  a  case  where  particularly
      compelling circumstances  existed  and  that  leave  should  be  given
      because there were genuine compassionate reasons. Such evidence  would
      also have assisted the appellant in relation to her Article 8 grounds.
      On the evidence before the FTTJ it is not clear  why  the  appellant's
      husband's condition is such that he cannot be left  alone  or  why  he
      needs help to go up and down stairs. Whilst the appellant's son  gives
      information about his employment it is not clear why their daughter-in-
      law, who is self-employed, cannot assist.


  14. As the appellant and her husband have  their  main  private  life  and
      family life together in Pakistan and they wish to return very  shortly
      I  find  that,  whilst  the  proposed  removal  will  be   a   limited
      interference  by  a  public  authority  with  the  exercise   of   the
      appellant's right to respect for her  private  and  family  life  such
      interference will not have consequences of such gravity as potentially
      to engage the operation of Article 8. The threshold is not a high  one
      but it is not crossed in the circumstances of this appeal. Even  if  I
      had concluded otherwise and that all but the last of the Razgar  tests
      was satisfied I would have found that balancing  the  public  interest
      against  the  circumstances  of  the  appellant  and  her  family  the
      respondent had established that the interference was proportionate.


  15. I find that whilst the FTTJ erred in law the error was not  such  that
      the decision should be set aside. Had the FTTJ properly considered the
      Article 8 grounds the decision would inevitably have been the same.


  16. I uphold the FTTJ's decision to dismiss the appeal.


  17. Very rarely do I make a  recommendation.  If  the  appellant  and  her
      husband do as they say they intend to do and leave the UK  before  his
      visa expires on 21 April 2014 I consider that it would be unreasonable
      and unnecessary for  the  respondent  to  take  steps  to  remove  the
      appellant before then. I hope and recommend that this  should  not  be
      done.
















      Signed                                          Date 11 March 2014
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

