
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/44343/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11th July 2014                             |On 05th Aug 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                               taskeen haider
                        (No Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Maqsood instructed by Maxim Law
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan and born on 27th September  1986
    and on 28th March 2013 he applied for a residence card as  confirmation
    of his  right  to  reside  in  the  United  Kingdom  under  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (the EEA Regulations) as  the
    spouse of Katarzyna Jolanta Pecko, a  Polish  national  (the  sponsor).
    The sponsor  must  be  exercising  treaty  rights  in  accordance  with
    Regulation 6 of the EEA Regulations.

 2. The respondent refused the appellant's application on 18th October 2013
    in the following terms.

 3. The respondent noted that  the  appellant  had  claimed  that  his  EEA
    sponsor was self-employed and provided a letter  from  the  HMRC  dated
    14th March 2013, a Gumtree advert acknowledgement and  an  accountant's
    letter dated 27th February 2013.  The respondent noted that the  letter
    from the HMRC showed the sponsor was issued with a  national  insurance
    number on 31st January 2013  thus  she  had  come  to  the  UK  shortly
    beforehand.  The appellant married the sponsor on  11th  February  2013
    but it was noted that the marriage certificate was incomplete  and  did
    not record the age of the appellant or the EEA sponsor and referred  to
    the EEA sponsor as a homemaker not a cleaner.  The  sponsor  placed  an
    online advert as a domestic cleaner through Gumtree  on  19th  February
    2013.

 4. The accountant's letter of 27th February 2013 recorded the  sponsor  as
    registered as a sole  trader  providing  services  to  various  private
    people and businesses.  The respondent found the appellant  had  failed
    to provide any evidence of work carried out such as recent invoices and
    statements,  audited  accounts  or  business  bank  statements  showing
    payment received and thus had failed to provide sufficient evidence  to
    demonstrate the EEA sponsor was economically active in the UK as  self-
    employed under Regulation 6 of the EEA Regulations.

 5. First-tier Tribunal Judge R G Handley dismissed the appellant's  appeal
    under the EEA Regulations and further to the Immigration Rules  on  3rd
    February 2014.

Application for Permission to Appeal

 6. Application for permission to appeal was made on the basis that it  was
    argued to the First-tier Tribunal Judge that audited accounts were  not
    required by a small business owner and the judge had  wrongly  referred
    to the paid NI contribution bill by saying it was due.

 7. The judge had refused to accept the cash receipt issued to the customer
    by saying that "these documents  are  not  proper  invoices".   It  was
    explained to the judge  that  the  sponsor  was  doing  small  business
    issuing receipts to customers and putting her personal account  as  she
    is permissible to use the personal account for self-employed  business.
    She did not have a limited company.

 8. The applicant's  sponsor  regularly  paid  tax  if  required  and  paid
    national insurance contributions and received  regular  money  by  cash
    from her cleaning service.

 9. The applicant's  wife  was  a  qualified  person  further  to  the  EEA
    Regulations.

10. First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cruthers  dismissed  the  application  for
    permission to appeal.  He stated that on the evidence "It is  difficult
    to think that any First-tier Tribunal Judge would have  concluded  that
    the claim as to the appellant's EEA sponsor  exercising  treaty  rights
    had been sufficiently established as per 11 to 16 of the  determination
    and the grounds did not identify any arguable error of law."

11. The application for permission to  appeal  was  renewed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal and Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek stated that  he  considered
    it arguable that the judge's reasons for rejecting the evidence of self-
    employment were inadequate.  Although the documents from HMRC  did  not
    indicate the nature or extent of self-employment  they  did  show  some
    self-employed  activity.   It  was  arguably  unclear  why   the   bank
    statements which showed cash deposits were not supportive of the  claim
    and in relation to the invoices it was noted that they did not bear the
    sponsor's name but they were it would appear submitted by her.

12. Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek granted permission to appeal.

The Hearing

13. At the hearing Mr Maqsood stated that the reasons given by the judge in
    dismissing the appeal were inadequate and the evidence before the First-
    tier Tribunal was not properly considered  and  no  proper  weight  was
    attached to it.

14. Mr Maqsood agreed that the tax return was  not  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge and although it had been included in the evidence before
    me it should be disregarded.

15. The first invoice was  issued  on  27th  February  2013  and  thus  the
    appellant had not had any income until that date.  The  judge  referred
    to the HMRC letter for self-assessment dated 14th  March  2013  and  to
    the letter 30th March 2013 from the HMRC regarding  national  insurance
    contributions but similarly and as with the 381 letter the  nature  and
    extent of the activity was not accepted.  The HMRC  letter  dated  14th
    March 2013 showed that the sponsor had attempted to register for  self-
    employment shortly before she submitted the application,  although  the
    judge did not accept that this showed the  nature  and  extent  of  any
    economic activity the accountancy but the  381 letter did refer to  the
    activity and  the  extent  of  the  activity  was  shown  by  the  bank
    statements and invoices.

16. Further the national insurance contributions'  letters  of  30th  March
    2013 and 5th October 2013 showed that the sponsor was  paying  national
    insurance contributions and showed that she was  self-employed.   There
    was a further HMRC letter dated 25th  April  2013  which  was  rejected
    because this did not indicate the nature and extent  of  activity  that
    the reasons given were inadequate.

17. The bank statements were very  important  as  were  the  invoices.   It
    appeared that the bank statements were rejected because the account was
    overdrawn and there were cash deposits made into the account  which  it
    was stated did not support the claim she  was  self-employed  but  they
    were not relevant reasons.  The invoices corresponded with deposits  in
    the bank account. There was no reference to the sponsor but  there  was
    her signature on the invoices.  They were all handwritten  but  bearing
    in mind the background and education and work of the sponsor  this  was
    not surprising.  Taken together the documents showed that she was self-
    employed.  There was a reference to the marriage certificate  with  the
    sponsor as a homemaker but this was given undue weight by the judge.

18. Mr Walker stated that the first cash deposit was made on 26th  February
    whereas the invoice and receipt was dated 27th February 2013,  the  day
    after the deposit.  Judge Handley had considered the  documentation  at
    paragraph 14 and only three of the invoices  predated  the  application
    which was made on 28th March.  On the evidence the  judge  had  it  was
    clear at paragraph 12 that he had considered the letter from 381 and he
    had considered all the bank statements.  There was no material error in
    his findings and they were open to him.

Conclusions

19. The judge clearly stated at paragraph 16 that he had considered all the
    evidence and that he was not satisfied that the appellant had shown  to
    the appropriate standard that the EEA sponsor was  economically  active
    in the UK as a self-employed person.  Judge Handley  addressed  all  of
    the relevant evidence  such  as  it  was  and  noted  contrary  to  the
    submissions the Gumtree advert acknowledgement.   The  judge  correctly
    pointed out that the 381 Accountancy and Bookkeeping  Services'  letter
    dated 27th February 2013 (and which I note in its first version was not
    dated) simply confirmed that the EEA sponsor was registered as  a  sole
    trader providing cleaning  services  and  that  there  was  no  further
    information regarding the EEA sponsor's income if any from her business
    activities in that letter.  It was open  to  the  appellant  to  submit
    further documentation from "381 Accountancy and  Bookkeeping  Services"
    in relation to her accounts and she did not do so.   The  judge  cannot
    work on evidence that is not before him.

20. Further he referred to the letters from the HMRC but these are  letters
    in relation to the submission of  a  self-assessment  documentation  or
    registration as self employed.  I note that  there  was  no  supporting
    self-assessment documentation, such as a tax return, submitted  to  the
    tax authorities to show earnings, and this could have  been  undertaken
    any time from the close of the 2012 to 2013 tax year, which is in April
    2013, onwards and submitted up to the  time  of  the  hearing  on  23rd
    January 2014. This was not done and thus was not before the judge, even
    though the Upper Tribunal bundle indicated it  was.    The  tax  return
    could not have been put before the judge because it was not dated until
    7th February 2014 (this Mr Maqsood readily  acknowledged).   The  judge
    clearly placed little emphasis on the national  insurance  contribution
    letters [determination paragraph 12] and noted a further letter of 25th
    April 2013 as a reminder to  complete  a  tax  return.   As  the  judge
    rightly stated "None of these letters give any  indication  as  to  the
    nature and extent of the EEA sponsor's economic activities".  Even  the
    national insurance contribution payment  letter  of  30th  March  2013,
    which the judge took into account, does not indicate the amount  earned
    by the sponsor.

21. The judge then turned to the bank statements which related to  the  EEA
    sponsor and noted that they covered a period from 22nd January 2013  to
    30th October 2013.  He stated that the bank statements "Do not  support
    the claim that the EEA sponsor is engaged in business  activity".   The
    point that the judge made out at paragraph 14  was  that  most  of  the
    invoices postdated the date of the appellant's application  and  indeed
    as Mr Walker pointed out the first invoice dated 27th February 2013  in
    fact postdates the deposit in the bank account.  Indeed there were cash
    deposits which were unexplained in the bank statement.

22. At paragraph 14 the judge stated

         "Also within the appellant's bundle were a  number  of  handwritten
         documents which appear to show the provision of  cleaning  services
         and the payment of the various sums of money.  These documents  are
         not proper invoices and they do not  contain  details  of  the  EEA
         sponsor.  Most  of  them  postdate  the  date  of  the  appellant's
         application.  In my view they are not supportive of the claim  that
         the EEA sponsor is indeed engaged in self-employment activities."

23. As the judge pointed out there were no details  save  for  a  purported
    signature of the appellant's sponsor on the invoices and the difficulty
    with the schedule which was produced before me at the Upper Tribunal is
    that  this  schedule  was  drawn  up  after  the  First-tier   Tribunal
    determination.  The judge pointed out the invoices  were  not  produced
    until 2014 and there is no reliable method of connecting  the  invoices
    with the  cash  deposits  prior  to  the  refusal  of  the  appellant's
    application.  As the judge clearly noted  the  invoices  postdated  the
    appellant's application.  Bearing in mind the paucity of the  evidence,
    which the judge took into account overall  and  on  a  reading  of  the
    determination as a whole I am persuaded that the  judge  gave  adequate
    reasons for refusing this appeal and I find that there is no  error  of
    law and that the determination should stand.  The production of further
    evidence in the bundle before me, I  consider,  acknowledges  that  the
    evidence before the First Tier Tribunal was indeed deficient.

24. I find no error of law in the determination of Judge  Handley  and  the
    determination shall stand.




Signed                                  Date 4th August 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

