
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA 44428 2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 9 May 2014                                 |24 June 2014                 |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                 Lydia Gyan
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Ariyo, solicitor from Apex Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by a citizen of Ghana against a decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal which found that she had not shown that she was  entitled
    to a residence card as confirmation of  her  right  to  reside  in  the
    United Kingdom.

 2. The case got off to a bad start because of the  Notice  of  Immigration
    decision which I find to be in  a  less  than  satisfactory  form.   It
    refers to the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006,
    Regulations 2 and 8(5).

 3. Regulation 8(5) is under  the  section  dealing  with  extended  family
    members and permits a person to enter the United Kingdom if that person
    can show that he is in a durable relationship with an EEA national.

 4. Regulation 2 is the definition section and its relevance to the  notice
    of  immigration  decision  is  not  absolutely  clear  but  Mr   Jarvis
    speculates, and I think he may be right, that it is intended  to  refer
    to the definition  saying  that  a  spouse  for  the  purposes  of  the
    Regulations is not a party to a  marriage  of  convenience.  The  point
    being that, as I understand  it,  a  "marriage  of  convenience"  is  a
    marriage which is valid in substance in the sense that it is the result
    of an apparently binding legal ceremony but it is  not  a  marriage  in
    which the parties have any commitment to one another.

 5. The explanation in the notice of immigration  decision  begins  in  the
    following terms:

         "You have applied for a residence card as confirmation of  a  right
         of residence as the spouse of an  EEA  national  exercising  treaty
         rights in the United Kingdom.  However, your  marriage  is  one  of
         convenience.   Your  application  has  also  been   considered   in
         accordance with Regulation 8 of the Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations
         2006 but you have failed  to  prove  that  you  are  in  a  durable
         relationship with an EEA national."

 6. I cannot avoid describing this as muddled.  If there is a  marriage  it
    is hard to see why the Secretary of State was concerned to see  whether
    there  was  a  durable  relationship.   If  the  marriage  was  one  of
    convenience for the purposes of the Regulations then  no  rights  would
    follow from it. It is difficult to  imagine  any  likely  circumstances
    where a marriage of convenience masks a durable relationship.

 7. The Reasons for Refusal Letter is a little more helpful.  It begins  by
    saying that the applicant has failed to provide evidence that she meets
    the criteria as an unmarried partner as detailed  in  the  Regulations.
    The marriage relied on was a customary marriage in Ghana and I think it
    is settled law that such a marriage, even  if  wholly  genuine  in  the
    sense that it was a reflection of an intention of the parties  to  live
    together permanently as a married couple, would  not  be  a  qualifying
    marriage for the purpose of the Regulations unless it was shown to be a
    marriage recognised both in Ghanaian law and in  the  law  of  the  EEA
    citizen exercising treaty rights, in this case the law of France.

 8. There was nothing before the Secretary of  State  that  would  possibly
    show that the relationship was a marriage for the purposes of the Rules
    and it is quite clear to me that the Secretary of State was  trying  to
    do the sensible thing in considering it as an application to remain  as
    a person in a durable relationship.  It is regrettable that  there  was
    reference to  marriage  of  convenience  remaining  in  the  notice  of
    immigration decision because it set  up  the  possibility  of  somebody
    arguing the case in entirely the wrong direction.  Indeed, I  think  it
    is also right to say that to some extent Mr Ariyo was misled because he
    has put some efforts  into  considering  whether  or  not  there  is  a
    marriage of convenience and where the burden of proof lies in the event
    of such an allegation.

 9. Had it been the appellant's case at an early stage that the  notice  of
    decision was defective it may have been a point that found  favour  but
    it was in my judgment too late to raise such argument  at  the  hearing
    before the Upper Tribunal.  Any  irregularities  have  been  waived  by
    engaging with the appeal process.  No doubt if the appellant really had
    been confounded by the decision so that she did not understand it  more
    thought would have been given to its  form  and  meritorious  arguments
    raised.

10. What is quite plain is that the First-tier Tribunal Judge dismissed the
    appeal because in his judgment the appellant had failed  to  show  that
    she was in a durable relationship with an EEA national.

11. Several reasons were given for this. Some of them are peripheral.   For
    example, there is reference to only three  letters  being  produced  to
    reflect ten months of cohabitation.

12. There is criticism in the grounds that  this  was  not  a  rational  or
    proper finding but I find no merit in those criticisms.  It was part of
    the reasoning and the judge was entitled to find it an indication of  a
    lack of good faith that only three  letters  could  be  produced  by  a
    couple who are allegedly living together as husband and wife.

13. Similarly, there is reliance on supporting  evidence  from  the  church
    pastor which, if taken at  face  value,  was  very  supportive  of  the
    appellant because it referred to the appellant and her apparent husband
    being known to the church and recognised  as  a  married  couple.   The
    First-tier Tribunal Judge clearly read the letter and was not impressed
    by it. Amongst the reasons for not being impressed was that it gave  no
    indication of how long the couple had been  attending  the  church  and
    therefore how well-known they were to the pastor.  In  the  absence  of
    such evidence, the impression of the pastor, however honestly felt, was
    of little value.  Again, I see  no  justification  in  criticising  the
    judge for regarding the letter as a not particularly helpful strand  of
    evidence.

14. However, the main reasons for finding that the relationship was  not  a
    durable relationship were the incongruity of the applicant entering the
    United Kingdom because of one relationship and quickly  establishing  a
    new one with the present purported partner and then the inconsistencies
    in answers given  by  the  applicant  and  her  partner  as  they  were
    interviewed separately by the Secretary of State.

15. I see no possible criticism on the part of the  judge  for  considering
    these inconsistencies to be material and indicative of  a  relationship
    that was not close and durable and akin  to  marriage  and  making  the
    finding that he did.

16. The claimant in her grounds  is  very  critical  of  the  interview  as
    portrayed in the Reasons for Refusal Letter because, in the Reasons for
    Refusal  Letter,  the  Secretary  of  State  draws  attention  to   the
    unsatisfactory  aspects  which  he  used  to  rely  on  to  refuse  the
    application.  I do  not  see  any  merit  in  this  criticism.   It  is
    described as a "Reasons for Refusal Letter".  The  Secretary  of  State
    was explaining why she reached the decision that she did.   If  it  was
    the case that the Secretary of State had edited the interviews to  only
    draw attention to the unsatisfactory elements and suppressed  the  rest
    there may be grounds for very grave concern and very serious  criticism
    but this is manifestly not what has happened.  The Secretary  of  State
    disclosed the full interviews and could not have been accused of hiding
    or ignoring anything. Even if she was, and it is clearly  my  view  she
    was not, it is a point that gets nowhere because all the  material  was
    available to the Immigration  Judge  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  who
    reached the decision that he did.  The decision was by way of rehearing
    on that point and even if the deficiencies of the  Secretary  of  State
    were made out, which they are not, the point would have  no  substance.
    It is the First-tier Tribunal's decision that matters now.

17. There was also a complaint that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  did  not
    understand the case because there is reference  to  interviews  in  the
    plural but that is a misunderstanding.  There was one interview in  the
    sense of one set of standard questions that were asked of applicant and
    her partner but they were each interviewed. It is clear to me that  the
    plural is simply a recognition of what happened and not  indicative  of
    any error of any kind.

18. Mr Ariyo submitted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  muddled  himself
    about the burden of proof when a marriage of convenience is alleged but
    I do not see that as a point  either  correctly  made  out  or  of  any
    inherent merit.  Certainly it is clear that an applicant does not  have
    to begin by proving that the marriage is not one of convenience.   That
    only becomes contentious if the  point  is  taken  and  raised  by  the
    Secretary of State.  If it does then, as I  read  the  decision  in  IS
    (marriages of convenience) Serbia [2008] UKAIT 31 and  Papajorgji  (EEA
    spouse - marriage of convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT 00038, it  is  for
    the Tribunal to decide on the totality of the evidence if the  marriage
    is one of convenience or not.  As I  have  indicated,  this  is  a  red
    herring in this case because the application has been dealt with on the
    basis that there is not a marriage at all but there might be a  durable
    relationship. The Secretary of State found there was  not  and  at  the
    rehearing of the point in an independent appeal the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge also decided that there was not a durable relationship.

19. For the reasons given I am  satisfied  that  the  criticisms  for  that
    finding do not stand, that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  was  entitled
    to reach the conclusion that  he  did  for  the  reasons  given  and  I
    therefore dismiss the appeal.

20. I appreciate  there  are  certain  side  issues  here  created  by  the
    Secretary  of  State's  confusing  use  of  the  phrase  'marriage   of
    convenience' in a decision that was not dealing with  the  marriage  at
    all but for the reasons I have given I do  not  accept  that  they  are
    relevant to the case that was actually heard and decided.   It  follows
    therefore that I dismiss the appellant's appeal in this case.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 23 June 2014                   |








