
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/45599/2014
                                                               IA/00827/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 December 2015                  |On 14 January 2016                   |
|Extempore                            |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Mr Qaiser Shahin
                              Miss Naila Shahin
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr I Ali, Counsel instructed by Tennyson Monroe
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Lagunju promulgated on 19 June  2015  whereby
    she allowed the appeals of Mr Qaiser Shahin and Miss  Naila  Shahin  on
    the basis that the decisions made by the Secretary of State were not in
    accordance with the law.

 2. It is, I  think,  important  to  set  out  first  of  all  the  factual
    background to this case, which  is,  as  both  representatives  accept,
    somewhat complicated.  Mr Shahin and Miss Shahin, whom I will refer  to
    as the claimants, are siblings.  They are nationals of Pakistan.   They
    applied for entry clearance with their mother and  another  brother  to
    join their British father in the United  Kingdom  as  long  ago  as  25
    November 2010.  Although those applications were initially  refused  in
    February 2011 there was a successful appeal against that decision.   It
    is at that point that the matter becomes complex.

 3. The first  claimant,  Qaiser,  was  granted  entry  clearance  from  29
    February 2012 until 29 May 2014.  His mother and sister were,  however,
    granted leave from 24 February 2012 until 24  May  2014.   For  reasons
    that are not  entirely  clear  the  other  brother  was  later  granted
    indefinite leave to enter some months later.  The claimants  and  their
    mother then travelled to the United Kingdom and  lived  here  with  the
    father but an application for leave to remain for the  mother  and  the
    two claimants was not made until 29 May 2014.  The explanation for  the
    delay is that the family had assumed, wrongly as it  turned  out,  that
    everyone had been granted leave to remain until 29 May 2014.

 4. The result of this was that the application  made  in  respect  of  the
    mother and the sister were made when they did not have extant leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom but the application made by Qaiser was  in
    fact made within time and thus he had  a  right  of  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules against the decision to refuse to  vary  leave.   The
    other claimant was issued with removal directions which again gave rise
    to a right of appeal.

 5. When the matter came before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lagunju,  the
    Secretary of State and the claimants  were  both  represented,  Mr  Ali
    representing the claimants below as he does before me today.  The judge
    does note the factual circumstances which gave rise to  the  difference
    in the rights of appeal and states at 14:

         "On careful consideration of  the  circumstances  and  the  various
         inconsistencies in this case, I find it may  suggest  that  anxious
         scrutiny has not been applied in relation to the appellants' cases.
          The respondent has failed to either  acknowledge  or  explain  the
         disparity in  the  respondent's  approach  to  the  various  family
         members in this case.  Neither does she  appear  to  consider  what
         impact this has on the outcome of the appellants' cases.  The  lack
         of parity between the cases when the circumstances  of  each  party
         are so similar, may suggest a degree of unfairness."

    On that basis  the  judge  concluded  that  the  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the  law  and  stated  that  it  was  remitted  to  the
    respondent for further consideration.

 6. The respondent sought permission to appeal against the  decision.   The
    grounds are relatively short and there is no need to repeat them.

 7. Mr Avery for the respondent submits that there is a clear error on  the
    part of the judge here in that the apparent inconsistencies in how  the
    members of the  family  have  been  treated  flow  from  the  different
    circumstances in which both of the claimants and  indeed  their  mother
    arrived, and from the applications by the mother and daughter being out
    of time.  He asked me to note that in the case of the mother there  was
    no right of appeal and although the decision to refuse  her  leave  was
    challenged by way of judicial review, that had been  unsuccessful.   He
    submitted that in the circumstances the judge  was  clearly  wrong  and
    that there was no proper error of  law  identified  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge.

 8. Mr Ali makes two principal points in his skeleton argument, first  that
    it is unfair for the Secretary of State to raise this issue now, having
    not made any submissions to that effect in the First-tier,  and  second
    that there was in this case a clear error of law on  the  part  of  the
    Secretary of State in the inconsistencies with which  she  had  treated
    the various members of the family who should have  been  treated  as  a
    unit rather than separately.  The full submissions are set out  in  the
    skeleton argument produced by Mr Ali for which I am most grateful.

 9. Dealing with the first point, I do not consider that it can properly be
    argued that the Secretary of State is stopped from now saying that  the
    judge's decision was not in accordance  with  the  law.   There  is  no
    indication that there was any  concession  made  on  the  part  of  the
    Secretary of  State  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   It  was  for  the
    claimants to show that the decision was not in accordance with the law.

10. Turning to the substance of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge, as Mr Ali accepted, for there to be an error of  law  or  rather
    for the decisions of the Secretary of State not  to  be  in  accordance
    with the law, it would necessarily have to be shown that  there  was  a
    public law error on the part of the Secretary of State.  That is to say
    it would have to be shown in conventional terms that the  Secretary  of
    State's decisions were irrational or otherwise unlawful.

11. There is a conceptual difficulty with the judge's  decision.   What  is
    said at paragraph 14, to which I have already  referred,  does  not  in
    reality identify any particular error.  It is said that it may  suggest
    that there has not been anxious scrutiny.   It  is  said  that  it  may
    suggest a degree of unfairness.  That is a considerable distance from a
    finding  that  there  has  been  unfairness  or  that  there  has  been
    inconsistency or that there has been some other error of law. There  is
    thus no proper finding of a public law error.

12. Further, it is clear that the various members of this family have  been
    treated differently but  why  that  is  so  flows  from  the  different
    positions they were in at the  relevant  time.   For  whatever  reason,
    Naila Shahin did not have leave to remain when the application was made
    whereas her brother Qaiser did.  It cannot be said that  the  Secretary
    of State  acted  irrationally  in  treating  either  of  those  parties
    differently, not least as it appears that there was subsequent  to  the
    application by Naila Shahin an issue as to whether  there  had  been  a
    proper application for leave owing to an absence  of  the  correct  fee
    being paid. Similarly the mother had no leave, and while the other  son
    was granted indefinite leave to enter,  that  does  not  appear  to  be
    inconsistent  with  the  application  of  paragraph  297  (i)  of   the
    Immigration Rules.

13. It is difficult to see that the situation of the mother could  properly
    be taken  into  account  in  these  proceedings  given  that  that  was
    correctly dealt with by way of an application for judicial  review  but
    again I do not consider that it could be  argued  that  there  was  any
    irrationality on  the  part  of  the  Secretary  of  State  and  it  is
    instructive that the decision of Judge Lagunju does not appear to  come
    anywhere near identifying that there was a rationality or  unlawfulness
    on the part of the Secretary of State.  On that basis the, decision  to
    allow the appeal involved the making of an error of law, and I  set  it
    aside.

14. As there has been no consideration of the substance of the appeals,  it
    is appropriate to remit the decision to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a
    fresh determination on all issues.

    SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  decision  on
    all issues.

 3. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 14 January 2016

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

