
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/45321/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 November 2016                            |                              |
|Prepared on 4 November 2016                   |On 23 December 2016           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                tahir khALIL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Bates, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Haq, Solicitor on behalf of Harrison Green
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In this decision the Appellant is  referred  to  as  the  Secretary  of
    State and the Respondent is referred to as the Claimant.

2.   The Claimant, a national of Pakistan, date of birth 1  September  1991,
    appealed against the Secretary of States' decision,  dated  23  October
    2014, to refuse to vary leave to remain and to make removal  directions
    under Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

3.   The appeal came before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Somal  (the  judge)
    who, on 5 May 2015, rejected the  appeal  on  immigration  grounds  but
    allowed the appeal under Article 8 of the  ECHR.   The  judge  did  not
    expressly deal with the issue of removal directions which had been made
    under Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality  Act  2006.
    However, it seems to me that that decision was contingent on  the  fact
    that he was allowing the appeal and therefore removal was not  in  fact
    in issue.

4.   On 13 May 2015 I found that the original Tribunal  judge  had  made  an
    error of law in  failing  to  properly  address  the  question  whether
    Article 8 ECHR should be looked at outside of the Rules for  there  was
    no identification of any exceptional or compelling circumstances  other
    than the view in effect that the  judge  had  formed  that  the  appeal
    succeeded under Article 8 and it was therefore proportionate.

5.   The matter was adjourned for further consideration by me  and  to  hear
    submissions on whether there were exceptional circumstances to  justify
    consideration of Article 8 outside of the Rules.

6.   In short the following points are taken: that the factual matters  that
    were before the judge: for the Claimant was in the United Kingdom as  a
    student, was married to a British national, she had circumstances which
    warranted her removal and were added to by the fact that the Claimant's
    wife, Mrs Begum, who is now the mother of a child born  on  11  January
    2016.  The child is a British national.  In effect it was said that  it
    was unreasonable and exceptional to expect her to leave her family  and
    settled circumstances in the United Kingdom to go to Pakistan with  her
    newborn child. Further, she needs to  have  a  cornea  operation  which
    requires her presence in the United Kingdom.

7.   Thirdly, it is said that in a  point  that  "had  not  previously  been
    raised" there may be  potential  difficulties  because  the  Claimant's
    family is not sympathetic to the marriage and  would  be  unwilling  to
    provide the kind of support and recreational help on a return.  Finally
    Mrs Begum is capable of returning to full-time employment  and  in  any
    event it is said that benefits which she could have  or  working  part-
    time are her entitlement and not a general cost to the United Kingdom.

8.   Additional  matters  were  the  Claimant's  evident  intelligence,  his
    fluency in English and his educational  achievements  and  that  he  is
    capable of finding employment although neither in Pakistan nor  in  the
    United Kingdom has he worked.  It is therefore said in effect that also
    the child's best interests as a British national remain in being in the
    United Kingdom.

9.   It is said on behalf of the Secretary of State that the  employment  of
    Mrs Begum is neither here nor there.  It is a neutral factor, it simply
    demonstrates that the Claimant would not be, as he has been,  a  burden
    upon the tax payer. Secondly, it is  said  that  his  status  has  been
    precarious in the  past  as  a  student  and  has  remained  in  effect
    precarious  because  he  has  had  no  settled  status  and  that   the
    relationship was entered into and during the time remained so.  Further
    it is said, that the medical treatment is  not  of  the  kind  that  is
    reflecting life threatening circumstances and in any event it  is  said
    the Claimant's wife can remain for  the  purposes  of  her  eye  cornea
    treatment if that proceeds.

10.  Finally it is said the child is very young at the present time and  his
    natural companion is its mother.  The family unit as a whole can be  in
    Pakistan and if there comes a time when they would wish the child to be
    educated in the United Kingdom the appropriate application can be made.
     It is therefore said that the matters originally before the judge, had
    he properly considered them, did not and those additional matters  that
    have now arisen and reflected in  a  bundle  that  has  helpfully  been
    provided with additional statements does not show that  there  are  any
    exceptional circumstances to warrant looking at Article 8 ECHR  outside
    of the Rules.

11.  As a result of one of my questions I am satisfied that the position  is
    that were the Claimant to have to return  to  Pakistan  and  apply  for
    entry clearance and do so then it would be  a  matter  for  considering
    that application if  his wife does not wish to return to  Pakistan with
    the child: It is a matter between them.

12.  At present on the evidence contained with the recent statements of  the
    Claimant and Mrs Begum, his wife, the potential health problems do  not
    give rise to exceptional circumstances  needing  his  presence  in  the
    United Kingdom, if it had been of realsignificance that would have been
    set out.

13.   For  these  reasons  therefore  I  am  satisfied  that  the   Original
    Tribunal's decision  contained  a  material  error  of  law  and  I  am
    satisfied on the evidence provided it is not, taking account, as I must
    do, in the best interests of the child, removal  at the present time is
    not disproportionate.

14.  There is nothing to show, were that to be their  wish,  that  returning
    to Bangladesh amounts to a disproportionate interference with Article 8
    ECHR rights.  I take into account the arguments  that  there  might  be
    other bases on which a claim under the Rules might fail but  I  do  not
    speculate on the outcome of a properly made out of country  application
    for entry clearance.

15.  The Original Tribunal decision can not stand.  The  following  decision
    is substiltuted.

16.  The Appeal (of the Claimant) is dismissed.

Signed                                  Date 12 December 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey


P.S. I regret the delay in promulgation which  is  due  to  the  file  being
    misplaced.
