
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/45429/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                         |Decision Promulgated         |
|On: 1st August 2016                           |On 5th August 2016           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                Ayodeji Ilori
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Ms J. Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B. Hawkin, Paul John & Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of Nigeria date of birth 26th  July  1977.
    On the 16th December 2015 the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  J  Bartlett)
    allowed his appeal against a decision to remove  him  from  the  United
    Kingdom pursuant to s10 of the Immigration and  Asylum  Act  1999.  The
    Secretary of State now has permission to appeal against the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision.

 2. The Respondent had applied for leave to  remain  in  the  UK  on  human
    rights grounds. He had at that time lived in the UK for nine years  and
    had a daughter who was born here in 2010.  Although  he  is  no  longer
    with her mother, he enjoys regular contact with her.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal determined the matter on the papers before  it.
    This included "refreshingly frank" correspondence from  the  mother  of
    the Respondent's daughter which described him as a  "wonderful  dad  to
    our daughter though he was a rubbish boyfriend". On the basis  of  this
    evidence it made the unchallenged finding that  the  Respondent  had  a
    genuine and  subsisting  paternal  relationship  with  the  child.   At
    paragraph 8 of the determination the Tribunal  notes  that  the  little
    girl is neither British nor settled for the purpose of the  immigration
    rules. The Respondent could not therefore show that  he  qualified  for
    leave under Appendix FM.

 4. Turning to Article 8 'outside  of  the  Rules'  the  Tribunal  directed
    itself to s55 of the Borders Citizenship and Immigration Act  2002  and
    to various authorities including Azimi-Moeyed v SSHD  [2013]  UKUT  197
    (IAC).   It made findings that the Respondent enjoyed  regular  contact
    with his daughter such that could not be replaced by "modern  means  of
    communication". Although he could have face-to-face  telephone  contact
    over the internet at her age this would be  of  limited  value.   There
    would therefore be  an  interference  such  that  Article  8  would  be
    engaged.  In respect of proportionality the Tribunal directed itself to
    consider s117A and s117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
    2002 and finds as follows:

         "The appellant's child is not a qualifying child as  she  is  under
         the age of seven. I find that the appellant can  speak  English  on
         the basis that English is widely spoken in Nigeria. I find that the
         appellant has been in the United Kingdom  unlawfully for his entire
         stay here.  I  have  not  been  provided  with  evidence  that  the
         appellant has  worked  in  the  United  Kingdom   or  that  he  has
         independent financial means other than his witness statement and  I
         do not find that credible given his immigration status. Therefore I
         find that he will have recourse to public funds.

         The respondent seeks to pursue the legitimate  aim  of  immigration
         control. As set out above, I find that the appellant's child's best
         interests are for her to remain in regular  physical  contact  with
         the appellant such as to  require  him  to  remain  in  the  United
         Kingdom whilst she is here. I do not  find  that  the  respondent's
         legitimate aim outweighs the considerations of the child which  are
         of primary importance.  Therefore  the  appeal  succeeds  on  human
         rights grounds".

    The Secretary of State's Appeal

 5. The Secretary of State's grounds of  appeal  are  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  erred in failing to have regard to the terms of  s117B(6)  of
    the 2002 Act. This states:

         (6)      In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,
         the public interest does not require the person's removal where-

               a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

               b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom

    The  Secretary  of  State  submits  that  had  the  Tribunal   properly
    considered this provision it  would  have  concluded  that  the  public
    interest  does  require  the  removal  of  a  person  whose  child   or
    relationship does not meet the tests at (a) or (b).

    My Findings

 6. It is, on a straightforward reading of the determination, not  arguable
    that the Tribunal failed to consider  s117B(6).  It  expressly  directs
    itself to the section at paragraph [18] and notes that the child is not
    "qualifying".

 7. The question of whether that consideration was "proper" is rather  more
    nuanced.  Ms Isherwood did not submit the six factors set out in  s117B
    to be an exhaustive list. Nor did she submit that a Tribunal was  bound
    to invert the meaning  of  s117B(6)  to  the  effect  that  the  public
    interest positively requires the removal of a person who does not  meet
    its terms. Rather her submissions were that there was a lack of reasons
    for the overall conclusion and this strayed to perversity. As  she  put
    it: "all of the factors appeared to weigh against the appellant yet  he
    still allowed it". She placed particular emphasis on the fact that  the
    child had no leave and could not be treated as a "trump".

 8. This is, on any reading, an appeal that has been allowed squarely  upon
    application of the 'best interests' principle in s55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and  Immigration  Act  2009.  The  Judge  made  a  balanced
    assessment of what those best interests are, having regard not just  to
    the evidence  of  the  father,  but  to  his  former  partner  and  her
    refreshingly frank assessment of him.   A reasons  challenge  can  only
    succeed where the aggrieved party is left in some doubt about  why  the
    decision went against him. It cannot be  said  that  the  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department is  in  the  dark  about  why  the  Judge
    reached the conclusions that he did about the Respondent's relationship
    with his daughter.  Having made those findings the Judge had regard  to
    all of the factors that weighed against the appellant  before  him:  eg
    the fact that the child was not 'qualifying', the lack of  evidence  in
    respect of  financial  independence,  his  consistent  lack  of  lawful
    status. He weighed all of that in the balance, as he is obliged to  do,
    and still found that the appeal should be allowed.   His  reasoning  in
    that regard is scant, but it is clear.

 9. That leaves the real core  of  Ms  Isherwood's  submissions:   that  no
    rational Tribunal could have possibly allowed  this  appeal.   Had  the
    legal effect of this decision  been  that  the  Respondent  is  granted
    indefinite or even a substantial period of  leave,  I  would  have  had
    little hesitation in agreeing. However, as Mr Hawkin  points  out,  the
    period of leave granted is a matter for the Secretary of State, and the
    First-tier Tribunal gave a clear steer as to what  that  should  be  at
    paragraph 19: "I find that the child's best interests are  for  her  to
    remain in regular physical  contact  with  the  appellant  such  as  to
    require him to remain in the United Kingdom whilst she  is  here".   It
    was on this limited basis that the appeal was allowed,  and  given  the
    best interest finding I see no reason to interfere with it.   The point
    was that notwithstanding the fact that the parents  were  not  together
    the Respondent, his former partner and child  did  in  effect  have  an
    interconnected family life.

10. Ms Isherwood informed me that the child  and  her  mother  are  in  the
    process of being removed from the United  Kingdom,  (to  the  point  of
    having attended meetings with the family removals team).  I  share  the
    view taken by the First-tier Tribunal Judge,  that  it  would  at  this
    stage be disproportionate to interfere with  the  child's  relationship
    with her father, and that he should be permitted to remain up until the
    point that her status is resolved, one way  or  another.    This  is  a
    child who is imminently facing real disruption to her life, and  I  see
    no reason to interfere with the First-tier Tribunal's  assessment  that
    it would be contrary to her best interests to preface  that  by  losing
    contact with her father.

11. The effect of the decision is not that the Respondent 'wins'. Rather it
    is that he gets to continue seeing his daughter up until the point that
    she, and he, are removed together. If his daughter is in fact permitted
    to stay in the UK, his position would need  to  be  reviewed.  For  the
    reasons set out by Ms Isherwood it is far from clear whether  he  would
    eventually be permitted to stay on human rights grounds. The Respondent
    should be in no doubt that the ratio of this decision was  confined  to
    the immediate and short-term future.

    Decisions

12. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain an  error
    of law such that it should be set aside.

13. I was not asked to make an Order for anonymity and on the facts  I  see
    no reason to do so.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                             4th August 2016
