

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Numbers: IA/45637/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                               |Determination           |
|                                                   |Promulgated             |
|On 2nd July 2014                                   |On 11th July 2014       |
|                                                   |                        |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                  Between:

                                ARINZE NNOLIM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr D Adams, instructed by JDS Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Ms A Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born  on  1st  August  1976.  He
      Appeals against the determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  dated
      17th  April  2014  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
      decision of 21st October 2013 refusing to issue a  residence  card  as
      confirmation of a  right  of  residence  under  Regulation  8  of  the
      (Immigration) EEA Regulations 2006.

2.    Permission to appeal was granted  by  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Murray on 20th May 2014 on the grounds that it was arguable that
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Shepherd acted  unfairly  in  relying  on  a
      previous determination without giving the Appellant the opportunity to
      give evidence on it.

3.    Mr Adams submitted that the Judge relied on the  credibility  findings
      in the  previous  determination  which  were  not  relied  on  by  the
      Respondent.  The  Appellant's  representative  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal was not aware of the determination and  therefore  the  Judge
      should have adjourned the hearing to give the Appellant an opportunity
      to address the adverse credibility findings. The factual matrix of the
      previous appeal and this appeal were different and  Devaseelan  [2002]
      UKIAT 000702 was not binding.

4.    Ms Holmes relied on the Rule 24 response and submitted that the  Judge
      had adopted the correct approach and the determination was careful and
      thorough. The Judge made it clear at the hearing (paragraph 26 of  the
      determination) that he intended to rely on the previous  determination
      and the Appellant's representative did not seek  to  adjourn  or  make
      submissions on  the  point.  The  Appellant  was  well  aware  of  the
      determination and failed to mention it. There was no unfairness on the
      part of the Judge. The previous determination was not appealed and the
      findings remained unchallenged. The Judge was entitled to rely  on  it
      and he behaved perfectly properly in indicating to the parties that he
      intended to do so.

5.    In any event, the Judge took into account the  Appellant's  additional
      evidence about the aluminium business, but found that he had still not
      shown dependency. The Appellant had no justifiable complaint.

6.    Mr Adams submitted that although the Appellant's representatives  were
      aware of the existence of the determination, they were  not  aware  of
      its contents. It was not  the  Appellant's  fault  that  his  previous
      solicitors did not challenge the  previous  determination.  The  Judge
      realised the importance of the adverse credibility findings and had to
      consider whether it would be fair to go ahead;  it  was  a  matter  of
      procedure. The Judge had the power to adjourn and did not do so.


Discussion and conclusions

7.    The Appellant was aware of the previous appeal,  having  attended  the
      hearing and given evidence. He had applied for a residence card on the
      basis that he was an extended family member of his uncle.  The  appeal
      was dismissed and not appealed. The determination was referred  to  in
      the immigration history. It was not  a  matter  only  arising  at  the
      appeal.

8.    The Judge was made aware of the previous appeal at the hearing  before
      him. Neither the Appellant nor the Respondent supplied him with a copy
      of the determination. The Judge  indicated  at  the  hearing  that  he
      intended to get a copy and that he would take it into account  in  his
      decision. The Appellant did not seek to make  any  representations  in
      relation to the previous appeal. He did not ask for an adjournment and
      he failed to  address  the  previous  judge's  findings  in  his  oral
      evidence. I find that the Judge did not act unfairly because  he  gave
      the parties notice of his intention to rely on the determination.  The
      Appellant was aware of the previous decision, but  failed  to  address
      the findings therein.

9.    The Judge properly  directed  himself  following  Devaseelan  and  was
      entitled to rely on the previous determination; the  Appellant  having
      made another application as an extended  family  member  of  the  same
      uncle. In any event, the Judge took into account the  Appellant's  new
      evidence and gave cogent reasons for finding that it was not credible.



10.   The Judge's finding that the Appellant was not credible  was  open  to
      him on the evidence before him. The Judge also considered  the  appeal
      in the alternative; accepting that there was  an  aluminium  business.
      The Appellant was unable to show dependency on his own evidence.

11.   The Judge made no error on any point of law which  might  require  the
      determination to be set aside. The appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
      dismissed. The determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  dated  17th
      April 2014 shall stand.





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
8th July 2014
