
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/45219/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 October 2015                   |On 20 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                              miss amarra arooj
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No representation
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 1 January 1987 and on 14
    August 2014 she applied for leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
    outside the Immigration Rules.  That  application  was  refused  on  27
    October 2014 by way of a decision to refuse to vary her leave to remain
    and a decision to remove her  under  Section  47  of  the  Immigration,
    Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  Her application for leave  to  remain
    was refused on the basis that she had applied for a purpose not covered
    by the Rules.  The Reasons for Refusal Letter included the following:

         "The Secretary of State's policy  is  to  consider  granting  leave
         outside  the  Immigration  Rules  where   particularly   compelling
         circumstances exist.  Grants of such leave are rare and  are  given
         only for genuinely compassionate reasons.  You have claimed that we
         should exercise  discretion  in  your  case  because  you  wish  to
         complete your studies here.  This has  been  carefully  considered.
         However, it is open to you to return to Pakistan  and  pursue  your
         studies  or  employment  there.   Alternatively,  if  you  wish  to
         undertake studies in the United Kingdom, it is open to you to  make
         an application for entry clearance under Tier 4 of the Points Based
         System.  It has been decided that a  grant  of  leave  outside  the
         rules is not appropriate in your case."

 2. Accordingly the application was refused.

 3. With her application the appellant submitted a letter which stated,  "I
    have a very clear idea of the type and purpose of course that I want to
    study and am already in touch with educational institutions in the  UK:
    and are able to vouch that  their  course  will  start  within  next  6
    months."

 4. In the same letter the appellant stated that she wished  to  remain  in
    the UK as a prospective student and intended to study in the  UK  under
    Tier 4 of the  points-based  system  but  had  not  completed  all  the
    arrangements for her course of study.  First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Aziz
    determined the matter without  a  hearing  and  on  the  papers  on  19
    February 2015 and a decision was promulgated on 22 February 2015.   The
    judge found that the appellant could not succeed under the  Immigration
    Rules further to paragraph 322(1) which states:

         "322.    In addition to the grounds for  refusal  of  extension  of
                stay set out in Parts 2-8  of  these  Rules,  the  following
                provisions  apply  in  relation  to  the   refusal   of   an
                application for variation of leave to enter  or  remain  or,
                where appropriate, the curtailment of leave:

                Grounds on which leave to remain in the United Kingdom is to
                be refused

                (1)    the fact that variation of leave to enter  or  remain
                    is being sought for  a  purpose  not  covered  by  these
                    Rules."

 5. The judge also considered the appellant's case at paragraph 17  of  the
    decision and made a note that Article 8 was not  a  general  dispensing
    provision.

 6. The  appellant  appealed  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  initially  her
    application was refused  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  McDade.   Her
    grounds were renewed to the Upper Tribunal  on  the  following  ground.
    She submitted she was denied an opportunity  to  have  a  fair  hearing
    further to Article 6 of the ECHR as she requested that  her  matter  be
    listed to the oral hearing so she could make oral submissions  and  the
    Tribunal had ignored her fax.

 7. Further, she stated the application form on which she  applied  to  the
    Home Office stated she could have applied for other reasons which  were
    not covered by the application form and  the  judge  did  not  consider
    this.  The applicant had been led to believe that she had completed the
    correct application form.  The judge had not considered the application
    under the correct Immigration Rules.   The  applicant  had  stated  she
    wished to submit her application under the Immigration Rules  cited  in
    her covering letter  and  the  Home  Office  should  not  have  applied
    paragraph 322(1) of the Immigration Rules and should have sent the form
    back as invalid under Rule 34A if necessary.  The judge had  failed  to
    follow the findings in the case of Patel (revocation of sponsor licence
    - fairness) India [2011] UKUT 00211 (IAC) 6 June  2011  which  required
    the respondent to afford an opportunity to the appellant  to  have  her
    leave varied.

 8. Further the Secretary of State had failed to apply  any  discretion  in
    the appellant's case knowing that  paragraph  322  of  the  Immigration
    Rules did not apply.  It was conceded and accepted there was a residual
    of discretion to grant leave outside the  Rules  and  the  exercise  of
    discretion should have been considered.

 9. Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins granted permission to appeal on the  basis
    that the present grounds raised  the  contention  "apparently  for  the
    first time" that the applicant requested  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    give an oral hearing and the Tribunal ignored that  application.   This
    was arguably a procedural error amounting to an error of law.

10. A Rule 24 response was served by the Secretary of State  on  the  basis
    that there was no error in the judge's findings  at  [18]  which  dealt
    with the matter and the reference to Patel was of no relevance  as  the
    application  made  fell  outside  the  Rules  and  was  not  a  Tier  4
    application.  There was no error in the judge's  decision  to  consider
    the residual discretion.  It was open to the judge to allow the  appeal
    on the basis of what was before him and he took into account everything
    that should have been.

11. Prior to the hearing before  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  26  October  the
    appellant submitted a  letter  dated  21  October  2015  requesting  an
    adjournment.  That adjournment was  refused  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Perkins.  It stated that "the application for an adjournment is refused
    because it is not supported by  medical  evidence.   If  the  appellant
    really has "bad flu" I am confident that medical evidence showing  that
    she is unfit to attend an appeal hearing would be forthcoming".

The Hearing

12. At the hearing Mr Melvin objected to any grant of  an  adjournment.   I
    found that there was no evidence that the appellant  had  produced  any
    medical evidence showing she was unfit  to  attend  an  appeal  or  had
    responded in any way to the refusal issued on 23 October  2015  to  her
    application for an adjournment previously.  She had previously  written
    to the Tribunal on 21 October 2015 and 5  days  prior  to  the  hearing
    stating that the doctor had told her she could 'self-certify' but I  do
    not accept that a GP would not provide a letter in respect of  a  court
    hearing.

13. I have considered the basis of the application for permission to appeal
    and consider that there was  sufficient  information  to  make  a  just
    decision on the papers. I had in mind the overriding objective  further
    to Rule 2 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and the
    need to balance the need for proper participation of the appellant with
    the avoidance of further delay so far as it was compatible with a  just
    consideration  of  the  issues.  I   therefore   refuse   any   further
    adjournment.

14. I note the appellant made no reference  to  any  request  for  an  oral
    hearing in her first application for permission to appeal and this  was
    raised in the application to the Upper Tribunal.  There was  no  letter
    on file from the appellant and no fax dated 6 February 2015.  The first
    notification that such a fax had been  sent  was  in  response  to  the
    notice of decision of the refusal for her application for permission to
    appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  after  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision.  She forwarded a copy of the said fax on 22 May 2015.  As  Mr
    Melvin pointed out no fee had been paid in respect of an  oral  hearing
    and the appellant indicated at the outset that she wished the matter to
    be determined on the papers.  I am  not  satisfied  that  there  was  a
    procedural error amounting to an error of law by the judge at the First-
    tier Tribunal proceeding  on  the  basis  that  the  matter  should  be
    determined on the papers.

15. It is clear that the appellant made an application for leave to  remain
    on the basis of being a prospective student and  the  judge  considered
    the covering letter forwarded with  her  application  dated  14  August
    2014.  The letter is referred to  in  paragraph  7  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision in which it is outlined  that  the  appellant  has  a
    clear idea of the type of course she wishes to study and that  she  has
    made contact with a number of educational  institutions  and  that  she
    hoped to begin her course  within  the  next  six  months.   The  judge
    clearly set out that the appellant was making  an  application  outside
    the Immigration Rules and that it  was  refused  further  to  paragraph
    322(1).

16. There is no indication that  the  judge  erred  because  he  failed  to
    consider the application under the correct Immigration Rules  as  there
    is no Rule for a prospective student.

17. There is no doubt that the judge also set out  that  the  Secretary  of
    State had addressed her mind to whether there  should  be  a  grant  of
    leave outside the Rule but that was rare and only given  for  genuinely
    compassionate reasons.  That was clearly not made out on the  basis  of
    the evidence presented in this case.  The judgment  Patel  &  Others  v
    Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department  confirms  that  it  is
    important to remember that Article 8 is not a general dispensing power.
     Indeed, as the judge set out in paragraph 57 of Patel "the merits of a
    decision not to depart from the Rules are not  reviewable  on  appeal",
    Section 86(6).  Although it is now accepted that  Gulshan  (Article  8:
    new rules: correct approach) [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC) does not set  out  a
    threshold  test  for  the  application  of  Article  8,  there  was  no
    indication that there were any circumstances in this case which had not
    been identified by the judge which would lead to  a  successful  appeal
    under Article 8.  As the judge stated at paragraph 17:

         "17. I have summarised above a covering letter that was attached to
             the  appellant's  application.   She  is  essentially  seeking
             temporary leave in order to find a place to go  study  in  the
             United Kingdom.  In a further letter dated  25  December  2014
             (contained within the appellant's bundle), she reiterates this
             request, adding that in Pakistan the conditions to  study  and
             lead an independent life are difficult for a girl."

    And at paragraph 21 the judge stated:

         "In arriving at her decision I echo the  respondent's  observations
         that if the appellant does wish to study in the United Kingdom then
         it  is  open  to  her  to  make  the  appropriate  entry  clearance
         application.  The appellant is essentially relying on Article 8  as
         a general dispensing power in order to secure a place of study on a
         course she has yet to find (let alone secure  admission  on).   The
         case law in this area is clear that the appellant  cannot  rely  on
         Article 8 for such purposes."

18. There is no merit in the contention that  the  respondent  should  have
    returned her application as invalid.  She simply does not, on the basis
    of her claim, fulfil any of the Immigration Rules and further has  made
    out no case for her application to be considered on Article 8 grounds.

19. As stated in Nasim and others (Article 8) [2014] UKUT 00025 (IAC)

         'The Tribunal did,  however,  expressly  acknowledge  that  it  was
         unlikely a person would be able to  show  an  Article  8  right  by
         coming to the United Kingdom for temporary purposes.   The  chances
         of such a  right  carrying  the  day  have,  we  consider,  further
         diminished, in the light of the judgments in Patel and Others.   It
         would, however, be wrong to say that the  point  has  been  reached
         where an adverse immigration decision in the case of a  person  who
         is here for study or other temporary purposes can never be found to
         be disproportionate.  But what is clear is that, on  the  state  of
         the present law, there is no justification for extending the obiter
         findings in CDS, so as to equate a person whose course of study has
         not yet ended with a person who, having finished their  course,  is
         precluded by the Immigration Rules from staying on to do  something
         else'.

    And further

    As Patel [57] states

        'It is important to remember  that  article  8  is  not  a  general
        dispensing power. It is to be distinguished from the  Secretary  of
        State's discretion to allow leave  to  remain  outside  the  rules,
        which may be unrelated to any protected human right. The merits  of
        a decision not to depart from  the  rules  are  not  reviewable  on
        appeal: section 86(6). One may sympathise with Sedley LJ's call  in
        Pankina for "common sense" in  the  application  of  the  rules  to
        graduates who have been studying in the UK for some years (see para
        47 above).  However,  such  considerations  do  not  by  themselves
        provide grounds of appeal under article 8, which is concerned  with
        private or family life, not education as such. The opportunity  for
        a promising student to complete his course in this country, however
        desirable in general terms, is not  in  itself  a  right  protected
        under article 8'.

20. The Secretary of States own discretion to refuse to consider the matter
    outside the Rules is not in this instance  reviewable.  This  appellant
    has not started a course and as her  case  stands  has  established  no
    rights which can secure Article 8 protection. Indeed as stated she  can
    return to Pakistan in order to make an out of  country  application  to
    study  in  the  United  Kingdom.  I  find  no  error  of  law  in   the
    determination and the determination shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal made no error and the decision shall stand.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

