
IAC-AH-DP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/45249/2013
     IA/45250/2013
     IA/45251/2013
     IA/45252/2013
     IA/45253/2013
     IA/45254/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Sheldon Court    |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 2nd October 2014                  |On 30th December 2014                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                   (1) m w
                                   (2) f k
                                   (3) s w
                                   (4) a w
                                   (5) y w
                                  (6) su w
                 (anonymity direction made as "MW & oTHERS")
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr N Murphy (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Freer,  promulgated  on  10th  March  2014,  following  a  hearing   at
    Birmingham  on  6th  March  2014.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeals of the Appellants, who subsequently applied  for,
    and were granted, permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and  thus
    the matter comes before me.

The Appellants

 2. The Appellants are a family, consisting of a father, a mother, and  his
    four children.  They are all citizens  of  Sri  Lanka.   The  principal
    Appellant is the father, who had arrived in the  UK  some  eight  years
    ago, on the basis of a work permit, following which he then obtained  a
    Highly Skilled Migrant's visa, which was extended yet again  to  August
    2012.  Subsequent applications  for  leave  to  remain  were  then  all
    rejected.  He is the principal  Appellant.   The  other  five  are  his
    dependent claimants.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim turns on family life (see  paragraph  21  of  the
    determination).  The family are all Muslims,  which  is  a  substantial
    minority  faith  in  Sri  Lanka  (see  paragraph  26).   The  principal
    Appellant's wife cannot write in Tamil or in Sinhalese because she went
    to a private school where  she  studied  in  the  English  medium  (see
    paragraph 27).  The principal Appellant's claim is that if  the  family
    were removed they would not have the money to send their four  children
    to a private school.  They would be taught in the local language.  They
    would be set back to the start.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The  judge  considered  the  "best  interests  of  the  children"  (see
    paragraph 59).  The three children were of a young  age.   Accordingly,
    the judge held that,

         "this issue will focus mainly on S as the eldest child who has been
         in the UK continuously for a period exceeding seven years.  That is
         because she has the strongest rights of the four  children  and  if
         ... I do find that she fails to pass the legal threshold,  so  will
         the others a fortiori" (see paragraph 64).

 5. The judge held that the eldest child,  S,  failed  to  pass  the  legal
    threshold, because although the "seven year Rule"  was  something  that
    must be applied, this "is not a rigid marker but a flexible  factor  to
    be weighed with other matters" (paragraph 65).

 6. The judge made a finding of fact that ,

         "the eldest child S adapted from her birth in Australia to life  in
         Sri Lanka and then to life in the UK.  As she  adapted  before,  it
         seems reasonable to anticipate, with an evidential  basis  for  it,
         that she can adapt again.  She has a strong interest  in  remaining
         with her family.  Her parents are  still  a  major  focus  and  she
         spends most of her evenings in the company of  her  siblings  at  a
         religious school ..." (paragraph 66).

    The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 7. The grounds of application, which are well crafted,  by  Faraz  Shibli,
    broadly state that  the  judge  failed  to  properly  assess  the  best
    interests of the minor children.

 8. On 28th March 2014, permission to appeal was granted.

 9. On 16th April 2014, a Rule 24 response was entered  by  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State.

Submissions

10. At the hearing before me, Mr Murphy, of Counsel, attended on behalf  of
    the  Appellants.   In  well  measured  and  clear,  and   comprehensive
    submissions, he stated that the judge had simply failed to assess  what
    was in the best interests of the  children.   Given  that  this  is  "a
    primary consideration" it was important for the judge  to  specifically
    engage with what served the children's own best interests.   The  judge
    had not done that.

11. Moreover, the judge had only looked at the best interests of the eldest
    child, S, because he had ended up  by  suggesting  that  "she  has  the
    strongest rights of the four children" and that the  interests  of  the
    other children would pale into  insignificance  in  the  light  of  S's
    interests, if she did not succeed (see  paragraph  64).   This  was  an
    incorrect approach.

12. Indeed, the second child, A W, was only  marginally  younger  than  the
    first child, and had also been in the UK for six years,  such  that  an
    individualised consideration of his rights,  and  his  best  interests,
    also necessarily fell to be considered by  the  judge.   Moreover,  the
    judge made factual errors such as stating that the principal  Appellant
    had two convictions, when he only had one conviction.

13. For his part, Mr Mills submitted that he would rely upon  the  Rule  24
    response of 16th  April  2013  and  the  judge  was  clearly  right  at
    paragraph 64, in stating that the eldest child, who had been in the  UK
    continuously for a period of seven years, had the  strongest  claim  to
    make.  Secondly, the judge had apprised himself of  the  relevant  case
    law.  He was aware of ZH (Tanzania).

14. More importantly, he earlier stated that this case was not  subject  to
    the case of Zoumbas, which at paragraph  25  qualified  ZH  (Tanzania),
    thus suggesting that the judge took a nuanced approach  to  the  matter
    before him (see paragraph 59).

15. Furthermore, the judge made adverse credibility findings (see paragraph
    52) and was clear that it was not credible that S could not  be  taught
    basic level of Tamil before she returned to Sri  Lanka,  and  that  the
    language argument presented on behalf of the Appellants "taken  in  the
    round, is not a strong factor albeit a  material  one"  (see  paragraph
    52).

16. In reply, Mr Murphy submitted that there was  a  clear  error,  if  one
    considered the Grounds of Appeal in the round, because the  plain  fact
    was that the judge had not considered what was in the best interests of
    the children.  Rather, the judge had simply  subsumed  their  interests
    into the  interests  of  the  parents.   This  is  something  which  ZH
    (Tanzania) had made clear could not be done.

Error of Law

17. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error of  law,  such  that  I  should  set  aside  the
    decision (see Section 12(1) of TCEA 2007).  The  determination  of  the
    judge is clear, comprehensive, and well thought  out.   In  particular,
    the judge was expressly clear that,

         "the eldest child S adapted from her birth in Australia to life  in
         Sri Lanka and then to life in the UK.  As she  adapted  before,  it
         seems reasonable to anticipate, with an evidential  basis  for  it,
         that she can adapt again.  She has a strong interest  in  remaining
         with her family.  Her parents are  still  a  major  focus  and  she
         spends most of her evenings in  the  company  of  her  siblings  at
         religious school ..." (paragraph 66).

18. Notwithstanding this clear finding, it does appear that the  judge  has
    considered the "best interests" of the child, S, on the  basis  of  her
    having "a strong interest in remaining with  her  family"  rather  than
    individually in her own  right.   That  is  a  material  difference  in
    approach to what the decided cases such as ZH  (Tanzania)  and  Zoumbas
    require.

19. The recent judgment by Mr Justice McCluskey in Ugo (unreported) is also
    to the same effect.  Moreover, the interests of the other children, and
    in particular those of A W, who had also, by the time  of  the  hearing
    before the learned judge, been in the  UK  for  seven  years  and  five
    months, have not been expressly considered.  The  "best  interests"  of
    the youngest two children have not been considered in terms at all.

20. In the event, though there is no doubt that the  determination  of  the
    judge is a clear and careful one,  appropriate  consideration  has  not
    been given to the best interests of the children  as  required  by  the
    latest cases.  The matter must accordingly  be  remitted  back  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a hearing with respect to this specific issue.





Decision

21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  This appeal is remitted  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, to be heard by a judge other than Judge Freer,  with  respect
    to the best interests of the children.

22. Anonymity order made.



Signed        Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss        27th December 2014

