
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/45762/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 29th April 2014                            |14th May 2014                |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge POOLE

                                   Between

                                KAISER AHMED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Khyati Joshi
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REMITTAL


   1. I will refer to the parties as appellant and respondent  in  the  same
      manner in which they appeared before the First-Tier Tribunal.

   2. The appellant is a male citizen of Bangladesh born  7  November  1989.
      The  appellant  applied  for  the  issue  of  a  residence   card   as
      confirmation of a right of residence as the spouse of an EEA  national
      exercising treaty rights.  The respondent refused the application in a
      decision dated 22 October 2013.  The appellant appealed  against  that
      decision.  In summary the respondent had concluded that the  appellant
      and his wife were not in a  subsisting  and  genuine  marriage.   This
      decision is based upon a visit to the appellant's home on 10 June 2013
      when  immigration  officers  sought  to  execute  a  warrant  at   the
      appellants address with regard to a third-party unconnected  with  the
      appellant.  Whilst at the address  the  appellant  was  "encountered".
      Checks revealed the appellants application as mentioned above.   As  a
      result of that visit the respondent took the view that  the  appellant
      and his wife were "involved in a sham marriage".

   3. The appellant appealed that decision and his appeal came before  Judge
      of the First-Tier Tribunal Shamash sitting at the Inner  London  Crown
      Court on 11 February 2014.  The appellant,  his  wife  and  a  witness
      attended and gave evidence.  Both  parties  were  represented.   In  a
      determination dated 4 March 2014 the judge "allowed the  appeal  under
      the Immigration Rules".  The findings made by the judge are set out in
      paragraph 20 of her determination.  In that paragraph the judge refers
      to the standard of proof as being the  balance  of  probabilities  and
      indicates that the case is "finely balanced".  Reference  is  made  to
      supporting evidence being provided to  the  judge  after  the  hearing
      which  the  judge  found  corroborated   the   appellant's   evidence.
      Reference is made to an independent witness, Mr Tovey, as being a poor
      witness.  In the penultimate sentence the judge records "in the end  I
      am  satisfied  to  the  lower   standard   that   the   appellant   is
      married....and that the marriage is genuine".

   4. The respondent  sought  leave  to  appeal  on  two  grounds.   Firstly
      procedural irregularity in that  the  judge  had  accepted  additional
      evidence  after  the  hearing  without  giving  the   respondent   the
      opportunity to scrutinise and examine.

   5. The second ground is that the judge had failed to adequately resolve a
      conflict with regard to the evidence of Mr Tovey.

   6. On 21 March 2014 another Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal granted  the
      respondent leave to appeal and in doing so gave the following reasons:

         "1.   This  is  an  in-time  application  by  the  respondent   for
             permission to appeal against the determination of Judge of the
             First-Tier Tribunal Shamash who  allowed  the  appeal  of  the
             appellant (a citizen of Bangladesh) against the refusal  of  a
             residence card as the spouse of an EEA national.


         2.   It is arguable that there was a procedural irregularity as set
             out at ground 1.  The judge placed reliance  on  post-decision
             evidence which she found corroborated the appellant's account.
              The judge found the case to be finely balanced and in such  a
             case where the  post-decision  evidence  provided  substantial
             reasons for her ultimate conclusion it is  arguable  that  she
             should have given the respondent at least  an  opportunity  to
             see and comment on that additional evidence even  if  she  did
             not consider it necessary to reconvene the hearing.


         3.   I consider that ground 2 on its own is less well-founded.  The
             judge was effectively explaining both why Mr Tovey could panic
             and why he could have been intimidated either  by  immigration
             officers or by the appellant.  She appears  to  have  regarded
             his evidence as effectively neutral.


         3.   For the avoidance of doubt however both grounds are arguable".

   7. Following the grant of leave the appellant's representatives lodged  a
      document "opposing appeal".  I accept this document as being lodged by
      reference to Rule 24 of the Procedure Rules.  In this document  it  is
      argued that there was no  procedural  irregularity  and  submits  that
      judge should not have adjourned the case for the  additional  evidence
      to be considered by the respondent, such evidence  was  in  any  event
      "reasonably foreseeable" by the respondent.  Reference is made to  the
      "Guide on Appeals".

   8. It is then argued that the additional evidence in the form  of  travel
      documents did not substantiate the judge's decision in the appellant's
      favour.  In addition the  overriding  objective  is  that  a  Tribunal
      handles cases fairly quickly and efficiently, and in the interests  of
      the parties to the proceedings and the wider public interest.

   9. The admissions are then made with regard to the position of Mr  Tovey.
      It is suggested that the judge was entitled to reach  the  conclusions
      that she did upon the basis of his evidence.

  10. Hence the matter came  before  me  in  the  Upper  Tribunal.   At  the
      commencement of the hearing Ms Joshi handed in  a  skeleton  argument.
      She indicated that this  document  was  similar  in  the  majority  of
      respects to the admission referred to  above,  that  in  addition  the
      point is made that had the judge given the respondent the  opportunity
      to comment on the additional evidence, there would not have  been  any
      difference in the outcome.

  11. Mr Bramble in his submissions simply relied upon the  grounds  seeking
      leave.

  12. I pointed out at this stage that I could not  ignore  the  conflicting
      standards of proof set out in paragraph 20 of the judge's decision.  I
      noted that this had not been raised in the  initial  grounds,  in  the
      grant or in the documents lodged by the appellant's representative.

  13. Mr Bramble requested leave to amend the grounds to include this point.
       Ms Joshi made not  comment.   I  consider  it  appropriate  that  the
      grounds be deemed to be amended to include this point.

  14. Ms Joshi relied upon the documents as set  out  above  that  had  been
      lodged by her firm.  She emphasised that an adjournment  was  not  the
      appropriate  course  for  the  judge  to  take.   The   tickets   were
      foreseeable and even without them she submitted the judge  would  have
      accepted that the appellant's wife had gone to Hungary as stated.  The
      respondent was not prejudiced by their production.

  15. At this stage I indicated that for the reasons that I would set out in
      this written decision I considered there was a material error  of  law
      contained in the judge's determination.  It could not stand  and  must
      be set aside.  I also indicated that because of a finding  that  there
      was a procedural irregularity it was appropriate following the  Senior
      Presidents practice statement to remit the case back to the First-Tier
      Tribunal for re-hearing.

  16.  I  have  no  hesitation  in  finding  that  there  was  a  procedural
      irregularity.  Fairness dictates  that  both  parties  must  have  the
      opportunity to see and comment upon evidence  produced  by  the  other
      party.  If it was the Secretary of State seeking  to  adduce  evidence
      after the event any appellant  would  be  perfectly  entitled  to  cry
      "foul" and seek to set aside any  adverse  decision.   The  same  must
      equally apply when  it  is  the  appellant  producing  the  additional
      evidence.

  17. I do not accept the point  raised  by  Ms  Joshi  with  regard  to  an
      adjournment.  In the circumstances  the  judge  could  not  have  been
      criticised if she had delayed promulgation of her determination  until
      the respondent had an opportunity to make written submissions  to  her
      with regard to the additional evidence.  This would not amount  to  an
      adjournment.  Even if the judge sought to reconvene the hearing, I  am
      not satisfied this would have amounted  to  an  adjournment.   In  any
      event, fairness must override speed and efficiency.

  18. I do consider that the judge has equally fallen into error with regard
      to the evidence of Mr Tovey.  His evidence and what he is  alleged  to
      have said to the immigration officers amounted to  a  substantial  and
      live issue before the judge. Greater explanation is required as to the
      judge's findings beyond what it set out in  paragraph  20.   I  couple
      this point with the issue of standard of proof.   The  judge  explains
      that the case is "finely balanced".  The true  standard  of  proof  is
      balance of probabilities, but then later in  the  same  paragraph  the
      judge refers to the "lower standard".  I am satisfied that  the  judge
      has not properly directed herself with regard to this item.

  19. For these reasons I consider that errors or law are  contained  within
      the  determination  and  that  they  are  material  to  the   eventual
      conclusions of the judge.  The judge's decision must therefore be  set
      aside.  None of her findings can be preserved and  it  is  appropriate
      for this matter to be re-heard for a differently constituted Tribunal.
       It is noted that a  Hungarian  interpreter  will  be  required.   Any
      further directions may be given by  the  Duty  Judge  at  the  hearing
      centre concerned.

  20. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Poole

