
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/45147/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30th March 2016                            |On 11th May 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                               MR BOJAN STAKIC
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Montenegro born on  2nd  May  1977.   The
    Appellant entered the UK with entry clearance as a  spouse  on  a  visa
    valid from 9th February 2012 to 9th May 2014.  On 9th  May  2014,  i.e.
    the date of expiry of the original  visa,  the  Appellant  applied  for
    indefinite leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  victim  of
    domestic violence.  That application was refused by  the  Secretary  of
    State in a Notice of Refusal dated 14th October 2014.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Alis sitting at Manchester on  13th  March  2015.   In  a
    decision promulgated on 18th March  2015  the  Appellant's  appeal  was
    dismissed under the Immigration Rules and under ECHR legislation.

 3. On 18th March 2015  Grounds  of  Appeal  were  lodged  with  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Those grounds noted  that  the  judge  had  found  that  the
    Appellant's application could not succeed under the  Immigration  Rules
    and that whilst the judge had found the  Appellant  had  established  a
    private life, his application was dismissed pursuant to  Article  8  of
    the European Convention of Human Rights.  The Grounds of Appeal contend
    that the judge erred in his approach to the evaluation of Article 8 and
    that the judge had not followed the approach adopted by Laws LJ  in  SS
    (Nigeria) v the Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]  EWCA
    Civ 550 of:

         "The  principle  of  minimal  interference  is   the   essence   of
         proportionality: it ensures that the  ECHR  right  in  question  is
         never treated as a token or  a  ritual,  and  thus  guarantees  its
         force".

 4. The Grounds of Appeal contend that this was not the  approach  followed
    by the judge and that the judge  had  fundamentally  misunderstood  the
    evidence with the Appellant's witness statement.  The  grounds  contend
    the Appellant initially entered the UK as a visitor and applied  for  a
    certificate  of  approval  to  marry.   Following  the  grant  of  that
    certificate he married and  voluntarily  returned  to  Montenegro  from
    where he applied for and was granted leave to enter as a  spouse.   The
    grounds contend that it is apparent from the  determination  that  this
    was  the  decisive  factor  in  finding  that  because  the   Appellant
    purportedly established his private life whilst in the  UK  unlawfully,
    the decision to remove him was proportionate and it is  submitted  that
    this factual mistake  was  material  to  the  outcome  of  the  judge's
    decision.  Consequently it was contended that the judge's evaluation of
    proportionality was flawed.

 5. On 27th May 2015 Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Pirotta  refused
    permission to appeal.

 6. On 12th June 2015 the Grounds of Appeal were  renewed.   I  note  those
    Grounds of Appeal are identical to the initial grounds.  On  29th  July
    2015 Upper Tribunal Judge Kekic granted permission to appeal relying on
    the contention that the Appellant contended that he had established his
    private life during a period when he had been lawfully in the  UK  with
    entry clearance as a spouse after his visit here and his marriage,  and
    that the judge had erroneously found that it was  established  when  he
    had been here unlawfully and that that had  negatively  influenced  his
    assessment and that had he understood the  evidence,  the  outcome  may
    have been different.  Further she considered that the judge's rejection
    of the claim of domestic violence  was  arguably  based  on  a  cursory
    examination of the claim and that  the  Appellant's  evidence  was  not
    fairly  considered.   On  19th  August  2015  the  Secretary  of  State
    responded to the Grounds of Appeal under Rule 24.

 7. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.   The  Appellant  appears  in  person.   The
    Secretary of State appears by her Home Office  Presenting  Officer,  Mr
    Harrison.

 8. I explained fully the court procedure and the issues that  were  before
    me to the Appellant.  I indicated to the Appellant that I would  listen
    without interruption to his submissions and that I would then  consider
    any responses  made  by  the  Secretary  of  State  and  give  him  the
    opportunity to briefly reply to those points.  The Appellant  indicated
    that he fully understood the court procedure.

Submissions/Discussion

 9. The Appellant stated that whilst noting the  decision  and  that  there
    were negative findings made about his behaviour, he wished to emphasise
    that he had not been violent and that the police had  said  that  there
    was no evidence of violence.  He emphasised that he had never been here
    unlawfully and that he had applied for variation before  his  visa  had
    expired.  He believed his evidence was not read  through  nor  properly
    considered, and that he left following an argument with his  wife.   He
    believes that she called the police to make sure he did not  come  back
    and that there were no criminal proceedings.  He emphasises that he  is
    a business development manager for a rental car firm  from  the  former
    Yugoslavia and that his job is important to him and he wishes to remain
    in this country.  He believes that he has been very  badly  treated  by
    his solicitors and that in fact his employers  are  desperate  that  he
    remains because he speaks both Serbo-Croat and English.

10. Mr Harrison relies substantially on the Notice of Refusal and the  Rule
    24 response.  As the Appellant is in person he  takes  me  through  the
    Rule 24 response which he indicates gives a very good analysis  of  the
    manner in which the judge properly addressed this matter.   He  submits
    it was accepted by both the Appellant and the judge that the  Appellant
    could not succeed under the Immigration Rules due to his conviction for
    harassment.  He notes that  certainly  in  the  Grounds  of  Appeal  no
    dispute is made regarding the findings in relation to domestic violence
    and that the judge appropriately engaged with  the  evidence  and  made
    findings open to him at paragraphs 30 to 32 and 41 of his decision.

11. Thereafter, he submits, the judge went on to consider  the  Appellant's
    claim under the human rights legislation and at paragraph 35 found that
    the Appellant had no family life but that he  had  established  private
    life.  Importantly, he states that at paragraph 39 the judge  addressed
    the Appellant's private life stating it had been established whilst the
    Appellant had been here unlawfully and with  a  precarious  immigration
    status.  The Secretary of State accepts that the Appellant's status  in
    the UK was not unlawful but that it  has  always  been  precarious  and
    Section 117B states that little weight should be  given  to  a  private
    life with either status.  In any event, he contends  this  finding  did
    not  influence  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  assessment  of  the
    Appellant because the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  had  stated  "I  have
    approached it from the position that  he  was  here  lawfully  when  he
    obtained his employment and met the two friends who  gave  evidence  on
    his behalf".  He consequently contends that it cannot be said that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge has erred in law and he asked me  to  dismiss
    the appeal.

The Law

12.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

13. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

14. It is important to note that the issue before me is whether or not  the
    judge materially erred in law in his  decision.   Whilst  acknowledging
    that the Appellant is a litigant in person, the main thrust of the oral
    submissions he has made are a criticism of  the  findings  of  domestic
    violence and of his wife.  Such arguments are firstly not  the  subject
    of this appeal, and secondly, even if they were allowed in,  amount  to
    no more than disagreement with the findings of the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.  The main thrust of the Appellant's appeal is the  mistake  made
    by the First-tier Tribunal Judge as his decision was influenced because
    he mistakenly addressed the issue of the Appellant's  private  life  on
    the basis that it had been established whilst he  was  here  unlawfully
    when in fact that was not the case.

15. Whilst clearly that was a mistake, it is clear from paragraph 39 of his
    decision that the judge  approached  the  Appellant's  claim  from  the
    position that his private life  was  established  whilst  he  was  here
    lawfully even though the Appellant had himself stated at paragraph 5 of
    his own witness statement that he came as a visitor and regularised his
    status after his  marriage.   Therefore  the  judge  had  balanced  the
    positive factors of Section 117B but concluded  that  removal  was  not
    disproportionate.  In such  circumstances,  any  error  is  effectively
    corrected by the judge himself when he applies the correct  and  proper
    approach to the consideration of the Appellant's claim for private life
    and the relevant factors pursuant to Section  117B  of  the  2002  Act.
    Consequently the decision discloses no material errors of law  and  the
    judge made findings that he was perfectly entitled to and the appeal is
    dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge discloses  no  material  error
of law and the Appellant's appeal is  dismissed  and  the  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

