





UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/45056/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated           |
|On 18th May 2016                  |On 7th June 2016                         |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Mr Sinan Ibrahim Haji
                         no anonymity direction made
                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Knight, counsel (instructed by Wilson
Solicitors LLP)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. I shall refer to the appellant as the secretary of state  and  to  the
      respondent as 'the claimant'.


   2. The claimant is a national of Kenya,  born  on  2  October  1996.  His
      appeal against the decision of the secretary of state dated 4 November
      2014 refusing him leave to remain in  the  UK  under  the  Immigration
      Rules was allowed by the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  in  a  decision
      promulgated on 8 September 2015.


   3. On 6 January 2016, the secretary of state was  granted  permission  to
      appeal against that decision on the basis that there  was  a  lack  of
      reasoning;  alternatively,  that  the  reasoning  was  inadequate  and
      ignored the principles set out in the cases upon which the  First-tier
      Tribunal sought to rely.


   4. On 31 March 2016, I adjourned the hearing of the appeal as  Mr  Knight
      was unavailable. He had been the claimant's counsel before the  First-
      tier Tribunal. In his skeleton argument on behalf of the claimant,  Mr
      Knight contended that by the time the appeal is  heard,  the  claimant
      will have satisfied the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(v) of  the
      Immigration Rules, namely, that as at the  date  of  application,  the
      applicant must be aged 18 years or above and under 25  years  and  has
      spent at least  half  of  his  life  living  continuously  in  the  UK
      (discounting any period of imprisonment). There is no discretion.


   5. At the hearing on 18 May 2016, I was informed at the outset  that  the
      secretary of  state  accepts  that  the  claimant  has  satisfied  the
      relevant requirements under paragraph 276ADE(1)(v) of  the  Rules.  In
      the circumstances the secretary of state is to grant to the claimant a
      period of 30 months' discretionary leave under the Rule.


   6. In the circumstances the secretary of state applied  to  withdraw  her
      appeal. It  was  jointly  submitted  that  it  is  convenient  in  the
      interests of time and cost to dispose of the case in this  manner.  In
      withdrawing her appeal the secretary of state placed  on  record  that
      she was not thereby making any  concession  as  to  the  soundness  or
      otherwise of the  decision of the First-tier Tribunal.


   7. In accordance with paragraph  39  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
      Tribunal) Rules 2008, the Upper Tribunal may at  the  request  of  the
      parties, but only if it considers it appropriate, make a consent order
      disposing  of  the  proceedings  and  making  such  other  appropriate
      provision as the parties have agreed.


   8. Having regard to the joint submissions I  granted  permission  to  the
      secretary of state to withdraw her appeal against the decision of  the
      First-tier Tribunal in case number IA/45056/2014.


   9. Mr Knight prepared a draft order the contents  of  which  Mr  Whitwell
      accepts.   The draft order is retained in  the  Tribunal's  file.  The
      preamble to the draft notes that it is now accepted by  the  secretary
      of state that the claimant has  satisfied  the  relevant  requirements
      under paragraph 276ADE(1)(v) of the Immigration Rules. It  is  further
      recorded that the secretary shall accordingly as  soon  as  reasonably
      practicable grant a period of 30 months' discretionary  leave  to  the
      claimant under paragraph 276ADE(1)(v) of the rules.


  10. It is also stated that it is the intention of  the  claimant  to  make
      further submissions to the secretary of state as to whether he  should
      also be granted indefinite leave to remain.


  11. Having regard  to  the  history  of  the  matter  since  the  decision
      promulgated by the First-tier Tribunal, I find that it  is  convenient
      in the interests of time and cost to  dispose  of  the  case  in  this
      manner. In granting permission to the secretary of state  to  withdraw
      her appeal, I note that  she  is  making  no  concessions  as  to  the
      soundness or otherwise of that decision.


      By consent it is ordered that


        1. Permission is granted to the secretary of state to withdraw  her
           appeal  against  the  decision  of   the   First-tier   Tribunal
           (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) in appeal number IA/45056/2014,
           promulgated on 8 September 2015.


        2. No order is made as to costs.














          Signed                             Date 6 June 2016






          Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer

