
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
Ia/45044/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 2 March 2016                           |On 7 April 2016                  |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                 KELA BEGUM
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss. C. Johnstone, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. A. Samad, Samad & Co. Immigration


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Lagunju, promulgated on 8 May 2015, in  which
    she allowed Mrs.  Begum's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision to the extent that she remitted it back to  the  Secretary  of
    State for further consideration.   Mrs.  Begum  applied  for  leave  to
    remain on the basis of her family and private life.




 2. For the purposes of  this  decision  I  refer  to  Mrs.  Begum  as  the
    Appellant, and to the Secretary of State as the Respondent,  reflecting
    their positions as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.
 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


    "The judge found that the decision was not in accordance with  the  law
    because the respondent failed to consider the  appellant's  application
    for further leave to remain as a spouse  under  paragraph  284  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  In doing so the judge appears to  have  accepted  a
    submission by the appellant that paragraph  284  contained  no  English
    language requirement.


    In fact, as the grounds correctly point out, the respondent did  refuse
    the application by reference to paragraph 284 in the letter of refusal.
     Moreover, as the grounds also point out, paragraph 284 did contain  an
    English language requirement."


 4. The Appellant attended the hearing.  I heard oral submissions from both
    representatives, following which I reserved my decision.


Submissions


 5. Miss. Johnstone relied on the grounds  of  appeal.  The  Appellant  had
    applied for a visa extension after July 2012 and the correct rules  had
    been applied.


 6. Mr. Samad accepted that at the time of  the  application  and  decision
    paragraph 284 contained an English language requirement.  This had been
    the case since 29 November 2010.  However, the  Appellant  had  applied
    for her initial visa in 2009.  Therefore she should have  fallen  under
    the transitional arrangements which meant  that  the  English  language
    requirement did not apply.  He submitted that this was the  reason  the
    judge had remitted the decision back.


 7. I was referred to page 13 of the bundle which contained archive content
    from the UKBA website in respect of paragraph 284.  The  date  on  this
    document is 4 February 2015.  Mr. Samad stated that  he  had  not  been
    able to find the transitional arrangements, but he submitted  that  the
    judge had the transitional provisions in mind in paragraph [11].


 8. I gave Mr. Samad a further seven days to  present  further  submissions
    regarding the  transitional  arrangements.   Miss.  Johnstone  did  not
    object to this.


 9. I have received a  skeleton  argument  from  Mr.  Samad.   He  has  not
    provided any transitional arrangements.  He accepts that paragraph  284
    contains  an  English  language  requirement.   He  submits  that   the
    Appellant provided an English language certificate with her application
    but it was from a provider who was not approved by the Home Office  for
    applications for limited leave to remain.


10. The skeleton  argument  refers  to  the  "Home  Office  IDI  Chapter  8
    transitional provisions, August  2015".   No  copy  of  this  has  been
    provided.  The skeleton states that these "generally  allow  for  those
    who made an application under Part 8 of the Rules before 9  July  2012,
    to continue to rely upon the rules then, up until settlement".   It  is
    submitted  that  the  Appellant's   application   falls   under   these
    transitional arrangements.  It is submitted that the judge was  correct
    to remit the case "as it is for the Respondent to  state  the  position
    for those who applied for entry clearance before 29/11/2010 as to  what
    their position would be for extension as they had  been  exempted  from
    the English language requirement".


11. Further the skeleton submits that the judge was correct  to  remit  the
    case as the  Respondent  had  failed  to  consider  family  life  under
    Appendix FM.  This was not submitted at the hearing before me,  and  my
    direction was that further submissions were to be made specifically  in
    relation to the transitional provisions.

Error of law


12. Paragraphs [11] and [12] of the decision state:


    "The appellant however contends that the respondent has considered  her
    application on the wrong basis.  The appellant contends that  she  made
    an application for an extension of leave under  paragraph  284  of  the
    immigration rules and under this paragraph there is no English language
    requirement.  The appellant argues that the respondent  has  failed  to
    give proper and adequate consideration to her case.


    As  the  English  language  requirement  is  the  sole  basis  of   the
    respondent's refusal and as the respondent  does  not  appear  to  have
    considered paragraph 284 of the rules, I am of the view that the matter
    should be looked at again by  the  respondent  in  light  of  what  the
    appellant says about  the  relevant  paragraph  under  the  immigration
    rules."


13. The reasons for refusal letter on page 1 quotes from paragraph 284  and
    then states:


    "We note that  you  have  provided  2  EMDQ  Certificates.   This  test
    provider is not approved by the Secretary of State.


    You are  therefore  refused  under  Paragraph  286  with  reference  to
    Paragraph 284 (ix) (a)".


14. I find that the judge was wrong to state that the  Respondent  had  not
    considered the application under paragraph 284.  It is clear  from  the
    reasons for refusal letter that, prior to considering  the  application
    under Appendix FM  and  paragraph  276ADE,  the  Respondent  considered
    paragraph 284  and  refused  the  Appellant's  application  under  this
    paragraph as she had failed to provide the correct test certificates.


15. Although it was submitted that the Appellant did not have to  meet  the
    English language requirements of paragraph 284 because she  fell  under
    the transitional arrangements, these transitional arrangements were not
    provided for  the  appeal  hearing.   Despite  allowing  the  Appellant
    further time, I have received no transitional provisions which  support
    her submission.  I have considered  the  "Home  Office  IDI  Chapter  8
    transitional provisions, August  2015"  referred  to  in  the  skeleton
    argument.  This states  that  the  guidance  applies,  inter  alia,  to
    "applications made on or after 9 July 2012, by persons who were granted
    entry clearance or limited leave to remain under Part 8  of  the  Rules
    before 9 July 2012 and who apply for further leave on the same basis".


16. The Appellant made this application after 9 July 2012.   She  had  been
    granted entry clearance prior to 9 July 2012.  She applied for  further
    leave on the basis of her marriage to the sponsor which  was  the  same
    reason as she applied  for  entry  clearance.   However,  the  guidance
    states that those to whom  the  transitional  arrangements  apply  will
    "remain subject to the immigration rules in force as at 8  July  2012".
    It was accepted by the Appellant's representative  that  paragraph  284
    had  changed  in  November  2010  to  include   an   English   language
    requirement.  Therefore, I find that the rules in force as  at  8  July
    2012 included the English  language  requirement.   I  find  that  this
    guidance does not support the Appellant's case.  I have  been  provided
    with  no  transitional  provisions  which  indicate  that  the  English
    language requirement in paragraph 284 does not apply to the Appellant.


17. Further, it is clear from the fact that the Appellant provided  English
    language certificates with her application that she was  aware  of  the
    English language requirement in paragraph  284.   Her  mistake  was  to
    provide English language test certificates from a provider who was  not
    approved by the Respondent for the purposes of the application that she
    had made.  Rather than address that, the  Appellant  instead  submitted
    that she did not need to meet the English language requirement at  all.
    However, she has acknowledged that the requirements of paragraph 284 as
    at the date of her application included the requirement that an English
    language certificate be provided.


18. It was submitted that the judge had transitional provisions in mind  in
    paragraph [11].  However there is  no  reference  to  any  transitional
    provisions, and I find that such a reference cannot be implied.  In any
    event, as I have found above, the Appellant has been unable to  provide
    any transitional provisions which are relevant to her case,  so  it  is
    difficult to see how it can be submitted that the judge  had  these  in
    mind.  The judge states that paragraph 284 does not contain an  English
    language requirement, but this is not the case.  The judge states  that
    the reason she is remitting the appeal is because  the  Respondent  has
    not considered paragraph 284.  However I  have  found  above  that  the
    Respondent did consider paragraph 284, but found that the Appellant had
    provided English-language certificates from the wrong provider.


19. I find that the judge made a material error of law when she found  that
    the Respondent had failed to  consider  paragraph  284,  and  when  she
    stated that paragraph 284 contained no  English  language  requirement.
    Accordingly I set the decision aside.


Remaking in respect of paragraph 284


20. I find that the Respondent considered the Appellant's application under
    paragraph 284.  However, the Appellant had  provided  English  language
    test certificates from  a  provider  which  was  not  approved  by  the
    Respondent.  I therefore find that the Respondent was correct to refuse
    her application on this basis.  The Appellant has not provided English-
    language test certificates from any  approved  provider.   I  therefore
    find  that  the  Appellant  has  failed  to  show  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities that she meets the requirements of paragraph 284.


21. The Respondent then went on to  consider  the  Appellant's  application
    under Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE.  The Respondent also considered
    whether there were any exceptional  circumstances  in  the  Appellant's
    case.  However given that the judge allowed the appeal as she did,  she
    did not consider Appendix FM, paragraph 276ADE,  or  any  appeal  under
    Article 8 outside the immigration rules.


22. Paragraph  7.2  of  the  Practice  Statement  dated  10  February  2010
    contemplates that an appeal may be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal
    where the effect of the error has been to deprive a  party  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing  or  other  opportunity  for  the
    party's case to be put to and considered by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Given the nature and extent of the  fact-finding  necessary  to  enable
    this appeal to be remade, having regard to the overriding objective,  I
    find that it is appropriate  to  remit  this  case  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.




Notice of Decision

The decision involves the making of an error of law and I set it aside.

I remake the appeal dismissing it under paragraph  284  of  the  immigration
rules.

In relation to Appendix  FM,  paragraph  276ADE  and  any  consideration  of
Article 8 outside the immigration rules,  the  appeal  is  remitted  to  the
First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.


Signed                                  Date 29 March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain


