
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/45633/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 9 September 2014                        |On 12 September 2014       |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

                           MR ABIOLA MORUFF SANUSI
                        (No Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:

                            For the Appellant: the appellant attended
           but was not legally represented
          For the Respondent: Mr T Wilding a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who was born on 20 July 1978. He
      has been given permission to appeal the  determination  of  First-Tier
      Tribunal Judge Trevaskis ("the FTTJ") who dismissed his appeal against
      the respondent's decision of 17 October 2013 to refuse  to  issue  him
      with a residence card as confirmation of his right to reside in the UK
      as the family member of an EEA national under Regulation 17 (1) (b) of
      the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 ("the EEA Regulations").


   2. The respondent refused the application because she was  not  satisfied
      that the appellant's claimed wife  ("the  sponsor")  was  employed  or
      exercising treaty rights in the UK. She was  not  satisfied  that  the
      appellant and the sponsor were lawfully married.  They  had  not  been
      present when the marriage took place in Nigeria and it appeared to  be
      a proxy marriage. It had not been  registered  as  required  by  local
      legislation. Finally, and in the alternative, it  was  concluded  that
      the appellant and the sponsor were not unmarried partners because they
      had not established that they were in a durable relationship.


   3. The appellant appealed and asked for the appeal to  be  determined  on
      the papers, which is what the  FTTJ  did.  He  reviewed  the  evidence
      including the country  evidence  about  marriages  in  Nigeria  before
      concluding, in the light of CB (validity of marriage; proxy  marriage)
      Brazil [2008] UKAIT 0080 that it had not been shown that  the  claimed
      marriage  had  been  registered  in  accordance  with  Nigerian  legal
      requirements. Furthermore, the evidence submitted did  not  show  that
      the appellant and the sponsor were in a  durable  relationship.  There
      was no evidence that they were living together.


   4. The FTTJ went on to consider the appeal  on  Article  8  human  rights
      grounds concluding that  there  were  no  arguably  good  grounds  for
      granting the appellant leave outside the Article 8 provisions  in  the
      Immigration Rules. He dismissed the appeal.


   5. The appellant applied  for  permission  to  appeal  through  his  then
      solicitors which was granted. The grounds argue that the FTTJ erred in
      law because the marriage had been properly  registered  in  accordance
      with Nigerian law. Reference is made  to  an  extract  from  an  Upper
      Tribunal Determination in effect submitting that it was  inappropriate
      for a  judge  to  question  a  certificate  issued  by  the  competent
      authorities in another country in  the  absence  of  any  evidence  of
      fraud.


   6. The appellant attended the hearing before me with the sponsor and  her
      children. He told me that he was no longer legally represented because
      he could not afford it. I note  that  the  sponsor  is  of  Portuguese
      nationality. She produced her original passport.


   7. The appellant was given copies of Kareem (proxy marriages  -  EU  law)
      [2014] UKUT 24 (IAC), TA and others (Kareem  explained)  Ghana  [2014]
      UKUT 316 (IAC) and CB (validity of marriage;  proxy  marriage)  Brazil
      [2008] UKAIT 0080.


   8. The appellant submitted that Portuguese law permitted proxy marriages.
      He produced a letter and an extract from a document from the Permanent
      Mission of Portugal in Geneva answering questions from the  office  of
      the High Commissioner for Human Rights in relation to child, early and
      forced marriages. He relied on a passage  which  reads;  "marriage  by
      proxy is permitted (Article 1620 CC). One of the intending spouses may
      delegate authority to an  appointed  representative  through  a  proxy
      document  that  must  contain  specific  authority  to  contract   the
      marriage, name and the other intending spouse (sic) and  indicate  how
      the marriage will take place and the type of  marriage."  He  accepted
      that this document had not been before the FTTJ.


   9. The appellant also produced a document. It is not clear from the  face
      of it exactly what the document is but the appellant said that it  was
      an "extract from Customary Registration Act of Nigeria".  He  referred
      me to paragraphs 39 and 42 which, he said, set out the requirements in
      Nigeria for the issue of a marriage certificate and  the  registration
      of customary marriages. He accepted that this document was not  before
      the FTTJ.


  10. The appellant accepted that his marriage in Nigeria  was  a  customary
      marriage not a statutory one. I showed him small bundle  of  documents
      from the Tribunal file which  he  accepted  was  a  full  set  of  the
      documents he had submitted in relation to the marriage in Nigeria.  He
      said  that  the  information  on  the  face  of  these  documents  was
      sufficient to show that he and the sponsor had gone  through  a  valid
      marriage in Nigeria, recognised by Nigerian law. The document  he  had
      now produced showed that the marriage was also a valid marriage  under
      Portuguese law.


  11. The appellant produced an original letter from the London  Borough  of
      Barking and Dagenham dated 11 January 2013 stating  that  the  sponsor
      would be put on the electoral register at the address where he  lived.
      He said that this had been sent to the respondent  with  his  original
      application. I referred  him  to  his  representatives'  letter  which
      accompanied the application which listed the  accompanying  documents.
      This letter was not amongst them. The  appellant  insisted  that  this
      letter had been  submitted.  There  is  no  reference  to  it  in  the
      determination of the FTTJ. I am not persuaded  that  this  letter  was
      submitted to the respondent or that it was before the FTTJ.


  12. Mr Wilding submitted that there was no material error of law. The only
      issue raised in the grounds of appeal was how the FTTJ dealt with  the
      question of the validity of the marriage. He relied  on  Kareem  which
      showed that in order to demonstrate a valid marriage for  the  purpose
      of the EEA Regulations the claimant had to establish that the marriage
      and the marriage process  was  recognised  in  the  State  of  the  EU
      national (in this case Portugal) and that if the marriage had  been  a
      proxy marriage it was recognised in the country where it took place.


  13. Mr Wilding argued that the document  now  produced  by  the  appellant
      which made reference to Portuguese law had not been  before  the  FTTJ
      and in any event did not assist because  it  did  not  show  how  this
      marriage would be treated under  Portuguese  law.  It  was  not  clear
      whether it related to proxy marriages in Portugal or elsewhere.  There
      was no reference to a proxy marriage in a third country. There was  no
      expert evidence as to what Portuguese law  was  or  how  it  would  be
      applied. There was a requirement for a proxy document but no  evidence
      of the issue of one. The document appeared to  permit  a  marriage  to
      take place in the absence of one of the parties but not both.


  14. The Nigerian customary marriage proxy procedure had not been  properly
      followed for the reasons given  by  the  FTTJ  in  paragraph  11.  The
      respondent's refusal letter had highlighted the requirements which had
      not been complied with. The appellant had not established either  that
      these requirements had been met in full or that any statement  on  the
      face of the documents was sufficient evidence  that  the  registration
      requirements had been met. The grounds of appeal  had  not  challenged
      the FTTJ's findings in relation to the lack of a durable  relationship
      or in relation to Article 8. However, he argued that in any event  the
      FTTJ reached conclusions open to him on all the evidence  in  relation
      to these matters. The evidence did not show that the appellant and the
      sponsor were in a durable relationship. Article 8 grounds had not been
      raised by the appellant  although  they  had  been  addressed  by  the
      respondent in the refusal letter. There was no arguable error of law.


  15. In his reply the appellant said  that  the  law  in  Nigeria  did  not
      require the marriage registration documents to show that all the  pre-
      registration information had been supplied. All that was needed was to
      say that the marriage had been registered under Nigerian law. This had
      been done.


  16. I reserved my determination.


  17. I find that the appellant  may  have  done  himself  an  injustice  in
      relation to the document which he produced at the  hearing  before  me
      (referred to in paragraph 9 above) when he told me  that  it  had  not
      been before the FTTJ. It is either similar to  or  a  partial  extract
      from the Births Deaths etc.  (Compulsory  Registration)  Act  2004  of
      Nigeria referred to in the respondent's  reasons  for  refusal  letter
      dated 17 October 2013. The refusal  letter  sets  out,  in  bold,  the
      information which should have been but was not supplied to  the  Chief
      Registrar and shown on the  registration  documents  produced  by  the
      appellant. The respondent reached the conclusion, which was  the  same
      conclusion reached by the FTTJ in paragraph 11 of  the  determination,
      that because the documentation produced by the appellant did not  show
      that these requirements had been met he had  not  established  to  the
      required standard that the form of marriage he had  gone  through  was
      recognised as a legally valid marriage in Nigeria. I find that in  the
      absence of any better evidence as to the requirements of Nigerian law,
      which could have been in the form of expert evidence from an expert in
      Nigerian law, the appellant has not established that the  requirements
      of Nigerian law were  met  or  that  his  marriage  is  one  which  is
      recognised under Nigerian law and that the FTTJ was entitled to  reach
      this conclusion for the reasons he gave.


  18. Even if the appellant had established that his marriage was one  which
      was recognised under Nigerian law it would also  have  been  necessary
      for him to show, under the principles set  out  in  Kareem,  that  the
      marriage was contracted between him and the sponsor according  to  the
      national law of her nationality, which is  Portuguese.  There  was  no
      evidence before the FTTJ about this. The letter and document  which  I
      have referred to in paragraph 8 was not before the FTTJ. In any  event
      it does not show that the marriage was contracted according to the law
      of Portugal. The provisions are far  from  clear.  It  does  not  show
      whether it relates to proxy marriages within or outside  Portugal.  It
      appears to indicate that they can be a proxy from one  party  but  not
      both. There  is  reference  to  an  appointed  representative  but  no
      indication of how that representatives should be  appointed  and  what
      documentation is required. There is no expert legal evidence  to  fill
      in any of these gaps or provide any further explanation. Even if  this
      material had been before the FTTJ  I  find  that  it  would  not  have
      assisted the appellant to show that his marriage was one  which  would
      have been recognised by the laws of Portugal.


  19. The grounds of appeal do not call into question the FTTJ's findings in
      relation to durable relationship or Article 8  human  rights  grounds.
      Even if they had done so I find that Article 8 grounds were not raised
      by the appellant. They were sufficiently addressed by  the  respondent
      in the refusal letter and the FTTJ in  paragraphs  14  to  17  of  the
      determination. The FTTJ reached  a  conclusion  open  to  him  on  the
      evidence that the appellant  had  not  established  that  he  and  the
      sponsor were in a durable relationship.


  20. I have not been asked to make an anonymity direction and  can  see  no
      good reason to do so.


  21.  I  find  that  the  FTTJ  did  not  err  in  law  and  I  uphold  the
      determination.












      .............................................
            Signed                                    Date 10 September
      2014
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

