
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                     Appeal
Number:     IA/45124/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                   |Determination Promulgated|
|On: 1st July 2014                      |On:11th August 2014      |
|                                       |                         |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        Tithelepo Thomson Chikombole
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Timson, Counsel instructed by Manchester
                            Associates


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The Respondent is a  national  of  Malawi  date  of  birth  27th
       September 1974. On the 18th March 2014 the  First-tier  Tribunal
       (Judge Crawford) allowed her appeal  against  the  Secretary  of
       State's decision to remove her from the UK pursuant  to  section
       10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act  1999.   The  Secretary  of
       State now has permission to appeal against that decision.

    2. The unchallenged facts as found by the Tribunal  were  that  the
       Respondent came to the UK in 2001  with  leave  to  enter  as  a
       visitor. She thereafter properly varied her  leave  to  that  of
       student on a number of occasions. In October  2002  she  made  a
       further application for leave to remain as a student. She  heard
       nothing from the Home Office. In June 2003 she was at a friend's
       house when the premises were visited by immigration officers who
       told her that her application had been  refused.  She  had  been
       unaware of this. She was asked to report to the UKBA  centre  at
       Dallas Court in  Salford.  She  did  this  on  a  monthly  basis
       throughout 2003.  In May 2004 she received a letter inviting her
       to make a new application. This application was acknowledged  as
       valid but she heard nothing else. She continued to sign on every
       month at Dallas Court. She signed on  all  through  2004,  2005,
       2006, 2007, 2008, 2009 and 2010. All her  enquiries  as  to  her
       application were  met  with  silence.  In  2010  she  engaged  a
       solicitor to chase the application. The Home Office acknowledged
       the solicitor's letter but did nothing further.  The  Respondent
       went and got other solicitors. They wrote to  the  Home  Office.
       They did not write back. The Respondent went to see her MP.  The
       MP wrote a letter, and  finally,  after  nine  years,  the  Home
       Office responded by granting the Respondent three months'  leave
       to remain.  Whilst she had that leave she  made  an  application
       for leave to remain on human rights grounds. It is  the  refusal
       of that application that has led to this appeal.

    3. The Secretary of State refused the application with reference to
       the Rules. The Respondent did not meet the requirements  of  any
       of the provisions in Appendix FM  of  the  Rules.  Nor  did  the
       Secretary of State accept  that  she  met  the  requirements  of
       paragraph 276ADE of the Rules.  In respect  of  that  provision,
       relating to 'private life' the Secretary of State found that the
       Respondent had not lived in the UK long enough.  Nor  could  she
       demonstrate that she had lost  all  ties,  social  cultural  and
       family, with Malawi.  The Secretary of State found there  to  be
       no exceptional circumstances and refused the application.

    4. Judge Crawford very carefully  sets  out  the  history  of  this
       matter and all applicable law. He finds that the Respondent  has
       been in  this  country  since  November  2001.  He  accepts  her
       evidence that she had been  unaware  that  her  application  for
       further leave to remain had been refused in 2003. He finds  that
       she has at all time complied with the requirements  placed  upon
       her by the Home Office.  She has not had any  contact  with  her
       family in Malawi since 2006. Her parents are elderly and she  is
       estranged from them after she fell out with them about  her  not
       attending college in the UK.  During the time she  has  been  in
       the UK she has made numerous good friendships and as her ties to
       this  country  have  deepened,  so  have  her  ties  to   Malawi
       diminished.  She has been working in a  care  home  during  that
       time and contributing  to  our  society.   Having  accepted  the
       Respondent as an entirely credible witness Judge Crawford  found
       that she had only remote or abstract ties  left  to  Malawi.  He
       accepted that she did not have ties as  envisaged  in  paragraph
       276ADE and allowed the appeal on  that  basis.  He  went  on  to
       consider Article 8 ECHR. He found that the Respondent could  not
       show the decision to be necessary  in  pursuit  of  any  of  the
       legitimate aims set out in Article 8(2).  He further  found  the
       decision  to  be  a  disproportionate  interference   with   the
       Respondent's private life. He  allowed  the  appeal  under  that
       alternative head.






Error of Law

    5. The Secretary of State now appeals that decision,  alleging  the
       determination to contain the following errors of law:

   i) The finding that the Respondent had no  ties  to  Malawi  was  an
      error following Ogundimu [2013] UKUT 60;


  ii) The Judge misdirected himself  in  failing  to  consider  whether
      there  existed  good  grounds  to  find  there   are   compelling
      circumstances not sufficiently recognised under the new rules  to
      require a grant of leave under Article 8: Nagre [2013]  EWHC  720
      (Admin);

 iii) There was no basis for  concluding  that  the  decision  was  not
      necessary in a democratic society to protect the economy: Shahzad
      [2014] UKUT 85.

    6. In his submissions Mr  Harrison  was  content  to  rely  on  the
       grounds.

    7. There is absolutely no merit in these grounds which amount to  a
       disagreement with the outcome of this appeal.

    8. Ground 1 consist of a comparison between the facts of this  case
       and the facts in Ogundimu. There is little to be gained in that.
       The  Judge  clearly  directed  himself  to  that  decision.   He
       understood and applied the test therein to the facts as he found
       them. The fact that the Secretary of State does not  agree  with
       his conclusions is neither here nor there. There is no error  in
       approach.

    9. Ground 2 is equally misconceived.   All Nagre says is that  most
       Article 8 cases will nowadays be dealt with under the  Rules;  a
       few that do not succeed under that framework  that  nevertheless
       merit consideration under the 'old' Razgar test.  If faced  with
       one that does not obviously  merit  consideration,  it  is  "not
       necessary" for the court to go on to consider it. That is all it
       says. It does not introduce some  additional  hurdle  for  human
       rights claimants to surmount. It is simply a statement of  fact.
       In respect of this particular case  there  was  clear  merit  in
       going on to consider the matter.

   10. Lastly the Secretary of State complains that the Judge erred  in
       finding that the decision could not be justified on the  grounds
       that the Secretary of State was protecting the economy. This  is
       a case where this woman waited nine years for her application to
       be decided. She reported to operational enforcement every  month
       for nine years. This was what the Judge  had  in  mind  when  he
       found that the decision could hardly be said to be  "necessary".
       That was a finding that was open to him on the facts. Again, the
       grounds amount to a disagreement with the findings of the First-
       tier Tribunal and do not identify any error in law.

   11. I find the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  cogent,
       reasonable and open to the Judge on the facts before him.


Decision

   12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error of law
       and it is upheld.





                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                              30th July 2014







