
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/45866/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |     Decision & Reasons          |
|                                              |Promulgated                      |
|On 1 February 2016                            |     On 12 February 2016         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M LEWIS

                                   Between

                               rajib bartaula
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr V Makol, instructed by Maalik & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

The History of the Appeal

1.   The Appellant, a citizen of Nepal, appealed  against  the  decision  of
    the Respondent to refuse his application for leave to remain as a  Tier
    4 (General) Student.  He failed to attend the hearing of his appeal  on
    27  April  2015.   It  was  adjourned,  and  subsequently  listed   for
    determination on the papers.  Judge Povey did so, sitting  at  Newport,
    on 20 May 2015.  In a decision dated and promulgated on 1 June 2015  he
    dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

2.   Permission to appeal was refused on 9 September 2015 by Judge Foudy  in
    the following terms:

         "1.  The Appellant seeks permission to appeal, in time,  against  a
             decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Povey  who,  in  a
             determination  promulgated  on  1  June   2015   refused   the
             Appellant's appeal against refusal to vary student leave.


         2.   The grounds are difficult to understand but  appear  to  argue
             that the Judge erred in his approach  to  Appendix  C  of  the
             Immigration Rules and the requirements  to  provide  specified
             documents.


         3.   The grounds are largely a critique of the Respondent's failure
             to exercise evidential flexibility rather than a demonstration
             that the Judge erred in law.  The Judge was not satisfied that
             the Appellant could satisfy the  Immigration  Rules  and  gave
             clear reasons for those findings.  Those findings were open to
             him on the evidence.   Contrary  to  what  is  argued  in  the
             grounds, the Judge did consider paragraph 245AA of  the  Rules
             and made cogent findings upon that aspect of the appeal.


         4.   In truth the grounds amount, at best, to nothing more  than  a
             disagreement with  the  findings  made  however  it  is  well-
             established law that the weight to be given to any  particular
             factor in an appeal is a matter for the Judge and will  rarely
             give rise to an error of law (Green (Article 8  -  new  rules)
             [2013] UKUT 254).


         5.   The grounds disclose no arguable error of law."

3.   On second application Judge Kebede granted permission to  appeal  on  4
    November 2015 in the following terms:

         "1.  The appellant,  a  citizen  of  Nepal,  appealed  against  the
             respondent's decision to refuse his application for  leave  to
             remain as a Tier  4  (General)  Student  Migrant.   First-tier
             Tribunal Judge Povey dismissed the appeal.


         2.   The appellant's application for leave to remain was refused on
             the basis that he had failed to show  the  required  level  of
             funds for maintenance for the relevant 28 day period under the
             immigration rules.  The grounds assert that the judge erred in
             his approach  to  the  evidential  flexibility  provisions  in
             paragraph 245AA of the rules which, if properly applied by the
             respondent,  would  have  assisted  the   appellant   in   the
             particular circumstances of this case.  In light of the recent
             judgment in Mandalia v Secretary of State [2015] UKSC 59 there
             is arguable merit in the grounds,  albeit  that  the  judgment
             post-dated the appellant's appeal before the judge."

4.   These two decisions encapsulate the issues in the appeal.

5.   In  a  Rule  24  response  the  Respondent  submitted  that  the  judge
    correctly found that the Appellant had not evidenced possession of  the
    requisite funds for the requisite 28 day period.
6.   The error of law hearing took the form  of  submissions  which  I  have
    taken into account.

Determination

7.   At paragraphs 18 to  21  Judge  Povey  found  that  the  Appellant  had
    provided evidence of funds in excess of the  requisite  minimum  for  a
    period of 26 out of the requisite 28 days; there  was  no  "near  miss"
    rule; and there was no breach of paragraph  245AA  of  the  Immigration
    Rules nor of the Respondent's evidential flexibility policy.   But  for
    Mandalia v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] UKSC 59  I
    would have determined the appeal  in  the  way  in  which  Judge  Povey
    approached it and upheld the decision.

8.   It is however  the  Appellant's  good  fortune  that  in  Mandalia  the
    Supreme Court reversed decision of the Court of Appeal.  The  question,
    at paragraph 1, was whether the Respondent acted unlawfully in refusing
    the application without having first invited the  Appellant  to  supply
    further bank statements showing that he had held the  requisite  amount
    throughout the six missing days of the requisite period.   Its  answer,
    at paragraph 36, was affirmative.   The  Respondent's  refusal  of  the
    application was unlawful because,  properly  interpreted,  the  process
    instruction obliged that the Appellant first be invited to  repair  the
    deficit in his evidence.

9.   In the present appeal the  Respondent  did  not  take  this  step.   It
    follows, albeit  on  the  basis  of  supervening  authority,  that  the
    decisions of the Respondent and of Judge Povey were erroneous  in  law.
    I accordingly set aside the decision of Judge Povey.

10.  In this  event,  both  representatives  were  content  for  me  to  re-
    determine the appeal rather than to remit it to  the  Respondent.   The
    Appellant subsequently submitted an additional bank  statement  showing
    that he held the requisite funds for the requisite period.  This is the
    only issue in the appeal, which accordingly succeeds.

Notice of Decision

11.  The original decision contained an error of law, and is set aside.

12.  The appeal is allowed under the Immigration Rules.

13.  No anonymity direction is made.

14.     If the Appellant has paid a fee I make a full fee award.


Signed
    Dated: 9 February 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Lewis
