
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/45739/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 22 August 2014                               |On 1 September 2014        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                       Mr Omokayode Afolabi OsaTuberu
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr W Ehimika, Solicitor of David & Vine Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                                ERROR OF LAW
                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals with  permission  against  the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Cameron dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
    respondent's refusal to grant  him  leave  to  remain   in  the  United
    Kingdom on Article 8 ECHR  grounds  under  Appendix  FM  and  paragraph
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules HC  395  (as  amended)  and  Article  8
    outside the Rules.

 2. At the hearing, Judge Cameron gave the appellant leave to  produce  his
    examination results within 48 hours, and the file  reflects  that  they
    were in fact provided within 24 hours.  Judge Cameron makes no  mention
    of that document in his determination. It may be that it was not linked
    promptly to the file, but it had been received and must be  taken  into
    account.

 3. I am satisfied that the failure to take into  account  these  documents
    amounts  to  a  material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    determination which I set aside and remit to Judge Cameron to remake on
    the basis of the evidence and the argument recorded  and  reflected  in
    his determination and the additional documents sent by the  appellant's
    solicitors under cover of their facsimile letter of 10 April 2014 (five
    pages).  I do not consider that  further oral hearing is required.

Conclusions

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision which will be remade in the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed                              Date   29 August 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
