
[pic]
IAC-HX-MC/12-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/45376/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 4 November 2014                           |On 25 November 2014           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE E B GRANT


                                   Between

                                 KRISHNA G M
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Fripp, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS


The Background to this Appeal

 1. On 19 September 2014 following the grant of permission to  appeal  this
    appeal came before me and in an error of law decision promulgated on  2
    October 2014 I set out the background and made findings as follows:

         "The Background to this Appeal

         2.   The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom  on  15  September
             2009 with leave to enter as a Tier 4 Student  valid  until  20
             August 2010.  He was subsequently granted an extension of stay
             for post-study work valid to 24 February 2013.  On 7  February
             2013 he applied for leave  to  remain  on  the  basis  of  his
             private life in the  United  Kingdom.   This  application  was
             refused on 18 October 2013 when the respondent made a decision
             to refuse to vary leave to remain in the United Kingdom and to
             remove  by  way  of  directions  under  Section  47   of   the
             Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

         3.   The appellant appealed that decision which came before  First-
             tier Tribunal Judge Oliver and in a determination  promulgated
             on  26  April  2014  the  judge  found   in   a   very   brief
             determination, at paragraphs 5 to 9 the following:

                  '5.  The appellant confirmed the truth and accuracy of his
                      witness statements, dated  6  February  2014  and  20
                      March 2014.  He gave details of his current employer.
                       His father had passed away last year.  He wanted  to
                      remain in the United  Kingdom  because  he  had  been
                      persecuted by political gangs whom he had refused  to
                      join.  He had been wrongly blamed for the death of  a
                      member of one of the political gangs.  When  he  left
                      home for Kathmandu he had been stabbed in  the  chest
                      and hip by a friend of the gang member.

                  6.   In cross-examination he was asked why  there  was  no
                      mention in his witness statement of February 2014  of
                      the stabbing  incident  in  2009  in  Kathmandu.   He
                      replied that he had mentioned it to the police and he
                      referred to the medical report.  Asked why  documents
                      had not been passed to the respondent,  he  explained
                      that  he  had  given  all  his   documents   to   his
                      solicitors.  It had taken a  long  time  to  get  the
                      documents from his father's friend.  Asked whether he
                      really wished to make an asylum claim, he  said  that
                      the process was taking too long and he wished  to  go
                      with this application.   He  did  not  want  to  take
                      another process to extend this.  He had  not  claimed
                      asylum in 2009 because he was living here legally.

                  7.    His  documentary  evidence  included  two  character
                      references and copies of the death certificate of his
                      father and  hospital  documents  in  respect  of  his
                      admission in 2009.

                  8.   The onus is on the appellant in  immigration  appeals
                      to  prove  his  or  her  case  on  the   balance   of
                      probabilities.

                  9.   The appellant has chosen not to make an asylum  claim
                      and his application has been considered properly only
                      within  the  terms  expressed  in  the  letter  which
                      accompanied the application.  The appellant has  been
                      in the United Kingdom for only a short while  and  at
                      no time  has  his  leave  been  anything  other  than
                      temporary.  In that short space  of  time  he  cannot
                      have lost cultural ties  with  his  country  and  his
                      claim in the application form that he has no  contact
                      with anyone there was undermined by his  evidence  at
                      the hearing that  he  did  still  have  contact  with
                      friends.   He  cannot  meet   the   requirements   of
                      paragraph 276ADE by a very long way and  I  can  find
                      nothing which would qualify as a compelling reason to
                      consider his article  8  private  life  in  any  wide
                      context (Gulshan (Article 8 -  new  Rules  -  correct
                      approach) [2013] UKUT 00640).'

         The Grant of Permission to Appeal

         4.   On  2  August  2014  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  McGeachy  granted
             permission to appeal for the following reasons:

                  '1.  The grounds  of  appeal  have  been  drafted  by  the
                      appellant who  states  that  his  barrister  had  not
                      attended the resumed hearing and that  he  should  be
                      granted a right of appeal.  He appears to claim  that
                      both articles 3 and 8 of the ECHR were in issue.

                  2.   There are clear procedures for which must be complied
                      with by those who wish to seek asylum here.  However,
                      Article 3 of the ECHR was raised by  the  appellant's
                      solicitors in their letter  of  6  February  and  the
                      record of proceedings of Judge Khan dated 12 February
                      indicates that  the  appeal  was  adjourned  for  the
                      respondent  to  consider  issuing   a   supplementary
                      refusal letter.

                  3.   In these circumstances  the  grounds  of  appeal  are
                      arguable.

                  4.   If the appellant wishes to claim asylum he should  do
                      so now and if he does not he should  be  prepared  to
                      explain at the hearing of this appeal why he has  not
                      done so.'

         Discussion and Decision

         5.   Mr Jarvis rightly conceded before me that  the  appellant  had
             raised as an issue before the judge his claim under Article  3
             both in the grounds of  appeal  and  in  evidence  before  the
             Tribunal (see paragraph 5 of the  determination).   The  judge
             made no findings on that claim and it  can  be  seen  that  at
             paragraph 9 he only dealt with Article 8.

         6.   In the light of the concession by  the  Presenting  Officer  I
             agreed that the judge had erred in  law  in  failing  to  make
             findings  on  the  evidence  placed   before   him   and   his
             determination must be set aside.

         7.   The FTTJ did make findings in relation to the Article 8 appeal
             which are not challenged.  The findings in respect of  Article
             8 are preserved.

         Conclusions

         8.   The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did
             involve the making of an error on a point of law.

         9.   I set aside the decision to be remade at a  fresh  hearing  of
             the appeal before me in the Upper Tribunal."

 2. Thus the matter came  back  before  me.   As  a  preliminary  issue  Ms
    Isherwood raised the point that Mr Fripp's skeleton argument  contained
    submissions with regard to Article 8 but Article 8 was not  before  the
    Tribunal.  I confirmed that Article 8 was not before the  Tribunal  and
    the issue before me was to decide the Article 3 appeal  which  had  not
    been determined by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

The Evidence

 3. The appellant's claim is set out in his witness statement which  is  at
    pages 2A to 2F of the appellant's bundle of documents  and  I  set  out
    that witness statement insofar as it relates to Article 3 below.

         "I, Krishna G M of 5B Calderwood  Street,  Woolwich  Arsenal,  SE18
         6QW, hereby state as follows in my Witness Statement in support  of
         my appeal to the Immigration and Asylum Upper Tribunal:-

         1.   I am the Appellant above named.  I am a national of Nepal born
             on 31/07/1985.

         2.   I first arrived in the United Kingdom on 15/09/2009 on Tier  4
             (General) Student visa which was valid until 01/08/2010.

         3.   ...............................

         My claim under Article 3 of ECHR:

         15.  I also currently fear for my life as I believe that  there  is
             still life threatening situations for me due  to  my  family's
             past  political  associations.   I  believe  that  I  will  be
             physically assaulted or killed by  my  associated  enemies  or
             political gang members upon my return to Nepal.

         16.  My father, Jagat Bahadur Gharti Magar was a district political
             leader of Rastriya Prajatantra Party Nepal and then  left  his
             active party involvement in 2004.

         17.  My family then  had  to  relocate  twice  from  Seram  Village
             Development Committee Rolpa to  Tribhuvan  Nagar  Municipality
             (now, Ghorahi Municipality) dang in 2004  and  from  there  to
             Kathmandu in 2008.  The reason for the relocation was  due  to
             the confinement of family free movement  and  social-political
             approach and involvement by social-political affiliated gangs.

         18.  In 2008, when the political  gangs  (young  communist  league)
             forcefully  wanted  to  recruit  me  in  to  their   political
             mainstream imposing political agendas, we refused and  refuted
             the physical assaults which turned into fights.  After  a  few
             days, a guy in the  fight  died  accidentally  and  the  gangs
             blamed me for his death.

         19.  We had made several complains to the police and requested  for
             the protection and justice from the  political  gangs  but  no
             actions were taken because of  the  political  protection  and
             movement as the police were a part of the  local  and  central
             government.

         20.  Eventually even after moving to the capital city of Kathmandu,
             I was fatally injured by the gangs  in  2009.   The  political
             state was in transitional phase with interim  constitution  on
             draft.  There was a chaos in  the  country  with  no  law  and
             order.   The  country  is  still  in  transitional  phase  and
             constitution assembly is taking place.

         21.  For the reasons stated above, I left Nepal and came to the  UK
             to complete my Studies as my father wanted a safe  and  secure
             future for me.

         22.  As stated above, I have no family members back  in  Nepal.   I
             have not been to Nepal since I left the country in 2009 and  I
             no longer have any social, cultural or family ties with Nepal.
              At this stage, I am very vulnerable as my  life  will  be  in
             danger, if I am returned to Nepal for the reasons stated above
             while I also no longer have any family members to return to in
             Nepal who will be able to protect me against these threats  to
             my life.  I fear for my life as I will be an easy target based
             on the current news I  hear  about  Nepal  from  the  Nepalese
             community in the UK.  I am informed that  the  political  gang
             members and their family are still looking for me in order  to
             revenge the death of the gang member who died during a fight.

         My explanation as to why I did not claim asylum:

         23.   I  did  not  raise  any  specific  claim  under  the  Refugee
             Convention and for that reason and also because I  was  living
             in the UK legally all this time and did not have any reason or
             grounds under  the  Refugee  Convention  to  claim  asylum,  I
             therefore did not claim asylum.  I believe that  my  claim  is
             under Article 3 of ECHR as opposed to an asylum claim.

         24.  Since my arrival in the United Kingdom, I feel very  safe  and
             secure and I am able to live a peaceful life without any  fear
             which will not be possible, if I am returned to Nepal.

         25.  In light of above, I humbly request the Immigration and Asylum
             Upper Tribunal to allow my appeal."

 4. In a witness statement dated 10  March  2014  the  appellant  gave  the
    following evidence in relation to Article 3:

         "I, Krishna G M of 5B Calderwood Street, Woolwich, London SE18  6QW
         make this statement in relation to my appeal hearing:

         1.   I confirm, endorse,  adopt  and  accept  the  contents  of  my
             previous statement dated 06/02/2014.

         2.   I confirm that  I  have  been  residing  continuously  in  the
             country since my arrival in 2009.

         3.   I confirm that I am  sufficiently  supporting  myself  in  the
             country through my job  and  have  been  contributing  to  the
             economy.

         4.   I confirm that I have a well-founded fear  of  persecution  on
             account of my perceived political opinion, namely  that  I  am
             son of a former district political leader of the RPP.

         5.   I confirm that I have been persecuted for that reason  in  the
             past, by way of severe mistreatment.

         6.   I confirm that I still have scars on my body from  the  attack
             at our family home in 2007.

         7.   My past persecution is an indicator that I will be  persecuted
             in the future as well by the same group.

         8.   I confirm I will be  physically  assaulted  or  killed  by  my
             associated enemies and political gang members upon my return.

         9.   I confirm that my father was a district  political  leader  of
             Rasriya Prajantra Party (PPP) Nepal and then he left his party
             involvement in 2004.

         10.  I confirm that I along with my family had  to  relocate  twice
             from Seram VDC, Ropla to Tribhuvan Nagar  Palika  8,  Dang  in
             2004 and from there to Kathmandu in 2008.

         11.  The reason of the relocation was due to confinement of  family
             free movement and social-political approach.

         12.  I confirm that  in  2008,  when  the  political  gangs  (young
             communist league) forcefully wanted to  recruit  me  in  their
             political mainstream imposing political agendas.  I refused to
             join their group and disapproved the physical  assaults  which
             turned into fights.  As a result of these fights,  one  person
             from the gang died accidentally and the deceased's  companions
             blamed me for the un-sudden death.

         13.  I confirm that I have made several complaints  to  the  police
             and public authorities.  I demanded  for  the  protection  and
             justice from the political gang but  no  actions  were  taken.
             This is because the political protection and movement are part
             of the local and central government.

         14.  Even after I moved  to  the  capital  city  Kathmandu,  I  was
             severely injured to death by gangs  in  2009.   The  political
             state was in transitional phase with interim  constitution  on
             draft.  There was a chaos in  the  country  with  no  law  and
             order.  I confirm that the country is  still  in  transitional
             phase and constitution assembly is taking place.

         15.  I confirm that for the incidents and reasons  stated  above  I
             fled Nepal and came to the UK to complete  my  studies  as  my
             father wanted a safe and secure future for me.

         16.  I confirm that my father Mr. Jagat Bhadur Gharti Magar  passed
             away on 13/05/2013.  My mother is also deceased.  I have  only
             one elder brother who is  currently  present  and  settled  in
             Belgium.  He is an EEA national.

         17.  I confirm that I have no family remaining in Nepal.  I confirm
             that I have not returned to Nepal since my arrival in the  UK.



         18.  I confirm that if I am returned to Nepal my life will be  more
             vulnerable and I will be an  easy  target  for  the  political
             gangs as my father passed away and I will have no  support  or
             protection from anyone.

         19.  In the light of the above, there  is  insufficient  protection
             available from those who have previously persecuted me and  my
             family.

         20.  I confirm that the option of internal relocation is  also  not
             viable option as I along with my family  previously  relocated
             and continued to be persecuted.

         21.  .....................

         I therefore, request the honourable judge to allow and consider  my
         appeal as I have exceptional and compassionate circumstances."

 5. In examination-in-chief the appellant gave evidence in the terms of his
    two witness statements and largely repeated what is contained  therein.
    In cross-examination the appellant was questioned about  the  documents
    lodged with the additional witness  statement  which  include  evidence
    from Bir Hospital and evidence from the Deputy Superintendent of Police
    dated August 23 2013.  The appellant was asked why  the  police  report
    refers to an attack in May 2009 whereas the medical evidence refers  to
    an admission in February, not May.   The  appellant's  explanation  was
    that the date on the hospital records is shown as a Nepalese date under
    the Nepalese calendar and that there is no discrepancy at  all  between
    the two items.

 6. The appellant was unable to explain why the assault  mentioned  in  his
    additional witness statement at paragraph 6 (an attack  at  the  family
    home in 2007) was not mentioned on the police  report.   The  appellant
    was cross-examined about discrepancies between his account of reporting
    on several occasions to the police and the police report which seems to
    refer to no more than two matters.  The appellant could  not  give  any
    cogent explanation.

Submissions

 7. Submissions for the appellant with regard to Article 3 are set  out  in
    paragraphs 5 to 7 of Mr Fripp's  skeleton  argument  which  I  set  out
    below:

         "5.  In Soering v United  Kingdom  no  14038/88;  [1989]  ECHR  14;
             [1989] 11 EHRR 439, the ECtHR found an implied prohibition  of
             refoulement in article 3 ECHR by reference to the  'death  row
             phenomenon', involving prolonged detention prior to execution.
              It was held that there was an  absolute  prohibition  against
             removing the applicant given  the  prospect  of  a  breach  of
             article 3 ECHR.  Since Soering the Strasbourg Court has  found
             that article 3 ECHR may be  engaged  by  expulsion,  including
             deportation on national security grounds: Cruz Varas &  Ors  v
             Sweden  no  15576/89;  [1991]  ECHR  26;  (1991)  14  EHRR  1;
             Vilvarajah v United Kingdom no 13163/87;  13164/87;  13165/87;
             [1991] ECHR 47; (1991) 14 EHRR 248; Chahal v United Kingdom no
             22414/93; [1996] ECHR 54; (1996) 23 EHHR 413; Hilal  v  United
             Kingdom no 45276/99; [2001] ECHR 214; (2001) 33  EHRR  2.   It
             has also been applied to risks attending  removals  of  asylum
             seekers  or  refugees  to  other  signatories   under   common
             framework agreements for the  distribution  of  responsibility
             for asylum claims.  See, in the domestic context, EM (Eritrea)
             v SSHD [2014] UKSC 12 per Lord Kerr, with whom the four  other
             members of the Court agreed, at [3] and [58].

         6.   The Court has held that the burden  of  proof  only  initially
             rests on the applicant to adduce evidence 'capable of  proving
             that there are substantial grounds for believing that, if  the
             measure complained of were to  be  implemented,  he  would  be
             exposed to  a  real  risk  of  being  subjected  to  treatment
             contrary to Article 3': N v Finland no 38885/02 (2006) 43 EHRR
             12, [167]; NA. v United Kingdom no 25904/07 [2008]  ECHR  616;
             (2009) 48 EHRR 15, [111].

         7.   In the present case the question which arises is whether there
             such grounds arise in relation to the Appellant in Nepal.   He
             will argue that on the facts such a risk does arise."

The Respondent's Submissions

 8. There is no refusal letter dealing with Article 3 because the appellant
    never made a claim for  asylum  and  Article  3  protection.   In  oral
    submissions Ms Isherwood submitted that the appellant is not a credible
    witness and that there is no risk to him upon  return  to  Nepal.   She
    submitted that a genuine person in need of international  human  rights
    protection would have claimed it at the earliest  possible  opportunity
    yet this appellant failed to do so.  His claim should be considered  in
    the light of his immigration history and his failure to  bring  himself
    to the attention of the respondent by making a claim  for  asylum.  She
    pointed out that there are significant discrepancies in  the  documents
    adduced by the appellant and no weight should be attached to them.

Decision

 9. I have no difficulty in finding that the appellant is  not  a  credible
    witness and I adopt the words of Harrison LJ in R (App. Sadia  Abdi)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003] EWHC  2921  and  find
    that the appellant has told "a pack of lies" in support of his  Article
    3 claim.

10. A genuine claimant in need of human rights protection would  have  made
    his claim at  the  earliest  possible  opportunity  yet  the  appellant
    consistently failed to do so and declined to make a claim for asylum to
    enable the respondent to examine his case when specifically invited  to
    do so after he intimated his Article 3 claim before FTTJ  Oliver.   His
    explanation for his failure to do so was that he was  lawfully  in  the
    United Kingdom and did not need to do so is not credible. I  find  that
    the appellant did not make a claim for asylum because his claim  is  so
    flimsy and so vague that he faced the real prospect of his claim  being
    allocated to the Detained Fast Track Procedure.

11. I find the appellant to be a vague and evasive witness  who  could  not
    give any real particulars  of  his  claim  when  questioned  in  cross-
    examination.  His claim to  have  been  the  victim  of  an  attack  in
    reprisal for an accidental killing and  to  be  at  continual  risk  on
    return is completely undermined, not only by the delay  in  making  the
    claim at all but also by the  vagueness  of  his  account  and  by  the
    significant discrepancies as demonstrated by the  supporting  documents
    produced by him with his additional witness statement.  His explanation
    of a date being written in the Nepali  calendar  to  explain  away  the
    discrepancies in variously the hospital dates compared  to  the  police
    report date and his account of an attack in  May  2009  is  simply  not
    credible.  The Nepali calendar is a lunisolar Hindu  calendar  used  in
    Nepal for both civil and religious purposes.  The year  begins  in  the
    month Baishakh usually around 14 April.  The official  Nepali  calendar
    follows Bikram Samwat (BS) and the BS year is 56.7 years ahead  of  the
    Western Gregorian calendar.  Thus the Gregorian year 2000 is the Nepali
    year 2056.

12. The Nepali language is written  in  the  devanagari  script  not  roman
    numerals.  The appellant's claim that the Bir Hospital date is a Nepali
    date is patently  and  transparently  false.   The  date  is  shown  as
    2011/2/09.  The police report and the appellant's claim  refers  to  an
    event in May 2009 but makes no mention of another attack the  appellant
    says left scars on his body in 2007.  The May date is inconsistent with
    the date given in the hospital notes supposedly relating  to  the  same
    attack.  I find as a matter of fact  that  these  documents  have  been
    fabricated to support the appellant's claim  and  no  reliance  can  be
    placed upon them.

13. In summary I find the appellant has not told the truth about events  in
    Nepal, that his immigration history, the use  of  fabricated  documents
    and his overall evidence demonstrates  that  he  is  a  witness  of  no
    credibility upon whom no reliance can be placed.  I find as a matter of
    fact that he is not at risk upon return to Nepal as alleged or at  all.



Notice of Decision

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.
I remake the decision of the FTTJ by dismissing the Article 3 appeal.
The Article 8 appeal was dismissed by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  those
findings are maintained.

No anonymity order is made.



Signed        13 November 2014

Judge E B Grant
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed        13 November 2014


Judge E B Grant
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

