
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/45422/2014
                                                               IA/45420/2014
                                                               IA/45414/2014
                                                               IA/45416/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7th November 2017                 |On 14th December 2017                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                MU and others
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms Patyna, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
Respondents


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Sangha)  who,  in  a   determination
    promulgated on 27th  February  2017  allowed  the  Respondents'  appeal
    against the decision to refuse to vary leave to remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom and to remove them from the United Kingdom. The decisions under
    challenge were made on the 20th October 2014.

 2. Whilst this is the appeal of the Secretary of State I intend  to  refer
    to the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal for sake  of
    convenience.

    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

 3. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants
    are granted anonymity as the claim concerns minor children.  No  report
    of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify them.   This
    direction applies  both  to  the  Appellants  and  to  the  Respondent.
    Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of  court
    proceedings.

 4. The Appellants are nationals of Sri Lanka. The background is set out in
    the determination of the First-tier Tribunal decision.  The  Appellants
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 15 October 2010; the  first  Appellant
    and been granted leave to enter as a  Tier  4  (General)  student.  Her
    husband,  the  second  Appellant,  and  the  children  entered  as  her
    dependents. The first Appellant completed the first year of the  course
    but failed two subjects which she had to re-sit. In the second year she
    failed the same to subjects but the University did  not  allow  her  to
    continue her course. In or about November  2013  she  enrolled  with  a
    different college to follow  a  management  diploma.  The  family  were
    subsequently granted an extension of stay in the United  Kingdom  until
    the 21 August 2015 on the  basis  of  the  first  Appellant's  studies.
    However that leave was curtailed to 26 August 2014 because the  college
    licence was withdrawn by the Home Office. No  further  application  was
    made for leave as a Tier 4 student.

 5. However on 23  August  2014  an  application  was  made  by  the  first
    Appellant for leave to remain on the basis of family and  private  life
    with the second, third and fourth Appellants as her  dependents.  In  a
    letter dated 22 August 2014 which accompanied the application,  it  was
    stated that the first Appellant had established her private and  family
    life in the UK and that the two children were studying on  a  full-time
    basis. It was asserted that it would be difficult for the  children  to
    adjust to their life abroad and it would not be  reasonable  to  expect
    the removal of the applicant, her spouse and the children from the UK.

 6. This application was refused in a Notice of Immigration  Decision  made
    by the Secretary of State on 20 October 2014. Accompanying that  notice
    was a reasons for refusal letter setting out the reasons why refusal to
    vary leave to enter or remain in the UK and the decision to remove them
    had been made.

 7. The decision noted the first Appellant's immigration history as set out
    above, namely that she had entered the United  Kingdom  on  10  October
    2010 with entry clearance as a  Tier  4  general  student.  As  to  the
    decision under the partner route, the Appellant could not  satisfy  the
    requirements as her partner was  not  a  British  citizen  nor  was  he
    present or settled in the UK  or  in  the  UK  with  refugee  leave  or
    humanitarian protection. Similarly under the parent route, the children
    were not British citizens nor were they settled in the UK or had  lived
    in the UK continuously for at least seven years  immediately  preceding
    the date of the application. They also could not meet  the  eligibility
    requirements for leave as a parent as it was  stated  that  whilst  the
    first Appellant was in a relationship with the father of  the  children
    they resided together as a family unit therefore she did not have  sole
    responsibility for any of the children.

 8. As to private life under Paragraph 276ADE (1), it was  noted  that  the
    first Appellant was a national of Sri  Lanka  who  entered  on  the  10
    October 2010 and thus had resided in the UK for 3 years and had not had
    20 years residence and was over 18 (and not under 25)  and  thus  could
    not meet Paragraph 276 ADE (1) (iii) or (iv) and (v). As  to  Paragraph
    276 ADE (1)  (VI)  it  was  not  accepted  that  there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to her integration into the country to which  she
    would have to go if required to leave the UK.  She  had  lived  in  Sri
    Lanka the majority of her life and that her  familiarity  with  culture
    and understanding of social norms would  not  have  deteriorated  to  a
    point whereby she  would  be  unable  to  reintegrate.  She  spoke  the
    language and this would be beneficial to her reintegration.

 9.  The  Secretary  of  State  also  considered  whether  there  are   any
    circumstances for a grant of leave outside the rules and did so  taking
    into account Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act
    2009 in the light of the circumstances of the children  who  were  then
    aged 9 and 6 and had been living in the United Kingdom for 3 years. The
    decision noted that the first Appellant would  be  returning  with  the
    children (and her spouse) and would be able  to  support  the  children
    whilst they became used to living there and enjoying their full  rights
    as citizens of Sri Lanka. Whilst they were in education, the  objective
    information available demonstrated that Sri  Lanka  had  a  functioning
    education system and the children would be able to enter. The Appellant
    had provided no evidence to  indicate  that  she  would  be  unable  to
    maintain the children in Sri Lanka or would be unable  to  provide  for
    the safety and welfare. They lived in Sri Lanka for five and two  years
    respectively before entering the UK and were familiar with the  Sinhala
    language and thus were familiar with the culture and would be  able  to
    adapt more easily to life there. Any relationships established  in  the
    United Kingdom could  continue  from  overseas  via  other  methods  of
    communication. It was considered reasonable to  expect  the  first  and
    second Appellant and the children to return to Sri Lanka  as  a  family
    unit and continue to enjoy family life there together. The Secretary of
    State noted that this might involve a degree  of  disruption  to  their
    private life but that it was proportionate to  the  legitimate  aim  of
    maintaining  effective  immigration  control  was  in  accordance  with
    Section 55 duties. Thus it was considered that a refusal to grant leave
    outside the rules would not result in unjustifiably harsh  consequences
    for the first Appellant and the family members.

10.  The  decision  letter  also  considered  the  circumstances   of   the
    Appellant's spouse who, for the same reasons, could not meet either the
    partner route, or the parent route or those relating to  Paragraph  276
    ADE based on his length of residence in  the  United  Kingdom  and  his
    previous residence in  Sri  Lanka.  Each  of  the  children  were  also
    considered in the decision letter and for the reasons given, could  not
    meet the requirements under the child  route  (Appendix  FM)  or  under
    Paragraph 276 ADE in the light of their length of residence  and  their
    ages. Their circumstances were also considered outside of the Rules.

11. The appeal came before the First-tier  Tribunal  on  the  27th  January
    2017.  In a decision promulgated on the 27th February 2017,  the  judge
    allowed the appeals on human rights  grounds  (Article  8).  The  judge
    reached the conclusion that none  of  the  Appellants  could  meet  the
    immigration rules dealing with Article 8 (Appendix FM 276  ADE  private
    life) as a result of their length of residence in the  UK  and  in  the
    circumstances of the children, that they have not lived in  the  United
    Kingdom continuously for at least seven years. The  judge  allowed  the
    appeal of the Appellants outside of the rules on the basis that it  was
    disproportionate to remove them from  the  United  Kingdom.  The  judge
    found that there were "good grounds grant leave to  remain  outside  of
    the rules" having made reference at paragraph 29 to the length of  time
    the Appellants had lawfully remained in the UK and the establishment of
    the business  during  that  period,  the  creation  of  employment  and
    additional  voluntary  work  that  the  Appellant   had   engaged   in.
    Furthermore the first Appellant's college had closed  and  her  conduct
    had not been criticised. As to the children, the eldest child was at  a
    critical age in his education and  the  judge  took  into  account  the
    length of time the children had remained in United Kingdom.

12. Permission to appeal that decision was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge O'Garra on the 5th September 2017. The grant of permission states
    as follows:

         "... the grounds assert that the judge failed to identify  anything
         in the case which  could  be  described  as  either  compelling  or
         exceptional in allowing the appeal of human rights grounds and that
         the decision lacks reasoning.

         In R (on the application  of  Agyarko)  (Appellant)v  Secretary  of
         State for the Home Department [2017] UKSC 11 the Court said this:

             "54. As explained in Paragraph 49 above,  the  European  Court
             said that, in cases concerned with precarious family life,  it
             is "likely "only to be in exceptional circumstances  that  the
             removal of the non-national family member  will  constitute  a
             violation of Article 8. That reflects the weight  attached  to
             the contracting states 'right to control their borders, as  an
             attribute of their sovereignty , and the limited weight  which
             is generally attached family  life  established  in  the  full
             knowledge that its continuation contracting state is  unlawful
             or precarious. The court has repeatedly acknowledged  that  "a
             state  is  entitled,   as   a   matter   of   well-established
             international law, and subject to its treaty  obligations,  to
             control the entry of  non-nationals  into  its  territory  and
             their residents there" (Jeunesse, para 100). As the  court  is
             made clear, the Convention is not intended to  undermine  that
             right by enabling non-nationals to evade  immigration  control
             by establishing a family life while present in the host  state
             unlawfully or temporarily, and then presenting it with a  fate
             accompli.  On  the  contrary  "when  confronted  with  a  fait
             accompli the removal of a non-national family  member  by  the
             authorities would be  incompatible  with  Article  8  only  in
             exceptional circumstances" (Jeunesse, 108).

         In the light of this guidance, I find arguable merit in the grounds
         and the terms in which they are set forth permission to  appeal  is
         granted.

         There are arguable errors of law in the judge's decision."

13. Thus the appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.  Mr  McVeety  made  the
    following submissions on behalf of the Secretary of State. He submitted
    that the Appellants could not meet the immigration rules and  therefore
    the appeals were considered "outside  of  the  rules".  The  judge  was
    required to undertake a proportionality  balancing  exercise  and  take
    into  account  all  matters  raised  by  both  parties  in  reaching  a
    conclusion on whether there were circumstances which were  sufficiently
    compelling  or  in  other  words,  gave  rise  to  unjustifiably  harsh
    circumstances to make their removal disproportionate. He  directed  the
    Tribunal to the determination and the list of authorities  relied  upon
    by the Secretary of State that dealt  with  legal  issues  relevant  to
    these  appeals,  including  reasonableness  of  return,  importance  of
    nationality, best interests assessment, and the public interest.  There
    was no consideration in the determination at  paragraphs  18  -  36  or
    engagement with those submissions. The judge essentially  repeated  the
    skeleton argument filed on behalf of the Appellants but did not support
    that with any reasoned analysis. Whilst at paragraphs  16  and  17  the
    judge recorded what had been set out in the refusal  letter,  that  was
    insufficient when considering an analysis of the Respondent's  case  on
    the evidence. The judge  had  not  recorded  or  analysed  any  of  the
    arguments raised on behalf Secretary of  State  and  that  this  was  a
    material error of law.

14. In general terms the judge cited case law that had been relied upon  by
    the  Appellants  (see  Paragraph  28  dealing  with  ZH  (Tanzania)  at
    Paragraph 32 dealing with UE (Nigeria)) but had  made  no  findings  in
    this respect.

15. Paragraph 29 similarly were not findings and in any  event,  some  were
    neutral (such as having not had criminality) and other  factors  stated
    by the judge were required to be balanced against other factors -  such
    as the children were not qualifying children by reason of the length of
    residence, the  length  of  prior  residence  in  Sri  Lanka,  lack  of
    significant obstacles to reintegration and that they were in the United
    Kingdom on a temporary basis.  There  was  also  no  findings  of  fact
    dealing with the issue of reasonableness of return. These matters  when
    taken together demonstrated that the judge had not applied the  correct
    legal test and analysis when reaching a conclusion  on  proportionality
    and   whether   there   were   such   "compelling   circumstances"   or
    "unjustifiably harsh consequences".

16. He submitted that the losing party was entitled to know why their  case
    had been rejected. However it could not be properly be determined on  a
    reading of this determination as the Respondents submissions  were  not
    recorded or analysed. He made reference to an 11 page submission  which
    had formed the basis of the Respondents closing  argument.  He  further
    submitted that this was a material error because only one side  of  the
    balance had been considered or in  the  alternative,  the  balance  was
    flawed as all of the competing interests had not  been  considered  and
    there had been a lack of reasoning. In this context the judge had  made
    reference to lawful leave but had not made any reference to their leave
    as "precarious" which on the facts of these Appellants was  a  relevant
    consideration. He therefore invited  the  Tribunal  to  set  aside  the
    decision and to remit the appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
    further hearing given the change the family's circumstances.

17. Ms Patyna relied upon the Rule 24 response which she had prepared on 24
    October 2017 and also a document entitled "Counsel's note".  She  began
    her submissions by reference to the relevant  law;  this  was  a  human
    rights appeal and that the Tribunal was required to carry out  its  own
    proportionality assessment under Article 8 based on all  of  the  facts
    and the evidence. She submitted that in the light of the  decisions  of
    the Supreme Court in R (on the application of Agyarko)  v  SSHD  [2017]
    UKSC 11 and Hesham Ali v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60, there was no  requirement
    to find any unique feature or any exceptionality (see Paragraphs 56 and
    60 of Agyarko).

18. She  further  submitted  that  the  judge  gave  consideration  to  the
    immigration rules and concluded that they could not be met at paragraph
    20 and at paragraph 22 took into account  the  statutory  consideration
    set out in Section 117 of the 2002 Act  (as  amended).  The  judge  was
    required to make an assessment of the facts and to give weight  to  the
    public interest which is what the judge had done in the  determination.
    On the Respondent's side was the  maintenance  of  immigration  control
    which the judge had expressly  considered  at  [20].  Contrary  to  the
    Secretary of State's grounds, she submitted that it was incorrect  that
    the judge had failed  to  identify  anything  "compelling".  The  judge
    reasoned that there were "good grounds" for the granting leave and  set
    out the factors upon which he had reached this  decision  at  paragraph
    29. That paragraph was to be read with paragraphs  21  and  23  and  in
    particular that the judge had found on the evidence that the first  and
    second Appellants had immersed themselves into the local community  and
    that the children were also well integrated into  British  society  and
    that the eldest child was well established in mainstream  education  in
    the UK (21) and that they had established a "very strong private  life"
    (see paragraph 23).

19. Ms Patyna submitted that it was unfair to state that it  was  only  the
    Appellant's case that had been considered, when the judge at  paragraph
    31 did make reference to the public interest and that was the Secretary
    of State's case. The judge also took into account  the  impact  on  the
    community and its relevance to the proportionality balance and that the
    case law of UE (Nigeria) relied upon by the judge  remained  good  law.
    She acknowledged that the determination did not set out the submissions
    of the Respondent but submitted that there was no requirement  for  the
    judge to set out every detail of the arguments  heard.  The  judge  did
    record at Paragraph 5 vii that he had  taken  those  cases  cited  into
    account and in any event those cases  did  not  advance  any  arguments
    pertinent to the appeals and there is nothing to show that those  cases
    applied to the present appeals. Therefore even if there was an error in
    this respect it was not material to the proportionality assessment.

20. It was acknowledged that the children were  not  "qualifying  children"
    but that at the time of the Tribunal hearing both  children  have  been
    living in the UK for over six  years  and  that  the  position  of  the
    children was a very weighty factor in the  Article  8  assessment  (see
    Paragraph 29 of the decision). The eldest child had arrived at the  age
    of five and the length of time in the UK after  the  age  of  four  was
    likely to be more significant (see Azimi-Moayed and  others  (decisions
    affecting children: onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 197).

21. She further submitted that even if the Tribunal reached the  conclusion
    the judge erred in not giving more express recognition to the  children
    circumstances, it was not material  because  the  judge  had  a  social
    circumstances report prepared  by  ISW  which  made  reference  to  the
    difficulties the children would face on return and supported the judges
    reasoning. She relied upon the report  at  Paragraphs  6.3.1,  7.5  and
    7.2). There were also letters for the children's school.

22. As to the nature of the leave that the Appellants  had  in  the  United
    Kingdom, she referred the Tribunal to the decision in Kaur  (children's
    best interests/public interest interface)  [2017]  UKUT  00014  and  in
    particular the weight that should be attached to  private/family  life.
    Whilst Mr McVeety had made reference to their leave as "precarious" the
    decision  in  Kaur  stated  that  the   phrase   "little   weight   "is
    unsophisticated and was not an "absolute measurement  or  concept"  and
    that "little weight" is not to be confused with "no  weight"  and  that
    the measurement of "little weight "is unlikely to be the same in  every
    case vary according to the particular context.  She  further  submitted
    that the issue of precariousness was not "overarching" and the same  in
    every case. Thus she submitted the judge carried out a proper balancing
    exercise  reached  a  conclusion  in  the  Appellant's  favour  on  the
    evidence.

Decision on error of law:

23. To consider whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  law  as  the
    Respondent submits, it is necessary to set out the judge's findings  of
    fact and analysis of the issues  in  the  determination.  They  can  be
    summarised as follows. The first Appellant entered the UK as a  Tier  4
    General Student on 15 October 2010 and was followed by her  spouse  and
    children shortly thereafter. The judge accepted the  first  Appellant's
    account of her studies and that she was unable to obtain  a  refund  of
    money because the college licence  was  withdrawn  [19].The  first  and
    second Appellants (the parents) could not meet the rules under Appendix
    FM as a parent or partner, nor the provisions as to private life  under
    Paragraph 276 ADE. It was also accepted that at the date of the hearing
    the children had not lived in the UK for at least 7 years and could not
    meet Paragraph 276 ADE (IV) [at 23].

24. As to Article 8 outside the rules, the judge was satisfied that Article
    8 was engaged, the decision to refuse the application to vary leave  to
    remain interfered with their family/private life and that this  was  in
    accordance with  the  law  and  that  the  issue  related  to  that  of
    proportionality [at 30].

25. Earlier in the decision, the judge had set out the Section  117  public
    interest factors at [22] and at [28] had set out case law  relating  to
    the best interests of children (ZH (Tanzania)).

26. The judge was required to apply that to the factual findings that  were
    made.

27. As to the extent of private life established in  the  UK  at  [21]  the
    judge referred to the  lawful  residence  on  the  part  of  the  adult
    Appellants and the age of the children and the eldest  child  (age  12)
    was well-established  in  school.  The  judge  found  that  the  second
    Appellant had  established  himself  in  a  business  and  had  made  a
    significant contribution to the U.K.'s  economy  by  paying  taxes  and
    creating employment by taking a failing shop  and  turning  it  into  a
    "thriving business". The judge made reference to "numerous letters  and
    support from customers and employees who held him in very  high  esteem
    and considered them to be hard-working and honest people and benefit to
    the  community".  At  [23]  the  judge  therefore  concluded  that  the
    "Appellants have established a very strong private life in the UK". The
    judge then went on to cite extracts of general law which were all taken
    from Counsel's skeleton argument (see 24,25,26 27, 28).

28. When looking at the balancing factors  identified  on  the  Appellant's
    side they are in  summary  set  out  at  [29];  the  length  of  lawful
    residence, the age of the eldest  child  and  at  a  critical  time  in
    education,  the  establishment  of  the  business   and   creation   of
    employment, the fact that the  college  first  Appellant  attended  was
    closed that her conduct was not criticised and voluntary work that  the
    Appellant had engaged in.

29. On the public interest side the judge at [31]  made  reference  to  the
    need to maintain "fair and effective immigration control" on the  facts
    of the case of these Appellants, but that:

          "... the refusal of leave to remain and set removal directions  is
         based solely on the need to implement  immigration  control.  There
         appears to be little or no consideration of  the  impact  that  the
         removal  will  have  upon  the  Appellants  or  indeed  the   wider
         community. I accept  Mr  Lewis'  arguments  that,  in  all  of  the
         circumstances,  that  impact  is  particularly  relevant   to   the
         proportionality of the decision, particularly given the evidence of
         the Appellant having created employment and their voluntary work in
         the UK and within their community in the UK."

30. The judge then went on to cite with approval the decision of the  Court
    of Appeal in UE (Nigeria) and others v SSHD [2011] 2 All ER at [32] and
    at [33]-[34] made reference to the decision of Huang  and  why  on  the
    facts of that case it was disproportionate to remove the Appellant (the
    facts there on an entirely different basis to the present appeals)  and
    at [36] concluded that "in  these  particular  cases  the  decision  to
    refuse the Appellant's application leave to  remain  on  the  basis  of
    their family/private  life  and  to  remove  them  from  the  UK  is  a
    disproportionate measure and therefore contravenes  Article  8  of  the
    ECHR".

31. I have had the advantage of reading the Rule 24 response on  behalf  of
    the Respondents and a document entitled "Counsels note" and hearing the
    oral submissions made by both Mr McVeety and Ms  Patyna.  In  both  the
    written materials and the oral argument, the advocates  made  reference
    to the relevant law.

32. Appendix FM, "Family Members", begins with a  general  statement  which
    explains that it sets out the requirements to be met by  those  seeking
    to enter or remain in the UK on the basis of their family life  with  a
    person who is a British citizen, is settled in the UK, or is in the  UK
    with  limited  leave  as  a  refugee  or  person  granted  humanitarian
    protection (para GEN.1.1). It is said to reflect how, under Article  8,
    the balance will be struck between the right to respect for private and
    family life and  the  legitimate  aims  listed  in  Article  8(2).  The
    Appendix nevertheless contemplates that the Rules will  not  cover  all
    the circumstances in which a person may have a valid claim to enter  or
    remain in the UK as a result of his or her Article 8 rights. Paragraphs
    GEN.1.10 and GEN.1.11 both make  provision  for  situations  "where  an
    applicant does not meet the requirements of this Appendix as a  partner
    or parent but the decision-maker grants entry  clearance  or  leave  to
    enter or remain outside the Rules on Article 8 grounds".

33. This is a case in which it was conceded on  behalf  of  the  Appellants
    that they could not meet the Immigration Rules either under Appendix FM
    (parent or partner route) or  under  Paragraph  276  ADE  dealing  with
    private life (see Paragraph 8 and Paragraph 20 of  the  determination).
    The children had not been present in the UK for at  least  seven  years
    (see Paragraph 20). Thus the judge accepted that the issue  related  to
    an assessment "outside of the Rules." There did  not  seem  to  be  any
    issue as to whether the first  four  limbs  of  the  Razgar  test  were
    satisfied thus the issue related  to  that  of  proportionality  (  see
    Paragraph [30]).

34. This required a fair balance to be struck between the  public  interest
    and the rights and interests of the Appellant and others  protected  by
    Article 8 (1) (see Razgar at [20]) which includes the adult  Appellants
    and  children (see   R (MM and others) (Lebanon) v Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2017] UKSC 10, the Supreme Court at [43].

35. When looking at the issue of Article 8 outside the Rules  at  Paragraph
    [48] the Court stated:

         "[48] As has been explained, the Rules are not  a  summary  of  the
         European court's case law, but a  statement  of  the  Secretary  of
         State's policy. That policy is qualified by the scope  allowed  for
         leave to remain to be granted outside the Rules. If  the  applicant
         or his or her partner would face very significant  difficulties  in
         continuing their family life together outside the UK,  which  could
         not be overcome or would entail very  serious  hardship,  then  the
         "insurmountable obstacles" test will be  met,  and  leave  will  be
         granted under the Rules. If that test is not met, but  the  refusal
         of  the   application   would   result   in   unjustifiably   harsh
         consequences, such that refusal would not  be  proportionate,  then
         leave will be granted outside the Rules on the basis that there are
         "exceptional   circumstances".   In   the   absence    of    either
         "insurmountable  obstacles"  or  "exceptional   circumstances"   as
         defined, however, it is not apparent why it should be  incompatible
         with Article 8 for leave to be refused. The Rules and  Instructions
         are therefore compatible with Article 8. That is not, of course, to
         say  that  decisions  applying  the  Rules  and   Instructions   in
         individual cases will necessarily be  compatible  with  Article  8:
         that is a question which, if a  decision  is  challenged,  must  be
         determined independently by the court or Tribunal in the  light  of
         the particular circumstances of each case".

36. At Paragraphs 49-51 the Court stated:

         "49. In Jeunesse, the Grand Chamber said, consistently with earlier
         judgments of  the  court,  that  an  important  consideration  when
         assessing the proportionality under Article 8 of the removal of non-
         settled migrants from a contracting state in which they have family
         members, is whether family life was created  at  a  time  when  the
         persons involved were aware that the immigration status of  one  of
         them was such that the persistence of that family life  within  the
         host state would from the outset be "precarious". Where this is the
         case, the court said, "it is  likely  only  to  be  in  exceptional
         circumstances that the removal of the  non-national  family  member
         will constitute a violation of Article 8" (para 108).

         50. Domestically, officials who are determining whether  there  are
         exceptional circumstances  as  defined  in  the  Instructions,  and
         whether leave to remain should therefore  be  granted  outside  the
         Rules, are directed by the Instructions to  consider  all  relevant
         factors,  including   whether   the   applicant   "[formed]   their
         relationship with  their  partner  at  a  time  when  they  had  no
         immigration status or this was precarious". They are instructed:

             "Family life which involves the applicant putting  down  roots
             in the UK in the  full  knowledge  that  their  stay  here  is
             unlawful or precarious, should  be  given  less  weight,  when
             balanced against the factors weighing in  favour  of  removal,
             than family life formed by a person lawfully  present  in  the
             UK."

    That instruction is consistent with the case law of the European court,
    such as its judgment in  Jeunesse.  As  the  instruction  makes  clear,
    "precariousness" is not a preliminary hurdle to  be  overcome.  Rather,
    the fact that family life has been established by an applicant  in  the
    full knowledge that his stay in  the  UK  was  unlawful  or  precarious
    affects the weight to be attached to it in the balancing exercise.

37. The correct approach is set out at  Paragraphs [56]-[57] when the Court
    considered the earlier jurisprudence and MF (Nigeria):

         "56. ... Cases are not, therefore, to be  approached  by  searching
         for a unique or unusual feature, and in its absence  rejecting  the
         application without further examination. Rather, as the  Master  of
         the Rolls made clear, the  test  is  one  of  proportionality.  The
         reference to exceptional circumstances in  the  European  case  law
         means that, in cases involving precarious family  life,  "something
         very compelling ... is required to outweigh the  public  interest",
         applying a proportionality test. The Court of  Appeal  went  on  to
         apply that approach to the interpretation of the  Rules  concerning
         the  deportation  of  foreign  criminals,  where  the  same  phrase
         appears; and their approach was approved by  this  court,  in  that
         context, in Hesham Ali.

         57. That approach is also appropriate when a court or  Tribunal  is
         considering whether a refusal of leave to remain is compatible with
         Article 8 in the context of precarious family life. Ultimately,  it
         has  to  decide  whether  the  refusal  is  proportionate  in   the
         particular case before it, balancing the  strength  of  the  public
         interest in the removal of  the  person  in  question  against  the
         impact on private and family life. In  doing  so,  it  should  give
         appropriate weight to the Secretary of State's policy, expressed in
         the Rules  and  the  Instructions,  that  the  public  interest  in
         immigration  control  can  be  outweighed,  when   considering   an
         application for leave to remain brought by a person in  the  UK  in
         breach of immigration laws, only where  there  are  "insurmountable
         obstacles" or "exceptional circumstances" as defined. It must  also
         consider all factors relevant to the  specific  case  in  question,
         including, where relevant, the matters  discussed  in  paras  51-52
         above. The critical issue will generally  be  whether,  giving  due
         weight to the strength of the public interest in the removal of the
         person in the case before it, the Article 8 claim  is  sufficiently
         strong  to  outweigh  it.  In  general,  in  cases  concerned  with
         precarious family life,  a  very  strong  or  compelling  claim  is
         required to outweigh the public interest in immigration control."

38. In summary the Court stated at [60]:

         "[60] It remains the position that the ultimate question is  how  a
         fair balance should be struck  between  the  competing  public  and
         individual interests involved, applying a proportionality test. The
         Rules and Instructions in issue in the present case do  not  depart
         from that position. The Secretary of State has not imposed  a  test
         of exceptionality, in the sense which Lord  Bingham  had  in  mind:
         that is to say, a requirement that the  case  should  exhibit  some
         highly unusual feature, over and above the application of the  test
         of proportionality. On the  contrary,  she  has  defined  the  word
         "exceptional", as already explained, as meaning  "circumstances  in
         which refusal would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences  for
         the individual such that the refusal of the application  would  not
         be proportionate". So understood, the provision in the Instructions
         that leave can be  granted  outside  the  Rules  where  exceptional
         circumstances  apply  involves  the  application  of  the  test  of
         proportionality to the circumstances of the  individual  case,  and
         cannot be regarded as incompatible with Article 8. That  conclusion
         is fortified by the express  statement  in  the  Instructions  that
         "exceptional" does not mean "unusual"  or  "unique":  see  para  19
         above."

39. Thus I accept the submission made by Ms Patyna that the law set out  in
    the more recent cases indicate a departure from the requirement to find
    some additional factor before Article 8 can be considered  outside  the
    rules. In Hesham Ali (Iraq)   v  SSHD  [2016]  UKSC  60  Lord  Reed  at
    Paragraphs 47 to 50 endorsed the structured approach to proportionality
    and said what has now become the established  method  of  analysis  can
    therefore continue to be followed in this context.

40. That approach was also endorsed in MM  (Lebanon)  [2017]  UKSC  10  (in
    particular paras 66 and 67) and in Agyarko [2017] UKSC  11  where  Lord
    Reed in explaining how a Court or Tribunal should  consider  whether  a
    refusal of leave to remain was compatible with  Article  8  made  clear
    that the critical issue was generally whether, giving due weight to the
    strength of the public interest in removal, the  Article  8  claim  was
    sufficiently strong to outweigh it.  There  is  no  suggestion  of  any
    threshold  to  be  overcome  before  proportionality   can   be   fully
    considered.

41. However, it is now clear from Agyarko and Ikuga [2017] UKSC  11  whilst
    that  there  is  no  separate  test  for  exceptional   or   compelling
    circumstances to be satisfied; that  one  would  expect  to  find  such
    circumstances, if it were to be decided that it was disproportionate to
    remove somebody who could not satisfy the provisions of the Immigration
    Rules.

42. In considering the issue of proportionality, the judge was required  to
    make an assessment of the best interests of the children and to  assess
    that in the light of the evidence. The judge did make reference to  the
    basic and uncontroversial  principles  set  out  in  ZH  (Tanzania)  at
    paragraph [28] but did not make any assessment of the best interests of
    the children taking into account their nationality and their length  of
    residence and the points that were set out in the decision  letter  and
    relied upon by  the  Secretary  of  State.  There  had  been  a  social
    circumstances report written  by  an  independent  social  worker  (see
    [AB18]) which assessed the family circumstances on  19  December  2015.
    The summary of the conclusions are at [AB21]  which  was  that  in  the
    opinion of the ISW a significant change in children circumstances would
    have a detrimental effect on their health, and emotional well-being and
    development and their opportunities to achieve. The ISW also found that
    the family would be likely to  be  subject  to  financial  hardship  if
    removed to Sri Lanka and made reference to  destitution  (7.2)  and  at
    (7.3) stated that it was unclear what resources (in terms of education)
    would be available for them there, and at (7.8) the risk  of  emotional
    harm to the children.

43. There was no reference in this determination to that report of the  ISW
    or any assessment made by the judge of that report  whatsoever,  either
    addressing  the  question  of  the  children's  best  interests  or  in
    assessing the reasonableness or otherwise  of  return.  As  Mr  McVeety
    submitted anyone reading the determination would be completely  unaware
    of the existence of such  a  report  and  also  of  any  contrary  view
    expressed by the Secretary of State in relation to the general tenor of
    that evidence. In this context, the availability of  education  in  Sri
    Lanka, the cultural and social ties of  the  first  Appellant  and  her
    husband, the nationalities of the children.

44. Whilst this  was  a  case  where  the  children  were  not  "qualifying
    children" under Section 117B (6), it seems to be the position that  the
    question  of  reasonableness  of  return  formed  part  of  the  judges
    assessment. That is understandable in the context of  removal  but  the
    assessment made was, in my judgement, entirely one-sided. I can see  no
    consideration given to the  Respondents  submissions  relating  to  the
    relevant issues despite the judge referring to the case law relied upon
    by the presenting officer set out at Paragraph [5 vii]  which  included
    MA (Pakistan)  and  EV  (Philippines)  and  other  relevant  case  law.
    Contrary to the submissions made by Ms Patyna, those cases did  concern
    issues relevant to the Appellants.

45. Similarly there was no consideration or engagement of the  Respondent's
    case when considering this aspect of the Appellant's  case.  Whilst  at
    Paragraphs [14 - 17] the  judge  summarised  the  Respondent's  refusal
    letter that is entirely different from engaging with its contents  when
    carrying out an assessment of the  evidence  and  reaching  a  reasoned
    conclusion. For example, there is no reference to the  ISW  report  and
    its conclusions as to whether the children  would  be  able  to  access
    education. Whereas the judge had recorded the refusal  letter  at  [17]
    where reliance was placed by the Respondent upon the evidence available
    that the children would be returning to Sri Lanka  with  their  parents
    who would be able to support them and that the objective  evidence  was
    that the country had a functioning education system which the  children
    would be able to enter. There is no  analysis  or  assessment  of  that
    evidence in the light of the contents of the ISW report.

46. Furthermore the ISW report also made reference  to  the  parents  being
    subject to financial hardship and destitution. The refusal  letter  had
    set out the Respondent's case that the parents are provided no evidence
    which indicated that they would be unable to maintain the  children  or
    would be unable to provide for their welfare. There was  no  engagement
    or any analysis of that part of the Respondent's case  and  reaching  a
    decision. That is particularly so when  considering  the  core  finding
    made by the judge relating to the establishment of a  business  in  the
    United Kingdom and thus having  assets  upon  which  the  family  could
    potentially draw upon and recent experience in the field of employment.

47. Ms Patyna submit that even if  the  judge  erred  in  not  giving  more
    express recognition to the children circumstances, it was not an  error
    that was material (see Paragraph 10 of Counsel's note). I cannot  agree
    with that submission. Whilst making  this  submission  Ms  Patyna  made
    reference to the ISW report however there was no analysis whatsoever or
    any reference to that report in the factual findings made by the judge.
    I accept the submission made by Mr McVeety there had been no assessment
    whatsoever in the light of  the  Respondent's  case  to  which  I  have
    referred. In my judgement, the judges lack of analysis as  regards  the
    best interests of the children and the lack of analysis of the evidence
    as a whole is a  material  error  of  law  and  demonstrates  that  any
    balancing exercise undertaken which related to the  proportionality  of
    removal, was flawed.

48. Similarly whilst the judge set out that the Appellant's case  was  that
    they could not meet the rules, there was no proper reference to this in
    the balancing exercise undertaken as  to  the  weight  that  should  be
    attached to that factor. It is correct that the judge made reference to
    the decision of Huang at [34 - 35] but  the  factual  circumstances  of
    Huang set out by the judge at [34] bear no resemblance to  the  factual
    circumstances  of  the  appeals   before   the   First-tier   Tribunal.
    Importantly there was  no  reference  to  the  weight  that  should  be
    attached to the failure to meet  the  immigration  rules.  As  set  out
    earlier GEN 1.1 of Appendix FM states  that  the  requirements  of  the
    immigration rules reflect how Article 8 and the ECHR  balance  will  be
    struck between the right to respect for family and private life and the
    legitimate aim  of  maintaining  an  effective  system  of  immigration
    control. The way in which the immigration  rules  relating  to  private
    life are considered and applied  is  directly  relevant  to  whether  a
    decision is lawful under Section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 because
    the rules are relevant to the assessment of  a  claim  based  on  human
    rights.

49. In my judgement, it is not sufficient to state, as  the  judge  did  at
    [31] "that the public interest side of the balance there is a  need  to
    maintain fair and effective immigration control but  on  the  facts  of
    these Appellants, the refusal  of  leave  to  remain  and  set  removal
    directions is  based  solely  on  the  need  to  implement  immigration
    control". There is no recognition firstly  that  the  Appellant  cannot
    meet the immigration rules and  secondly,  why  they  cannot  meet  the
    immigration rules which is part of the exercise the judge was  required
    to consider when making an assessment outside  of  the  rules  and  the
    proportionality balancing exercise. One issue of relevance was that the
    Secretary of State had concluded from the factual background that there
    were no very significant obstacles to reintegration of  the  first  and
    second Appellants to Sri Lanka and thus they could not  meet  Paragraph
    276 ADE (1) (vi) but there was no consideration  of  that  factor  when
    making an assessment of the issue outside of the rules.

50. In carrying out the  balancing  exercise  and  reaching  a  finding  on
    proportionality, the Tribunal must "have regard" to the  considerations
    set out in Section 117B of the Nationality, immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002 (Section 117A). Section 117A (2) of the  2002  Act  provides  that
    where a Tribunal is required to determine whether a decision made under
    the Immigration Acts would be unlawful under Section  6  of  the  Human
    Rights Act 1998 it must, in considering 'the public interest question',
    have regard in all cases to the considerations listed in Section117B of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  (as  amended  by  the
    Immigration Act 2014).  Section  117  (3)  provides  that  the  'public
    interest question' means the question of whether an interference with a
    person's right to respect for private  and  family  life  is  justified
    under Article 8(2).

51. S117B Article 8:  public  interest  considerations  applicable  in  all
    cases:

         (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
         public interest.

         (2)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-

             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
         financially independent, because such persons-

             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)  Little weight should be given to-

             (a)  a private life, or

             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

             that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration  status  is
         precarious.

         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom.

52. Whilst the judge set  out  the  Section  117  public  interest  factors
    earlier in the determination at [22], that was merely a recitation  and
    there  is  little  to  indicate  that  the  judge  applied  them   when
    considering the balancing  exercise.  It  is  plain  from  reading  the
    determination that the judge appears to have given great weight to  the
    Appellant's establishment of a successful business. At paragraph 21 the
    judge made reference to the lawful residence and  his  contribution  to
    the economy by paying taxes and creating employment. In his analysis of
    this factor the judge made reference to a  decision  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in UE (Nigeria) (see Paragraph 32). This  is  a  decision  which
    predated the coming into force of the public interest considerations in
    Section 117 of the 2002  Act  (as  amended).  Furthermore,  whilst  the
    decision did make reference to a broad  approach  being  taken  to  the
    community "losing something of value" and  that  this  is  a  principle
    capable of being relevant to the assessment of the public interest, the
    decision went on to state that it was unlikely  in  practice  to  carry
    much weight (see Paragraph 43 of the decision).

53. In this context also, the judge placed weight  on  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant had established his business and  that  this  was  a  "strong
    element" of his private life and whilst they were in the  UK  lawfully.
    However there was no consideration that his status, whilst lawful,  had
    been precarious in the sense that  the  second  Appellant,  who  was  a
    dependent of the first  Appellant,  had  no  expectation  of  permanent
    status and the establishment of his business had to  be  seen  in  that
    light. It is common ground that the first Appellant came as  a  student
    and her husband as her dependent along with the children. She  did  not
    complete her studies in the United Kingdom  and  it  was  against  that
    background that the application leave to remain was made. Section  117B
    (5) states that "little weight" should  be  given  to  a  private  life
    established by person at a time when a person's immigration  status  is
    precarious. The Appellants were granted a period of  limited  leave  to
    remain United Kingdom on the basis of the Appellants Tier 4 status as a
    student but that leave was still precarious for the purposes of Section
    117B(5) ( see AM (S117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT  0265  and  Ruppiah  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 805). Whilst Ms Patyna submits that "little weight"  does  not
    mean that "no weight" can be given and that  it  is  dependent  on  the
    circumstances of the particular case, there was no assessment  made  of
    this part of  the  Section  117B  public  interest  considerations  and
    therefore again the balancing exercise was flawed and as the Respondent
    submits it was unclear  as  to  how  the  proportionality  balance  was
    properly reached.

54. I have considered with care the arguments  advanced  by  Ms  Patyna  on
    behalf of the Appellants but I am satisfied that the  judge  fell  into
    error in his assessment of the Article 8 issues for the  reasons  given
    in the earlier paragraphs. I am also satisfied that the submission made
    by Mr  McVeety  is  made  out  that  there  appears  to  be  no  proper
    consideration of the Respondents arguments beyond reciting the contents
    of the refusal letter. The judge made no analysis of the evidence  that
    was before the Tribunal (which related to the children) in the light of
    the Respondents submissions (both in the refusal letter and  generally)
    and instead appeared to cite (with approval) large amounts of  what  is
    uncontentious extracts of law. In this context I agree with Mr  McVeety
    that there was a failure to  engage  with  the  Respondent's  case  and
    whilst the judge cites with approval throughout the  determination  the
    Appellants counsel's skeleton argument, it lacks an assessment  of  any
    alternative analysis. It would have been open to the  judge  to  reject
    the Respondent's case but it has not been  demonstrated  that  such  an
    analysis was undertaken.

55. Consequently I am satisfied that the errors demonstrated  are  material
    to the outcome. The balancing exercise undertaken as a  consequence  is
    materially flawed and thus the decision should be set aside.

56. When  considering  the  issue  of  remaking  the  decision,  Ms  Patyna
    submitted that in the event of a  material  error  of  law,  she  would
    request that the decision be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a
    further hearing. There are a number of reasons  for  that;  principally
    the position of the children has changed. The decision of the Secretary
    of State was made  in  2014  and  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  was  in  January  2017.  The  children  are  now  "qualifying
    children" under Section 117D, as they are under 18  years  of  age  and
    have now lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous period  of  seven
    years or more. The ISW assessment of their circumstances  and  that  of
    their parents was also made in December 2015 and is two years  old  and
    may require updating in line with the children's circumstances. In  the
    light of those factors, I am satisfied that Ms Patyna's submissions  as
    to the necessity for a further hearing is correct and that  the  appeal
    should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to make further  findings
    of fact and analysis of the evidence as a whole. Mr McVeety also agreed
    with that course.

57. Consequently for the reasons I have given, I am satisfied that there is
    a material error of law in the decision of the First Tier Tribunal  and
    that it should be set aside  and  the  matter  shall  be  remitted  for
    further hearing before the First Tier Tribunal on a date to be fixed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FTT involved the making of an error on a point  of  law;
it is set aside and remitted to the First Tier Tribunal to hear the appeal.

An anonymity direction is made.

Signed [pic]  Date: 11/12/2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

