
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/45159/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 2nd July 2014                                |On 31st July 2014          |
|Prepared 8th July 2014                          |                           |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

                            MISS Evgeniya Evseeva
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Nathan of counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The Appellant

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Russia born on 3rd  November  1989.   She
    appealed against a decision of the Respondent dated 16th  October  2013
    to refuse to vary her leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  and  to
    remove her by way of directions under Section 47  of  the  Immigration,
    Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.   Her  appeal  was  allowed  at  first
    instance by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Blake  sitting  at  Taylor
    House on 5th March 2014.  The Respondent  appeals  with  leave  against
    that decision and the matter therefore comes before me as an appeal  by
    the Respondent.  Nevertheless for  the  sake  of  convenience  I  shall
    continue to refer to the parties as they  were  referred  to  at  first
    instance.

2.   The Appellant last entered the United Kingdom with entry  clearance  as
    a Tier 4 (General) Student valid  from  16th  September  2009  to  30th
    October 2012.  She first entered the United Kingdom in  September  2007
    as a student in order to study for her A levels at age  17.   Prior  to
    that time she had lived with her  mother  and  step-father  (a  British
    citizen) in Russia.  The Appellant's step-father had only ever  resided
    in Russia on the basis of his employment and the Appellant was sent  to
    the United Kingdom in advance of her mother and step-father's return in
    order to start her preparation  for  university  and  integration  into
    United Kingdom society.

3.   The Appellant's mother obtained a spouse settlement visa  in  May  2010
    and was subsequently granted indefinite leave to remain issued  to  her
    on 22nd May 2012.  Since that time she has acquired naturalisation as a
    British citizen.  The  Appellant  herself  went  on  to  study  at  the
    University of Warwick where  she  obtained  a  BSc  honours  degree  in
    economics with a 2:1 classification.  On completion of her studies  she
    returned to her family home in the UK living with her mother and  step-
    father in East Sussex.

The Refusal

4.   On 11th October 2012 solicitors acting for  the  Appellant  applied  on
    her behalf for leave to remain in the United Kingdom.   The  Respondent
    refused that application stating that it had  been  considered  whether
    the particular circumstances set out  in  the  application  constituted
    exceptional circumstances that might require the  Respondent  to  grant
    leave  to  remain  outside  the  Immigration  Rules.   The   Respondent
    summarised the Appellant's claim thus:

         "... you have a close relationship with your mother who is  settled
         in the UK and you have lost most ties to Russia."


    The Respondent decided that a grant of leave outside the Rules was  not
    appropriate in the Appellant's case because she was aged 23 and was  an
    independent  adult  not  dependent  on  her  mother.   She  had   lived
    independently from her parents for several years in the United  Kingdom
    which itself was a new country to her and  therefore  it  was  expected
    that she would be able to re-establish an independent  life  in  Russia
    where she had spent most of her life.  She could maintain contact  with
    her mother through modern means of communication.


5.   The reasons for refusal did not refer to whether or not  the  Appellant
    could satisfy either Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration
    Rules.  It indicated that the application was being considered  outside
    the Rules but there was no indication in the  refusal  letter  of  what
    weight if any the Respondent placed on  the  fact  that  the  Appellant
    could not satisfy the aforementioned provisions of the Rules.

The Hearing at First Instance

6.   The Appellant appealed and the matter  came  before  Judge  Blake  when
    both parties were represented by Counsel.  The Judge had before  him  a
    psychologist's report by Lisa Davies dated 16th September  2012.   This
    report had been submitted to the Respondent but was not referred to  in
    the refusal notice.  The psychologist had undertaken an  assessment  of
    the Appellant and observed the relationship that  existed  between  the
    Appellant and her mother.  The Judge summarised the  contents  of  this
    report at paragraphs 27 to 30 of his determination.  The  report  noted
    that the Appellant had enjoyed a close and supportive relationship with
    her  mother  and  step-father  which  appeared  to  extend  beyond  the
    dependency experienced by a young woman of the Appellant's peer  group.
    The Appellant lacked a clear sense of autonomy and had found  emotional
    separation from  her  mother  very  difficult.   She  would  experience
    significant difficulties adjusting to life in Russia without the  close
    presence of her mother and step-father.  She had  presented  as  a  shy
    introvert and had experienced difficulties building new  relationships.
    She would experience a profound sense of isolation  and  loneliness  if
    removed to Russia.  Modern means of communication would not address the
    Appellant's emotional needs.  The Judge also heard oral testimony  from
    the Appellant's mother and  step-father  and  received  in  evidence  a
    number of letters in support.

7.   In closing submissions to the Judge the Respondent put her case on  the
    basis that the Appellant's family life with her mother and  step-father
    did not engage Article 8(1) and as she  could  not  succeed  under  the
    Rules the appeal should be dismissed.  Again no reference was  made  to
    the weight or otherwise to be placed on the fact that  the  Appellant's
    application was seemingly outside the Rules.

8.   In  his  determination  the  Judge  accepted  the  credibility  of  the
    evidence  given  to  him  and  took  the  psychology  report  and   the
    Appellant's personal background and  difficulties  into  account.   The
    Appellant had a strong bond and emotional  dependency  on  her  parents
    above that which would have been normal in people  of  the  Appellant's
    age.   The  Judge  considered  that  his  task  was   to   assess   the
    proportionality of interference with the  Appellant's  family  life  in
    accordance with the authority of Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.  The  Appellant
    had at all times remained  lawfully  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  her
    removal to Russia would cause a serious rupture to  both  her  and  her
    family life. The Judge concluded that the Appellant's dependence on her
    parents was over and above that of a normal person  of  her  age.   The
    Appellant's  removal  to  Russia  would  bring  about  the  Appellant's
    isolation which would result in depression.  The  interference  in  the
    family life was not proportionate  to  the  public  aim  sought  to  be
    achieved.  In allowing the appeal under Article 8 the  Judge  noted  at
    paragraph 130:

         "I found that the Secretary of State had failed to give any or  any
         proper weight to the psychological profile of the Appellant and the
         likely effect on both her and her immediate family".

The Onward Appeal

9.   The Respondent appealed against that decision arguing it was not  clear
    from the determination on what basis the  Appellant's  application  was
    made whether pursuant to the Immigration  Rules  or  for  consideration
    outside of the Rules.  For the first time the grounds of appeal  raised
    the  issue  that  the  determination  had  made  no  reference   to   a
    consideration of the relevant Immigration Rules namely Appendix FM  and
    paragraph 276ADE.  It was also argued the Judge had not considered  the
    guidance in the case  of  Gulshan  [2013]  UKUT  640.   If  there  were
    arguably good grounds for granting leave to remain outside  the  United
    Kingdom it was necessary for Article 8 purposes for the Judge to go  on
    to  consider  whether   there   were   compelling   circumstances   not
    sufficiently  recognised  under  the  Rules.   Simply   undertaking   a
    freestanding Article 8 assessment was a material error in law.

10.  Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Andrew
    on 7th May 2014 who stated that it was an arguable error for the  Judge
    to take no note of the guidance in the case of Gulshan.  In consequence
    the matter came before me on 2nd July 2014 to determine  in  the  first
    instance whether there was an error of law in the Judge's decision such
    that it fell to be set aside.  If there was then  I  would  proceed  to
    rehear the matter.  If  there  was  not  then  the  decision  at  first
    instance would stand.

11.  The Respondent's submissions  on  the  point  of  law  were  relatively
    short.  It was acknowledged that the Respondent  had  not  referred  to
    Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE in the refusal letter.  The caseworker
    had minuted the  file  that  the  Appellant  could  not  satisfy  those
    requirements but that had  not  reached  the  decision  notice  itself.
    There were no exceptional or compelling circumstances  such  that  this
    appeal should be allowed outside the Rules.

12.  In somewhat longer submissions Counsel for the  Appellant  argued  that
    there was no error of law in the Judge's determination.  Given that the
    appeal system was adversarial in its nature it was not for the Judge to
    fill in the holes in the Respondent's case if the  Respondent  did  not
    refer to the provisions of the Rules or the weight to be attached where
    those Rules could not be met.  If the Respondent had  not  referred  to
    those Rules then the Judge was required to consider the appeal  on  the
    basis of  the  Article  8  jurisprudence  and  the  Razgar  test.   The
    important difference between the refusal letter and  the  determination
    was that the Judge in  assessing  proportionality  had  considered  the
    expert evidence whereas the Respondent had not.   To  the  extent  that
    there was  an  error  in  the  Judge's  determination  (which  was  not
    admitted) it was a failure of form and the Tribunal was limited to  the
    challenge by  the  Respondent.   The  Upper  Tribunal  was  limited  to
    consider the submissions of the Respondent at first instance.  Just  as
    the Judge could not embark on a freestanding assessment of Article 8 so
    the Tribunal could not embark on a freestanding assessment of the error
    of law.  It should be confined to the issues at first instance.

13.  In conclusion for the Respondent it was argued  that  the  "concession"
    by the Respondent at first instance (that is that there was no  mention
    of Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE in closing submissions) would  only
    be valid if it  was  a  concession  relating  to  facts,  a  concession
    relating to law was  invalid.   The  Respondent  could  not  waive  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules even if  she  did  not  refer  to
    them.  Even if the Respondent got the law  wrong  the  Judge  was  duty
    bound to apply the law correctly and that should have been his starting
    point.  Gulshan should have been applied.   The  Appellant  was  not  a
    child of settled parents, she was an adult.  It could not be argued the
    Appellant had no ties to Russia and thus could  not  satisfy  paragraph
    276ADE in respect of private life.

The error of Law Stage

14.  The Judge was not assisted at first instance by the failure  of  either
    party to mention the Immigration Rules or the impact  that  they  would
    have on an  Article  8  assessment.   Counsel  for  the  Appellant  was
    recorded by the Judge as indicating that  the  claim  concerned  family
    life and not private life.  Nevertheless it was necessary for the Judge
    to consider whether the Appellant  could  meet  the  Immigration  Rules
    because if she could not the Judge was required to consider the  weight
    thereby that was to be attached to the public interest in removing  the
    Appellant.  Although I consider it is significant (for the purposes  of
    the proportionality exercise) that the Respondent did not refer to  the
    weight to be attached to a failure to meet  the  Rules  in  either  the
    refusal letter or  submissions  to  the  Judge,  for  the  purposes  of
    considering whether there was an error of law  I  do  not  consider  it
    significant at this stage.

15.   A  considerable  amount  of  case  law  has  developed  regarding  the
    assessment of Article 8 claims where the Immigration Rules are not met.
     In Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 it was considered that in many cases the main
    points for consideration in relation to Article 8 will be addressed  by
    a decision maker applying the new Rules.  It was only  if  after  doing
    that that there remains an arguable case that there may be good grounds
    for granting leave outside the Rules under Article 8 that it  would  be
    necessary for Article 8 purposes to go on  to  consider  whether  there
    were compelling circumstances not  sufficiently  recognised  under  the
    Rules to require the grant of such leave.  In Shahzad  [2014]  UKUT  85
    the  Upper  Tribunal  reminded  first  decision  Tribunals   that   the
    Immigration Rules reflect an assessment made by the government with the
    sanction of Parliament of what requirements are necessary in  order  to
    ensure sufficient control on a number of persons entering into or being
    able to stay in the United Kingdom and for  how  long  and  under  what
    conditions.

16.  The fact therefore that the Respondent did not pray in  aid  a  failure
    to meet the Rules either in the decision letter or  at  first  instance
    does not of  itself  mean  that  the  Tribunal  could  disregard  those
    provisions.  There must still be an analysis of why the  Appellant  can
    succeed outside the Immigration Rules where the Rules are not met.  The
    Rules cannot be simply  ignored.   It  matters  not  that  this  is  an
    adversarial system, the requirement to show compelling circumstances is
    a matter of law.  The Appellant's argument before me is that that is  a
    matter of form not substance since the  end  result  is  the  same.   I
    disagree with that.  Unless the  Tribunal  has  considered  the  weight
    which jurisprudence has explained should be given to a failure to  meet
    the Immigration Rules it cannot be said that the Tribunal has  assessed
    the claim under Article 8 correctly.  I therefore find that  there  was
    an error in the Judge's assessment of Article 8 in that  he  failed  to
    give  any  or  any  proper  weight  to  the  legitimate  aim   pursued.
    Importantly he did not consider the Article 8 application in  terms  of
    whether there were compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised
    under the new Rules to require the grant of  leave  since  he  did  not
    consider the impact of the Rules at all.  I  therefore  set  aside  the
    determination as disclosing a material error  of  law  and  proceed  to
    remake the decision in this determination preserving  the  findings  of
    fact made by the Judge at first instance which were not challenged.

The Rehearing

17.  I would agree that this is an appeal to be considered  in  relation  to
    Article 8 family life rather than private life.  The  Appellant  cannot
    satisfy the Immigration Rules but  the  evidence  of  the  psychologist
    particularly demonstrates an arguable  case  that  there  may  be  good
    grounds for granting leave outside the Rules.  The Respondent  did  not
    consider the psychologist's report or if she did she certainly made  no
    reference to it in her refusal letter.  The Respondent's  case  in  the
    refusal letter appears to accept that there is a family life that  will
    be interfered with but that the interference will  not  be  significant
    and will thus not be disproportionate.  The Respondent's case at  first
    instance appears to have changed to arguing that in fact  Article  8(1)
    was not engaged at all as  there  was  no  family  life  beyond  normal
    emotional ties.   It  was  open  to  the  Judge  to  find  against  the
    Respondent  on  that  point  in  the  light  of  the  contents  of  the
    psychologist's report which indicated that there was  a  dependency  by
    the Appellant on her mother  and  step-father  over  and  above  normal
    family ties.

18.  That having been said I must  go  on  to  consider  whether  there  are
    compelling circumstances not  sufficiently  recognised  under  the  New
    Rules to require the grant of leave to the Appellant.  Inevitably  such
    an assessment is fact  sensitive.   It  is  not  relevant  to  consider
    whether another Judge might have come to different findings on the same
    evidence. It  is  nevertheless  as  the  jurisprudence  makes  clear  a
    proportionality exercise. The weight to be placed  on  the  Appellant's
    non compliance with the Rules is significant but the Respondent herself
    did not argue the point in either the refusal letter or the hearing  at
    first instance. I cannot disregard the fact that the Appellant fails to
    meet the Rules what I can say is that the Respondent herself  does  not
    place great weight on the failure to meet the Rules because she did not
    argue it below. The weight which goes into the balance on that side  of
    the argument is thereby diminished

19.  On the other side of the balance the position is  that  the  impact  on
    the Appellant of her removal to Russia would mean the  Appellant  would
    experience a profound sense of  isolation  and  loneliness,  depression
    would result and it would also have an emotional effect on  her  mother
    and step-father.  The disruption to the  family  life  enjoyed  by  all
    three persons in the United Kingdom would I find be  disproportionately
    interfered with.  In terms of the Razgar questions, I find that  family
    life is engaged, I find it would be interfered with by the  removal  of
    the Appellant, I  find  that  that  removal  is  proportionate  to  the
    legitimate aim of immigration control  particularly  in  the  light  of
    Shahzad but I find nevertheless that in the particular  facts  of  this
    case it would  be  disproportionate  such  that  there  are  compelling
    circumstances that the Appellant should be granted  leave  outside  the
    Rules.

20.   Given  the  difficulties  which  the  Appellant  would  experience  if
    returned to Russia there would  be  a  significant  disruption  to  her
    family life. The Appellant's mother would be compelled to go  with  the
    Appellant so as to avoid the effects of separation.  I would not  place
    the same weight as  the  Judge  did  on  the  correspondence  from  the
    Appellant's friends as it  does  not  significantly  advance  the  case
    beyond confirming what was the likely effect upon the Appellant of  the
    Respondent's decision.  Their only significance was that  it  supported
    the expert evidence of the psychologist.  Nor would I place  weight  as
    the Judge did that the Appellant would make a  capable  and  worthwhile
    contribution to UK society.  That may or not be the case but  it  would
    be speculation on my part to indicate that as a reason.  The  important
    point  is  what  the  Judge  summarised  at  paragraph   127   of   his
    determination that there would be a serious rupture to the family  life
    enjoyed by all members of the family.  For those  reasons  therefore  I
    find that the Respondent's  decision  to  remove  the  Appellant  would
    breach this country's obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention  on  Human  Rights.   It   would   be   a   disproportionate
    interference for the reasons given with the family life  of  all  three
    members of the family.  There are compelling circumstances in this case
    such that the appeal should exceptionally be allowed outside the Rules.
     I therefore allow the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    decision.  I make no anonymity order  as  there  is  no  public  policy
    interest in so doing.  The fee award at first instance will stand.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law and I have set it aside.  I have remade the  decision  by  allowing  the
Appellant's appeal against the  Respondent's  decision  to  refuse  to  vary
leave and to remove her.

Appellant's appeal allowed.

Signed this 29th day of July 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft
