


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/45919/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|20 June 2014                                  |7 January 2015               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

              Lord Matthews, sitting as an Upper Tribunal Judge
                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Holmes


                                   Between

                           MRS SANDRA KOME HUTTON
                       (Anonymity Direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr O Bare, of Gromyko Amedu Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Background

1.   The appellant is a national of Nigeria who was  born  on  30  September
    1984.  She entered the United Kingdom on 16 March 2013 on a visit  visa
    valid until 16 September 2013.  On 14  September  2013  decisions  were
    made to refuse to vary her leave to enter the  United  Kingdom  and  to
    remove her under Section 47 of the Immigration Asylum  and  Nationality
    Act  2006.   It  was  contended  that  she  was  unable  to  meet   the
    requirements  of  paragraphs  E-LTRPT.2.2-2.4   and   E-LTRPT.3.1   and
    paragraph EX.1 applied.  As she was in the UK on a visit visa she could
    not meet the requirements of E-LTRPT.3.1.  Furthermore she did not meet
    the requirements for leave to be granted on the basis  of  her  private
    life under paragraph 276ADE and the Secretary of State's  position  was
    that there were no exception circumstances which required leave  to  be
    granted outside the Rules under Article 8 ECHR.

2.   She appealed against these decisions but her appeal was refused in  the
    First-tier Tribunal in a determination promulgated on  28  March  2014.
    The appeal was dismissed both under the Rules and under Article  8  and
    permission was sought to appeal to this Tribunal.  Before dealing  with
    the grounds it might be helpful to set out the factual background which
    was, in large measure, undisputed.

3.   The appellant  married  Alan  Milton  Hutton,  a  British  citizen,  in
    Nigeria on 27 March 2010.  He was then working in Qatar and she  joined
    him there after she was granted a one-year visa which was extended  for
    another year.  Their daughter, Nikisha, was born in Qatar on 3  January
    2013 and is a British  citizen.   Shortly  after  Nikisha's  birth  her
    husband's contract ended and they came to the UK while they  awaited  a
    renewal of it.  The appellant entered the country as a visitor in March
    2013.  As the renewal  took  longer  than  expected  her  husband  took
    temporary employment in Kazakhstan which became  permanent.   He  works
    offshore and accommodation is for employees only.  She cannot obtain  a
    visa to join him.  He claimed that she was stranded in the UK and  that
    gave rise to her application for leave to remain.   Her  husband  is  a
    mechanical engineer.  The appellant claims  that  she  comes  from  the
    Niger Delta region which is not safe for her.  Her parents live  there,
    she has one brother in college and the other is  on  the  Ivory  Coast.
    She has a married sister.  Nikisha is of mixed race and it  is  claimed
    that she is not safe in Nigeria.  She claims that people are  kidnapped
    in the region in order that the kidnappers might make money.  The First-
    tier Tribunal made reference to a Country of Origin Information  Report
    updated in February 2014 which recorded that there was violence in  the
    area but there was no claim for asylum.

4.   The grounds of appeal submitted that the FtT failed  properly  to  take
    account of the child's best interests, that the  Article  8  assessment
    was flawed, that it was perverse to acknowledge that there was violence
    in the Niger Delta area and yet suggest  that  the  appellant  and  her
    daughter could not enjoy a private life there.   Of  more  significance
    however, it was submitted  in  the  grounds  that  the  FtT  failed  to
    consider the appellant's European law right to reside  in  the  UK  and
    referred to Article 20 TFEU and the well-known case of Ruiz Zambrano.

5.   A judge of the First-tier Tribunal granted permission to appeal  noting
    that the appellant had been appealing under  Section  84(1)(d)  of  the
    2002 Act on the grounds that she was a member of the family of  an  EEA
    national and the decision breached under Community  Treaties.   It  was
    noted that the application contended the FtT erred in  not  considering
    the appeal by reference to EU law.  The judge was of the  opinion  that
    given the derivative rights of residence for primary carers of  British
    citizen children contained in Regulation 15A(4A) of the EEA Regulations
    this ground was arguable.

6.   Before us Mr Deller conceded that the First-tier Tribunal had  made  an
    error of law  in  not  considering  the  question  of  any  rights  the
    appellant might have under EU law but did not go so far as  to  concede
    that the appellant  had  a  derivative  right.   At  the  root  of  his
    submissions was an argument that if the  appellant  had  to  leave  the
    country it was not inevitable that her child would also have to do  so.
    At the very least there was no evidence to that effect.  While the  FtT
    had, at paragraph 15, found that  due  to  her  age  it  followed  that
    Nikisha would leave with her mother if she was removed, that was not  a
    finding made in the  context  of  the  EEA  Regulations.   We  are  not
    entirely sure that that matters.  A finding in fact  is  a  finding  in
    fact whatever the context and is based on the evidence rather  than  in
    the context of the legal consequences which may flow.   Nonetheless  we
    agreed with Mr Deller that an  error  of  law  had  been  made  and  we
    proceeded to re-make the decision ourselves.

7.   We heard evidence from the appellant.  Her position  was  that  if  she
    left the country then her daughter would have to come  with  her.   She
    had no relatives in the UK and her husband's only relative  was  a  29-
    year old son who lived in Scotland with his  partner  and  child.   Her
    husband could not come back to look after  the  child  because  of  his
    work.  Certain payslips were produced which showed that he  earned  750
    euros per day.

8.   Mr Deller did not challenge any of her evidence.

Submissions

9.   Mr Deller again made the point that it  was  not  inevitable  that  the
    child would have to leave the UK if the mother left.  He accepted  that
    there were currently relatives available but  the  appellant's  husband
    could come back to look after the child.  The fact that he  was  living
    and working abroad was a matter of personal choice.  Under  questioning
    from the bench we understood him  to  concede  that  he  could  see  no
    particular reason why an application from abroad by the  appellant  for
    leave to enter within the Rules would not be successful.  He  submitted
    that the Zambrano route, now reflected in the EEA Regulations, was  one
    which was jealously guarded and we should be slow to find that  it  was
    inevitable that the child would have to leave with her mother.  He then
    made detailed submissions on Article 8 considerations but  in  view  of
    the decision to which we have come we do not consider it  necessary  to
    go into those in any detail.

10.  For his part Mr Bare submitted that the Regulations had  been  met  and
    that in any event we should allow the appeal under Article 8.

Discussion

11.   The  particular  Regulation  in  contention  is,  as  we  have   said,
    Regulation 15A(4A) and is in the following terms:

        "P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if -


        (a)  P is the primary carer of a  British  citizen  ("the  relevant
             British citizen");


        (b)  the  relevant  British  citizen  is  residing  in  the  United
             Kingdom; and


        (c)  the relevant British citizen would be unable to reside in  the
             UK or in another EEA State if P were required to leave".


12.  There is no doubt that the appellant is the primary carer of a  British
    citizen, her daughter.  Equally there is no doubt that her daughter  is
    residing  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  question,  so  far  as   the
    Regulations are concerned, is whether the child "would  be  unable"  to
    reside in the UK or in another EEA state if the appellant were required
    to leave.

13.  There was no issue as to whether or not the  appellant  could  live  in
    another EEA state, the argument being related to her  position  in  the
    UK.  As we have indicated, Mr Deller focused on  the  inevitability  of
    the child having to leave if her  mother  were  removed.   He  conceded
    however that inevitability could not be taken to its strictest  limits.
    For example the child could be adopted but he would not argue that that
    was a reasonable approach to the meaning of "unable to reside"  in  the
    UK if her  mother  left.   One  could  imagine  a  number  of  fanciful
    scenarios  but  he  quite  properly  refrained  from   relying   on   a
    construction which brought them into play.

14.  In our view the question  is  ultimately  one  of  fact.   As  we  have
    indicated, the First-tier Tribunal found as a fact that due to her  age
    Nikisha would leave with her mother if she was removed.  It seems to us
    that her age is a most material consideration.   At  the  date  of  the
    hearing before us she was 17 months old.  The evidence  disclosed,  and
    we accepted it, that her father spent  most  of  the  year  working  in
    Kazakhstan and visited from time to time.  It is plain that the primary
    bond in the family is  between  Nikisha  and  her  mother.   We  cannot
    conceive of circumstance in which Nikisha could reasonably be  able  to
    live in the UK without her mother.  We take on board what Mr Deller had
    to say about the husband's working arrangements being voluntary and  we
    agree with him that people cannot circumvent the  Rules  by  virtue  of
    their own actions and thereby deprive the United Kingdom of its ability
    to control immigration.  All that having been said, however, we are  of
    the opinion that if the appellant were to leave the country  her  child
    would inevitably have to go with  her  given  her  age,  her  state  of
    development and the bond to which we have referred.  We  do  not  think
    that the child's inability to live in the UK without her  mother  could
    in any sense be said to be voluntary.



15.  In these very special circumstances we  hold  that  the  Regulation  is
    met.  That being so  we  do  not  find  it  necessary  to  discuss  the
    permissions which were made on Article 8.  We pause to  note,  however,
    that one feature which would have weighed with  us  is  that  it  would
    appear, at least on the information before  us,  that  there  would  be
    nothing to stop the  appellant  making  an  out-of-country  application
    under the Immigration Rules, if she were  so  minded,  and  we  see  no
    reason to think it would be unsuccessful, given what we know about  the
    family's financial circumstances.  What we have said  in  that  regard,
    should be treated with caution since there may be  other  circumstances
    of which we are unaware.









                                                               LORD MATTHEWS
                                          Sitting as an Upper Tribunal Judge
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
                                                        Date:  25 March 2015


