

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA454632014




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|No hearing                               |Decision Promulgated on           |
|29 April 2016                            |23 May 2016                       |
|                                         |                                  |



                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT

                                   Between

                                MAGALIE BAMU
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent



                                  DECISION

 1. The reasons for the grant of permission in this case read as follows:-

        "1.  I accept that the application was a day late  because  of  the
             sudden, temporary but disabling illness  of  a  member  of  the
             appellant's solicitor's staff and I extend time.


        2.   The appellant is a  citizen  of  France  currently  serving  a
             sentence of life imprisonment with a minimum term of  25  years
             for her part in the sadistic murder of her brother then aged 15
             years and the serious assault of  her  sister  aged  20  and  a
             female child aged 11.  These  stark  facts  are  repulsive  but
             understate the nature of the appellant's crimes.


        3.   Nevertheless I give  permission  to  appeal  the  decision  to
             dismiss her appeal against a decision to deport her.


        4.   There is clearly arguable merit in counsel's contention that a
             person serving a prison sentence cannot  represent  a  genuine,
             present and sufficiently serious threat affecting  one  of  the
             fundamental interests of society because of something that  she
             might so when she is released and particularly when she  cannot
             be released for another 22 years.


        5.   I also give permission to appeal the decision  that,  contrary
             to the NOMS report, there is  more  than  a  low  risk  of  the
             appellant re-offending.  The grounds rightly recognise that the
             Tribunal is not bound to follow  the  NOMS  report  but  it  is
             arguable the Tribunal had no evidence to support its decision."



 2. Following a number of procedural delays the following  directions  were
    sent out on 19 April 2016:

        "1.  The Tribunal notes that despite the grant of an  extension  of
             time for a response under rule 24 (the time for such a response
             having long passed) no response has been submitted.

        2.   In the circumstances the Tribunal proposes to assume that  the
             Secretary of State has not reasoned opposition to  this  appeal
             and proposes to allow it, on the  basis  of  the  grounds  upon
             which permission was granted, without more ado.

        3.   Any submissions to the contrary must  be  made  so  as  to  be
             received within 7 days of the sending of these Directions."

 3. There has been no response.  The appeal is allowed.  I  set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal and substitute a decision  allowing
    the appeal.









                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL



                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                           Date: 12 May 2016
