
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/45284/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 December 2015                   |On 6 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             CAROL PAMELA HEMANS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Layne, Counsel, instructed by Malani Fernando


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Bart-Stewart (Judge Bart-Stewart) promulgated
    on 4 June 2015,  in  which  she  allowed  the  appeal  of  Miss  Hemans
    (hereafter the claimant). The appeal was allowed on Article  8  grounds
    outside of the Rules only. The  claimant's  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal arose from the decision of the  Secretary  of  State  dated  6
    November 2014, giving directions for her removal by way of  Section  10
    of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

 2. Judge Bart-Stewart set out the claimant's immigration history  in  this
    country and thereafter the evidence given by her son,  Mr  Powell,  her
    daughter, Miss Dixon, and her niece Miss Heymans. Having done that  the
    judge went on to consider the Article 8 claim  within  the  Rules.  She
    concluded that the claimant  could  not  satisfy  the  requirements  of
    Appendix FM. In respect of paragraph 276ADE  of  the  Rules  the  judge
    found that in relation to subparagraph (vi)  of  that  provision  there
    were no "very significant obstacles" to the claimant reintegrating into
    life in Jamaica. Therefore the claimant failed to  meet  the  Rules  in
    this regard as well.

 3. Judge Bart-Stewart then went on to consider the Article 8 claim outside
    of the Rules.  She directed herself to the well-known case  of  Razgar,
    and then made reference to the  mandatory  considerations  set  out  in
    Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002,  as
    amended.

 4. The judge took into account the  fact  that  the  Secretary  of  State,
    despite having made adverse decisions in respect of the  claimant  over
    the course of time, had failed to in fact  remove  her.  The  inaction,
    which was described by the judge as being "extreme", was obviously  the
    significant factor in her ultimate conclusion that removal now would be
    unjustifiably harsh and therefore disproportionate. In  light  of  that
    conclusion, as I have mentioned already, the appeal was  allowed  under
    Article 8 outside of the Rules.

 5. The Secretary of State sought permission  to  appeal  on  two  grounds:
    first, that the judge had failed to take account of the fact  that  the
    claimant had failed to meet the  Rules;  second,  that  the  judge  had
    failed to consider the issue of delay properly, and  in  particular  in
    light of the decision of the Supreme Court in  Patel  [2013]  UKSC  72.
    Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Colyer on 20 August
    2015.

The Hearing Before Me

 6. Representing the Secretary of State, Mr Bramble relied on the  grounds.
    For the claimant, Mr Layne asked me to look in particular at  paragraph
    26 of the judge's decision in which the public  interest  had  in  fact
    been referred to. He did, very fairly in my view, accept that there was
    no express consideration of the failure of the  claimant  to  meet  the
    Rules. At this stage I indicated to Mr Layne that there was in my  view
    a  clear  error  of  law  by  Judge  Bart-Stewart  in  respect  of  her
    consideration of the Article 8 claim outside of the Rules.

 7. On the current state of the law it is clear that  where  an  individual
    cannot meet the Rules  insofar  as  they  relate  to  Article  8,  this
    constitutes more than simply a  starting  point  for  consideration  of
    Article 8 outside of  the  Rules:  it  is  a  very  significant  factor
    weighing against the individual. This much is clear from  the  decision
    of the Court of Appeal in Haleemudeen [2014] EWCA Civ 558 at  paragraph
    47, observations that were subsequently approved by the Court of Appeal
    in SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA  Civ  387.   Having  considered  Judge  Bart-
    Stewart's decision with care, nowhere therein does she  refer  to  this
    very important  factor.  In  addition,  there  is  nothing  by  way  of
    substance to  indicate  that  she  took  this  matter  adequately  into
    account, or indeed at all, when considering Article 8  outside  of  the
    Rules.

 8. The error of law was in my view clearly material to the outcome of  the
    appeal and the contrary position has not been asserted by Mr Layne.

 9. In respect of the second ground of appeal, there is  strictly  speaking
    no need for me to deal with it at this stage because I  have  found  an
    error in respect of the first ground, and that renders the whole of the
    judge's conclusion on Article 8 unsound. For the sake of  completeness,
    I do however find that Judge Bart-Stewart erred in her approach to  the
    delay issue. The Secretary of State's inaction was a  relevant  factor.
    Yet so was her legitimate position that those with no right  to  remain
    in the United Kingdom and are told to leave should in fact do so.  This
    is the point made by the Supreme Court in Patel and  in  several  other
    decisions from the Court  of  Appeal.  The  judge  did  not  take  this
    countervailing factor into account.

10. In light of the foregoing, I set aside  the  decision  of  Judge  Bart-
    Stewart.

Disposal

11. Both representatives were agreed that I could remake  the  decision  in
    this appeal based upon the evidence before me,  and  in  light  of  the
    findings of fact made by Judge Bart-Stewart, none of which having  been
    challenged by the claimant.

12. By way of submissions in terms  of  the  remake  decision,  Mr  Bramble
    accepted that the claimant would have private  life  and  asked  me  to
    consider whether or not there was also family life in light of the well-
    known  decision  of  Kugathas  [2003]  EWCA  Civ  31,  given  that  the
    claimant's children in this country have been adults  at  all  material
    times.

13. It was accepted that removal would constitute an interference with  the
    private life.

14. In respect of proportionality, he emphasised the fact that the claimant
    had not met the Rules, that I must consider all of the relevant factors
    under Section 117B of the 2002 Act, and that the claimant had  been  an
    overstayer since 1999.  In respect of the delay issue, it was  accepted
    that there had been a failure to remove the claimant over the course of
    time but reference was made to Patel and of the Upper Tribunal in R (on
    the application of) Xu (IJR) [2014] UKUT  375.  In  short,  Mr  Bramble
    submitted, the claimant herself should have  left  the  United  Kingdom
    when required to.

15. In respect of the decision of the House of Lords in EB (Kosovo)  [2008]
    UKHL 41, it was difficult in this case to see  what  the  claimant  had
    missed out on in terms of the Secretary of State's  failure  to  remove
    her earlier.

16. Mr Layne submitted that this case was really all about  proportionality
    and delay or perhaps more accurately,  inaction  by  the  Secretary  of
    State. The claimant had not been removed  when  she  could  have  been.
    Removal directions were in fact set in 2012 but were cancelled  for  no
    discernible reason. The claimant was allowed to remain in this  country
    and the delay or the inaction of the Secretary of State  was  described
    as being inordinate.

17. The reasoning in EB (Kosovo) was said to apply to the present appeal. I
    was referred to paragraph 15 of the judgment. There had been many years
    of inaction in this appeal and this was a  factor  that  needed  to  be
    accounted for in the proportionality exercise.

18. In addition there was a close family unit in  the  United  Kingdom  and
    this too was relevant.

Decision on the Remaking of the Article 8 claim

19.  In  re-making  the  decision  in  this  case  I  have  considered  the
    Appellant's bundle, paginated 1-51, together with the findings of  fact
    made by Judge Bart-Stewart.

20. I accept that the claimant has established  a  private  life  over  the
    course of her time in the  United  Kingdom.   This  is  perhaps  hardly
    surprising given that she has been here for many years and  has  family
    in this country. The family relationships with her two  adult  children
    and her grandson form important aspects of that private life.

21. In respect of family life, whilst this is not perhaps of  the  greatest
    importance, I do not accept that the threshold in Kugathas has been met
    in respect of the claimant's relationships with her two adult children,
    there being no sufficient evidence before me as to  ties  going  beyond
    normal emotional ties between a parent and their adult children.

22. In terms of interference, there would clearly be a sufficiently serious
    interference with private life if the claimant's  removal  were  to  be
    affected by the Secretary of State.

23. The core issue in  this  appeal  is,  as  has  been  expressed  by  the
    representatives,   that   of   proportionality.   In   conducting   the
    proportionality exercise I take the following matters into account.

24. First and foremost, and in light of Section 117B(1) of  the  2002  Act,
    there is the public interest. That is a very significant factor in  the
    Secretary of State's favour and against the Appellant. In this case the
    Appellant came as a visitor with very limited leave  and  has  been  an
    overstayer since late 1999.  She has made a number of  applications  to
    the Secretary of State over the course  of  time  but  has  never  been
    granted leave after the initial  short  period.  Therefore  the  public
    interest  in  maintaining  effective  immigration  control  remains   a
    powerful factor in this particular case.

25. Second, there  is  the  fact  that  the  claimant  fails  to  meet  the
    provisions of the Rules as  they  relate  to  Article  8.  Judge  Bart-
    Stewart's conclusion on this has not been challenged at any stage,  and
    in any event I would have concluded that on the evidence before me  the
    claimant could not succeed. This factor  is  also  a  very  significant
    matter weighing in the Secretary of  State's  favour  and  against  the
    claimant. The decisions of  Haleemudeen  and  SS  (Congo)  referred  to
    previously make it very clear that a  failure  to  meet  the  Rules  is
    something significantly greater  than  simply  a  starting  point  when
    looking at Article 8 claims outside of the Rules.

26. Third, the claimant's private life in this country has been established
    at all times whilst her status here  has  been  either  precarious  (in
    respect of the initial period of  leave)  or  unlawful  (at  all  times
    thereafter), and therefore I attribute little weight  to  that  private
    life in light of Section 117B(4) of the 2002 Act.

27. Fourth, it is right that the Secretary  of  State  could  and  probably
    should have acted earlier in actually removing the  claimant  from  the
    United Kingdom. There is no indication that the  claimant  hid  herself
    away from the authorities at any time. It is  true  that  the  claimant
    became 'appeal rights exhausted' back in October 2004, and that removal
    directions were set and then cancelled in 2012.  In  addition,  it  did
    take the Secretary of State some two years to decide  the  final  human
    rights  application.  To  this  extent,  the   Secretary   of   State's
    inaction/delay is a factor in the claimant's favour.

28. However, this factor is in reality of only limited  assistance  to  the
    claimant. The indisputable fact is that she has had no right to  be  in
    this country since 1999. She has known this to  be  so  at  all  times.
    There has been no attempt by her whatsoever to leave this country. This
    inaction on her part is a very forceful counter-weight to the Secretary
    of State's conduct  in  this  case.  It  is  clear  from  the  case-law
    (including Patel) that people without status are legitimately  expected
    to leave of their  own  accord.  In  addition,  an  effect  of  primary
    legislation (in the form of Section 117B(4)) is to reduce  the  ability
    of a person unlawfully in the United Kingdom to rely on inaction by the
    Secretary of State in enforcing removal. In respect of EB (Kosovo), the
    only delay in actually making a decision upon an application  was  that
    between 2012 and 2014: this is not an extreme  or  even  an  inordinate
    period. In terms of the inaction on removal, EB (Kosovo)  does  not  in
    fact expressly consider this particular  scenario.  However,  there  is
    certainly no  suggestion  in  the  judgment  that  the  refusal  of  an
    individual to leave once all avenues have been exhausted  could  amount
    to  a  basis  for  success  under  Article  8  on  that  ground  alone.
    Furthermore, this decision, like all others, must be read in  light  of
    Part 5A of the 2002 Act.

29. It is clear to me that the Secretary of State's inaction/delay in  this
    case comes nowhere near to constituting a compelling circumstance. Nor,
    with respect, does the relationship the claimant has with her  children
    and grandchild. There are no health issues here, and by virtue  of  her
    inability to satisfy the Rules, she  will  not  face  very  significant
    obstacles in reintegrating into Jamaican society.

30. The  removal  of  the  claimant  would  be  proportionate.  The  appeal
    therefore fails both within the Rules and without them.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I re-make the decision by dismissing the appeal under the Immigration  Rules
and on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 30 December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date: 30 December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
