
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/45072/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 11th August 2015                  |On 2nd September 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between
                              MR SHAHID KHALIL
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim, Counsel instructed by MA Consultants
(London)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan  born  on  1st  May  1975.  He
       arrived in the UK in 2004 with  a  work  permit.  His  permission  to
       remain was extended until November 2005, since when he overstayed his
       leave to remain. In 2011 the appellant married a British citizen, Mrs
       Christine  Watson.  On  9th  February  2012  the  appellant  made  an
       application to remain in the UK as a spouse. There was then confusion
       over the submission of a signed declaration page, which  resulted  in
       the appellant making a fresh application which was  rejected  in  the
       refusal letter dated 13th June 2013. His appeal against the  decision
       to refuse leave as a spouse  was  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Scott on Article 8 ECHR grounds and on the basis that there was
       no jurisdiction to hear an appeal under the Immigration Rules after a
       hearing on 26th March 2015.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
       Kelly on the basis that it was arguable that the First-tier judge had
       erred in law in failing to properly consider whether Chikwamba v SSHD
       [2008] UKHL 40 was applicable to the appellant's case in the  context
       of s.117B  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
       (henceforth the 2002 Act). It was said in  the  grant  of  permission
       that any error  with  respect  to  the  finding  that  there  was  no
       jurisdiction to determine the appeal under the Immigration Rules  was
       immaterial as the appeal had ultimately been dismissed under  Article
       8 ECHR.

    3. The matter  came  before  us  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law

Submissions

    4. Mr Karim submitted that the requirements of  Ferrer  (limited  appeal
       grounds;  Alvi)  [2012]  UKUT  00304  to  make  a  limited  grant  of
       permission to appeal excluding some grounds had not been met, and  Mr
       Kandola agreed that this  was  the  case.  In  the  circumstances  we
       therefore agreed that all grounds could be argued.

    5. In summary, Mr Karim argued firstly that the First-tier Tribunal  had
       erred in law by failing to acknowledge that it  had  jurisdiction  to
       allow the appeal under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules, and that
       this error of law was material because there was oral  evidence  from
       Mrs Watson that there were insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  couple
       having family life in Pakistan. The evidence was set out at paragraph
       8 of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and indicated  that  she
       would not feel safe in Pakistan; and that she would not  be  able  to
       work or lead an independent life in that country. Mr Kandola  replied
       by saying that there was no objective evidence that this was the case
       and that any error was therefore immaterial as the appeal  could  not
       have succeeded on this basis.

    6. Secondly Mr Karim argued that in consideration of the Article 8  ECHR
       appeal outside of the Immigration Rules the First-tier  Tribunal  had
       erred in law at paragraph 25 of the decision, as they had  not  given
       proper consideration to Chikwamba. This was  because  the  judge  had
       erroneously understood that this decision  was  not  compatible  with
       s.117B(4) of the 2002 Act. He argued that this appellant  could  show
       that if he returned to Pakistan he would be very likely to succeed in
       an entry clearance application based on  his  marriage.  He  accepted
       that there were problems with the documentation before the First-tier
       Tribunal in two respects when measured against the  requirements  for
       an entry clearance application: there was no letter from Mrs Watson's
       employer and the IELTS certificate from the appellant was out of date
       as it had expired in January 2013. He argued  that  any  issue  of  a
       potential  discretionary  refusal  under  paragraph  320(11)  of  the
       Immigration Rules strengthened the  applicability  of  Chikwamba.  He
       also argued that there was evidence before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       that it would cause difficulties to the appellant to  make  an  entry
       clearance application: at paragraph 6 of the decision  it  was  clear
       the appellant no longer had family in Pakistan  with  whom  he  could
       stay and from paragraph 8  of  the  decision  it  was  clear  that  a
       prolonged  period  of  separation  would  put  the  relationship   in
       difficulties.  Mr  Karim  argued  that  Chikwamba  had   not   become
       irrelevant to the consideration of proportionality  under  Article  8
       ECHR simply because little weight had to be given to family life with
       a qualifying partner if the relationship was formed at  a  time  when
       that partner was unlawfully in the UK. If Chikwamba had relevance, as
       it was argued it did here, then an appeal could be allowed as  s.117B
       of the 2002 Act did not provide that no weight could be given to  the
       family life with a qualifying partner who is unlawfully in the UK.

    7. In reply Mr Kandola said that this  was  not  a  case  in  which  the
       Chikwamba principle applied as it was accepted by Mr Karim  that  the
       appellant had not shown at the date of hearing that he could meet the
       requirements of Appendix FM-SE in respect of  his  wife's  employment
       (the letters from her employers) and  his  own  standard  of  English
       language.  Further, even if the appellant had been able to show  that
       he met all the relevant requirements of Appendix FM and Appendix  FM-
       SE, there was no error in law in what was said at paragraph 25 of the
       decision. He  submitted  that  not  all  applicants  who  had  formed
       relationships with qualifying partners  at  a  time  when  they  were
       unlawful would be required to return and apply for  entry  clearance:
       there would be some who be able to meet the requirement  of  EX1  and
       could show insurmountable obstacles to family life in  their  country
       of origin.  He did not exclude the  possibility  that  the  Chikwamba
       principles might potentially permit an appeal to be allowed where  an
       appellant had not succeeded under EX1 and had formed his family  life
       relationship whilst unlawfully present (and thus had to  show  regard
       to s.117B(4) of the 2002 Act), but he could not think  of  a  factual
       scenario which would succeed in that way. He  argued  that  Chikwamba
       allowed for the fact that appellants could be expected to  return  to
       apply  for  entry  clearance  if  their  immigration   history   were
       particularly poor, and this was now reflected  in  s.117B(4)  of  the
       2002 Act.

    8. Both parties agreed that if an error of law  was  found,  and  if  we
       found it was material, that they were happy for  us  to  re-make  the
       appeal based on their submissions as summarised above.

Discussion

    9. It is clear that there was jurisdiction for the  First-tier  Tribunal
       to hear this appeal as it is an appeal against  a  removal  decision,
       and thus against an immigration decision as defined under s.82 (1)(g)
       of the 2002 Act. It was therefore an error of law not to consider all
       the grounds of appeal put forward by the appellant in accordance with
       s.86 of the 2002 Act. However we do not find that the Tribunal made a
       material error in refusing to make findings and determine the  appeal
       under the EX1 (ten year route) of  Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration
       Rules as we find that this ground of appeal was bound to fail. We  do
       not accept Mr Kandola's  argument  that  an  appellant  must  provide
       "objective" evidence  that  there  are  insurmountable  obstacles  to
       family life with the  partner  continuing  outside  of  the  UK,  but
       clearly an appellant must show that this is the case on  the  balance
       of probabilities. The small amount of oral evidence from  Mrs  Watson
       set out at paragraph 8 of the decision is simply insufficient to show
       this test is met as it does not demonstrate that there would be  very
       serious hardship for the appellant or Mrs  Watson  if  they  were  to
       continue their family life outside of the UK.  A  far  more  detailed
       statement, preferably supported  with  objective  materials  and/  or
       statements from Mrs Watson's wider family, would have been needed  to
       create an arguable case that they could meet this demanding test, and
       thus that there was a material error of law on this basis.

   10. Chikwamba was decided on the basis that it was inevitable in  Article
       8 ECHR terms that the appellant would be granted entry  clearance  to
       return to the UK to her British citizen daughter, and her husband who
       held indefinite leave to remain and refugee status in the UK. It  was
       noted that there were insurmountable obstacles to family life  taking
       place in Zimbabwe due to her husband's refugee status.  It  was  held
       enforcing return to the country of origin to obtain  entry  clearance
       was largely a policy aimed at deterring people from coming to the  UK
       without entry clearance,  which  might  on  occasion  be  a  relevant
       consideration, but would have to be balanced  against  whether  there
       were good reasons for  the  illegal  presence,  and  the  prospective
       length and degree  of  family  disruption.   It  was  noted  that  in
       Zimbabwe conditions were harsh and unpalatable. It was  of  course  a
       decision made by the House of Lords at a time  when  the  Immigration
       Rules did not attempt to encompass Article 8 ECHR at  all,  and  when
       the ordinary marriage Rules were  encapsulated  in  a  short  set  of
       straightforward requirements with no specific  evidence  required  to
       demonstrate compliance with those requirements. At the time judgement
       was given in Chikwamba it was  therefore  potentially  easier  for  a
       court to foresee whether  an  appellant  would  be  returning  for  a
       straightforward administrative  exercise  in  which  entry  clearance
       would inevitably be granted; and in addition there was no EX  1  (ten
       year route) under the Immigration Rules for those unlawfully  present
       to potentially utilise if they could show insurmountable obstacles to
       family life continuing outside of the UK.

   11. The "insurmountable obstacles" provision  in  EX1  provides  a  route
       whereby some appellants whose relationship are formed at a time  when
       they are illegally present in the UK do not need to return to  obtain
       entry clearance, and can thus  (in  accordance  with  Chikwamba   and
       their Article 8 ECHR rights) be allowed to remain in the UK. It could
       be said that this test deals with the issue of concern  in  Chikwamba
       exempting a spouse who can show harsh, unpalatable conditions in  the
       country of origin and where there would be a  significant  degree  of
       family disruption from being required to return.

   12. The case of Agyarko v SSHD [2015] EWCA  Civ  440  is  in  point  when
       considering the relevance of Chikwamba in the  current  context.  The
       Court of Appeal held, at paragraphs 29 to 31, that it would not  only
       be in cases where insurmountable obstacles can be shown that it would
       be  disproportionate  to  remove  the  appellant,  and   that   where
       exceptional  circumstances  are  shown  Chikwamba  may  still  be  of
       relevance in a  case  with  an  illegally  present  spouse.  Such  an
       instance  of  "exceptional   circumstances"   might   be   cumulative
       circumstances equivalent  to  those  that  prevailed  in  Jeunesse  v
       Netherlands (2015) 60 EHRR 17,  i.e.  children  and  partner  holding
       British nationality; the appellant  being  the  children's  principle
       carer; a degree of hardship to  the  children;  strong  ties  of  the
       illegally present partner with the UK; and the authorities tolerating
       the unlawful person living with their family for a period  of  15  or
       more years. However, to succeed in  such  an  argument  it  would  be
       necessary to show, as a starting point, that all the entry  clearance
       requirements of Appendix FM and Appendix  FM-SE  would  be  met,  see
       paragraph 35 of Agyarko.

   13. We consider the proper approach to the  Chikwamba  principle  in  the
       light of what is  said  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Agyarko;  the
       Immigration Rules; and the direction at s.117B(4) of the 2002 Act  in
       relation to an unlawfully present appellant to be as follows.

   14. To the extent that return to obtain entry clearance was  to  a  place
       where there would be insurmountable obstacles to family life  outside
       of the UK the Immigration Rules at EX 1 allows that those  appellants
       would not have to return to obtain entry clearance.

   15.  The  fact  that  little  weight  is  to  be  given   to   qualifying
       relationships  established  whilst  the  appellant  is  unlawful   in
       accordance with s.117B(4) of the 2002  Act  does  not  mean  that  no
       weight is to be given to them, or that an appellant might not succeed
       on appeal. There will be some circumstances, analogous to those which
       prevailed in Jeunesse v Netherlands, where return would be ultimately
       disproportionate if it was inevitable that entry clearance  would  be
       issued for the appellant's return as a partner because the  appellant
       had shown an ability to comply with all relevant elements of Appendix
       FM and Appendix FM-SE to obtain entry clearance as a partner  at  the
       time of hearing. There  may  also  be  circumstances  which  mean  an
       appellant succeeds because  of  other  substantial  private  life  or
       family ties with persons other than  a  qualifying  partner.   It  is
       however for the appellant to produce evidence that return  to  obtain
       entry clearance would be a disproportionate interference with his  or
       her family life: see conclusion (i) R (on the application of Chen)  v
       SSHD (Appendix FM-Chikwamba -temporary separation -  proportionality)
       IJR [2015] UKUT 00189 and at  paragraph  42  regarding  the  need  to
       descend into practical detail  with  regards  the  interference  with
       family  life  rather  than  rely  upon  legal  principles,  which  is
       consistent with what was said in Agyarko on this point.

   16. What is clearly also important to note is that s.117B(4) of the  2002
       Act only refers to cases where the relationship was formed whilst the
       appellant was unlawfully present in the UK. It does not deal  with  a
       scenario where the appellant forms  a  relationship  whilst  lawfully
       present in the UK, and then applies under Appendix FM; is  unable  to
       meet the requirements at that point but by the point of  hearing  can
       show demonstrably that he or  she  would  be  able  to  obtain  entry
       clearance as a partner if forced to  return  to  an  entry  clearance
       post.  Such  a  case  could  more  easily  succeed  under   Chikwamba
       principles even if there are no insurmountable  obstacles  to  family
       life outside of the UK.

Conclusions

   17. The appellant in this case has not shown a material error in law.  In
       the context of the material before the First-tier  Tribunal,  as  set
       out above, there was no material error of  law  in  relation  to  the
       appeal under the Immigration Rules  because  there  was  insufficient
       evidence of insurmountable obstacles to family life taking  place  in
       Pakistan. In relation to the Article 8 ECHR  appeal  outside  of  the
       Immigration Rules there is also no material error. Most  simply  this
       is for the reason that the appellant could not show at  the  date  of
       hearing before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  an  entry  clearance
       application would inevitably succeed: it was  accepted  by  Mr  Karim
       that all the necessary evidence under Appendix  FM-SE  had  not  been
       before the First-tier Tribunal.  In  addition  the  appellant,  as  a
       person who formed his relationship with his partner  when  unlawfully
       present, has not produced evidence of any  exceptional  circumstances
       (such as those in Jeunesse v  Netherlands)  when  arguing  return  to
       Pakistan to obtain entry  clearance  is  disproportionate,  which  he
       needed to do to show an error of law given the regard  that  must  be
       had by courts and tribunals under s.117B (4) of the 2002 Act  to  the
       consideration that little weight be given to  his  relationship  with
       his partner.

  Decision:

    1. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve
       the making of a material error on a point of law.

    2. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  the  appeal  is
       upheld.


[pic]

Signed:     Date: 24th August 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

