

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

Immigration and Asylum Chamber                   Appeal Number:
IA/46625/2013

IA/46626/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                        |Promulgated:              |
|On 17 October 2014                          |On 23 October 2014        |
|                                            |                          |

                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?


                                   Between

                             Thanjua Nimali Mary
                  Dinesh Asela Kumara Gajaman Hewa Malawige
                                  Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                           Respondent

                          Determination and Reasons

Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr H Kannangara, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Details of appellant and basis of claim

   1.       This appeal comes before me following the grant of permission on
      24 July  2014  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Reeds  in  respect  of  the
      determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Paul  who  dismissed  the
      appeal following a hearing at Taylor House by way of  a  determination
      promulgated on 29 April 2014.

   2.       The appellant (with her husband as a dependant) is a Sri  Lankan
      national. She was born on 23 December 1982 and he on 1 May  1982.  She
      challenges the decision of the respondent on 16 January 2013 to refuse
      to grant leave to remain as a Tier 1 entrepreneur. Her team member was
      also refused leave and currently has an appeal pending.

   3.       The application was refused because it was considered  that  she
      (and her team member who relied on the same documents)  had  submitted
      false bank documents in respect of a third party sponsor. Further, the
      confirmation  letter  regarding  the  third   party's   identity   was
      unacceptable as it did  not  include  details  of  the  third  party's
      identity document such as were required by the  rules;  the  date  and
      place of issue of the document and the expiry date.

   4.       Permission to appeal was  granted  on  the  basis  that  it  was
      arguable that the judge had not properly considered the paragraph  322
      (1A) issue.

Appeal hearing before the Upper Tribunal

   5.       The appeal came before me on 17 October 2014. The appellant  was
      represented but not herself present.  On  her  behalf,  Mr  Kannangara
      submitted that the respondent had failed to discharge  the  burden  on
      her to show that the appellant had produced false documents  and  that
      the  judge  had  erred  in  finding  that  the  322(1A)  refusals  was
      justified.  He  argued  that  the  email  correspondence  between  the
      respondent and the  bank  was  unclear  as  to  whether  one  or  more
      documents were sent for verification. In any event, the email referred
      only to the appellant's team member and not to her and the  respondent
      had only questioned the bona fides of  one  of  the  two  third  party
      sponsors.

   6.       He further pointed out that Sri Lankan ID cards did not  provide
      a place of issue and date of expiry and so that information could  not
      have been provided by the lawyer who  verified  the  identity  of  the
      third party. He also argued that the respondent should have sought the
      further information by way of the evidential flexibility rule.

   7.       Mr Walker responded. He argued  that  the  verification  enquiry
      referred to bank letters in the plural as did  the  response  received
      from the bank. That showed that both letters  were  forwarded  to  the
      bank for verification. He submitted there was no error by  the  judge.
      The  appellant  produced  false  documents  and  the  other  documents
      supplied did not meet  the  requirements  of  the  rules.  He  further
      submitted that the additional bank letters provided by the appellant's
      team member had been forwarded to the bank for verification and  they,
      too, were found to be false. The principle of  evidential  flexibility
      did not apply given the two reasons for refusal.

   8.       Mr Kannangara replied. He argued that  the  verification  report
      could have been better prepared. No issue  had  been  taken  with  the
      other third party sponsor. The appellant had obtained letters from the
      bank in March to confirm that the initial letters issued were genuine.
      The appellant's team member's appeal was awaiting hearing  before  the
      First-tier Tribunal. This appeal should be remitted back to the First-
      tier so that both could be linked and heard together. Mr Walker had no
      views on disposal but submitted that if an error were found, the March
      bank letters would have to be verified by the Secretary of State prior
      to any resumed hearing.

   9.       At the conclusion of the hearing  I  reserved  my  determination
      which I now give.

Findings and conclusions

  10.       I have considered with care the submissions made by the  parties
      and the evidence to which I was referred.

  11.       In support of her application the appellant and her team  member
      relied on two letters from the Bank of Ceylon, Personal Branch,  dated
      7 December 2012 (Annex C; respondent's bundle). These relate to Mr S M
      R Alexander and Mrs A S  Nanayakkara  who  are  the  two  third  party
      sponsors. The letters are headed: "In regards to  the  application  of
      Mrs Thanuja  Nimali  Mary  and  Mrs  Krishanthi  Promodva  Nanayakkara
      Balaharuwa Koralalage for entrepreneur states (sic) in the UK".

  12.       As the main thrust of the appellant's complaints centres  around
      the email correspondence between the Secretary of State and  the  Bank
      of Ceylon, it is useful to set out the details of that  correspondence
      in full.

  13.       On 19 July 2013 the Tier 1 Verifications Team emailed  the  bank
      at boc681@boc.lk, the email address provided at  the  bottom  of  both
      letters with a copy to boc@boc.lk. The message stated:
      "Good morning
      I am contacting you on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State  from  the
      British Home Office with  regards  to  the  visa  application  of  Mrs
      Krishanthi Promodya Nanakkara Balaharuwa Koralalage.
      Please find verification request attached for financial  documents.  I
      would be  grateful  if  you  could  provide  a  response  as  soon  as
      possible".
      Details of the sender are provided. The message shows a PDF attachment
      named "BOC" (Annex D).


  14.       An email response was received from boc681@boc.lk. This stated:
      "Dear sir/madam,
      This has reference to your email regarding  visa  application  of  Mrs
      Krishanthi Promodya Nanakkara Balaharuwa Koralalage.
      Please be informed that we have not issued  the  balance  confirmation
      letters you have forwarded for verification.
      Kind regards
      Manager Customer Services
      Personal Branch".


  15.       A refusal letter in respect of Mrs Koralalage was  submitted  by
      Mr Walker. This confirmed that on 11  September  2014  the  respondent
      refused her application on the basis that she had  submitted  a  false
      bank letter in respect of Mr S M R Alexander. Additional letters  from
      the bank dated 18 and 19 June 2014 were also verified but  were  found
      to be false. The application was  also  refused  because  insufficient
      details of the third party's identity  documents  had  been  provided.
      These reasons are therefore the same as those relating to the  present
      appellant with the exception that in Mrs Koralalage's  refusal,  there
      were two additional false documents.

  16.       It is the appellant's case that  the  verification  process  was
      unclear and left much to be desired. With respect, I see no  merit  in
      Mr Kanangara's criticism that the email from the Verification Team  to
      the bank only referred to Mrs Koralalage. Both she and  the  appellant
      relied on the same bank documents and the fact that the email  to  the
      bank only mentioned her as opposed to both of them is neither here nor
      there. What is relevant is that the information received in respect of
      the documents was pertinent to both applications.

  17.       There was also criticism of the lack of clarity in  the  request
      for verification. Mr Kannangara pointed to one attachment.  I  see  no
      merit in this argument  either.  One  attachment  does  not  mean  one
      scanned document. It can incorporate any number of documents.

  18.       The respondent has provided copies  of  both  the  bank  letters
      along with email correspondence. No other bank letters were  available
      from the appellant or her team member at the time and so it has to  be
      the  case  that  these  were  the  letters  sent  to  the   bank   for
      verification. There being no other financial documents  on  file  from
      the bank, these must  be  the  documents  referred  to  in  the  email
      correspondence. The email correspondence from the respondent and  from
      the bank both refer to documents in the plural but even if I  were  to
      accept  Mr  Kannangara's  submission  that  perhaps  only  a  document
      relating to Mr Alexander was sent  for  verification,  that  does  not
      assist the appellant because it was found not to have been  issued  by
      the bank.

  19.       Mr Kannangara argued that the bank had not explained  the  steps
      taken to verify the document(s). I do not see that it is  obliged  to.
      For reasons of security it may not  wish  to  reveal  flaws  in  false
      letters. What is important is that it confirmed that it had  not  been
      issued the letters forwarded.

  20.       Mr Kannangara also argued that the respondent  only  took  issue
      with the authenticity of the documents  of  one  of  the  sponsors.  I
      cannot speculate on the reasons for that but it does  not  matter.  Mr
      Alexander's document was found to be  a  forgery  and  the  judge  was
      perfectly entitled to consider that the correspondence adduced by  the
      respondent demonstrated that the burden on her had been discharged.

  21.       Mr Kannangara also took issue with  the  second  basis  for  the
      refusal; that Sri Lankan identity cards do not provide the details the
      Secretary of State wanted and so the lawyer who verified the sponsor's
      signature could not have supplied information  such  as  the  date  of
      issue and expiry of the document. I can see no merit in this  argument
      either. The rules set out the information that must  be  provided.  If
      the sponsor's identity card did not provide the  required  information
      then other evidence should have been  adduced  which  did  supply  the
      information. I do not see that the evidential  flexibility  principles
      apply here because there was no missing document as  such;  incomplete
      evidence or the wrong type of evidence had been provided. In any event
      even if this information had been requested  and  been  provided,  the
      application was doomed to  fail  because  of  the  reliance  on  false
      documents.

  22.       For these reasons I find that the judge did not make  any  error
      of law such that requires his determination to  be  set  aside  either
      under paragraph 322(1A) or the rules relating to Tier 1.

Decision

  23.       The First-tier Tribunal did not make any error of  law  and  the
      decision to dismiss the appeal is upheld.

Anonymity

  24.       The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity order  and  no
      request for one was made to me.

      Signed:


      Dr R Keki?
      Judge of the Upper Tribunal
      21 October 2014
