
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46828/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                   |                  Decision & Reasons  |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 9 September 2015                   |                  On 22 September 2015|
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                             SYED ZULQURNAIN ALI
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr G Brown of Counsel instructed by One Source
Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against a decision of Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal O R Williams (the  judge)  promulgated  on  6th  February
    2015.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and I will refer to him as the Claimant.

 3. The Claimant is a male citizen of Pakistan born 31st October  1988  who
    applied for leave to remain in the United Kingdom as the  spouse  of  a
    British citizen.

 4. The application was refused on 28th October  2014.   The  Secretary  of
    State contended that the Claimant had sought leave to remain in the  UK
    by deception.  The Claimant  had  submitted  with  his  application  an
    English language test that he had taken and passed on 18th April  2012,
    but following  information  provided  by  Educational  Testing  Service
    (ETS), that an anomaly with the speaking test indicated the presence of
    a proxy test taker, the test results had been cancelled.

 5. The Secretary of State refused the application  with  reference  to  S-
    LTR.2.2 of Appendix FM which is set out below;


         S-LTR.2.2     Whether or not to the applicant's knowledge -
         (a)  false information,  representations  or  documents  have  been
             submitted in relation  to  the  application  (including  false
             information submitted to any person to obtain a document  used
             in support of the application);

 6.  In  addition  the  Secretary  of  State  found  that  the   Claimant's
    relationship with his partner had not been genuine and  subsisting  for
    at least two years.  It was not accepted that there were insurmountable
    obstacles that would prevent the Claimant from  returning  to  Pakistan
    with his partner.

 7. The Claimant's appeal was heard by the judge on 29th January 2015.  The
    judge found that the  Secretary  of  State  had  not  proved  that  the
    Claimant  had  acted  dishonestly  in  taking  and  passing   his   ETS
    examination.  The  judge  found  that  the  Claimant  had  married  his
    partner, a British citizen, on 18th February 2014,  and  therefore  did
    not rely on being in a relationship akin to marriage for at  least  two
    years.  The judge found that they were in a genuine relationship.

 8. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  There was no challenge to finding that the Claimant and  his
    wife were in  a  genuine  relationship,  but  the  Secretary  of  State
    challenged the finding by the judge that insufficient evidence had been
    provided to prove that the Claimant had acted dishonestly in taking and
    passing his English language test.

 9. It was contended that the judge had  provided  inadequate  reasons  for
    concluding that the Claimant had not acted dishonestly.

10. It was submitted that the two statements submitted by the Secretary  of
    State together with a document headed 'Annex A' proved that a proxy had
    taken the English language test for the  Claimant.   It  was  contended
    that the witness statements when read in conjunction with one  another,
    detailed extensively the investigation undertaken by ETS in relation to
    the Claimant's case, along with  thousands  of  other  applicants,  and
    'Annex A' proved the test he had taken was invalid.

11. It was submitted that the judge had  provided  inadequate  reasons  for
    rejecting the Secretary of State's evidence, and it was submitted  that
    the findings were flawed and could not stand.

12. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Parkes on 13th April 2005, who found it arguable that the judge had not
    properly considered the evidence presented.

13. Directions were issued making provision  for  there  to  be  a  hearing
    before the Upper Tribunal to decide  whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision contained an error of law such that it should be set aside.

Submissions

14. Mr McVeety relied upon the grounds contained within the application for
    permission to appeal and submitted that the judge had not engaged  with
    the evidence.  It was submitted that the appropriate test  was  whether
    the  Secretary  of  State  had  proved  the  case  on  a   balance   of
    probabilities, and it was not appropriate for the judge not to properly
    consider the evidence that had been supplied, but to list the  evidence
    that he would have expected to receive as he had done in paragraphs 11-
    15.  In  addition,  the  judge  had  not  recorded  what  evidence  was
    contained in 'Annex A', and this evidence confirmed that the Claimant's
    test was invalid.

15. Mr Brown submitted that the First-tier Tribunal had not  erred  in  law
    and had correctly identified the burden and  standard  of  proof.   The
    judge had been entitled to find that the Respondent had not  discharged
    the burden of proof.  The judge had balanced the evidence that had been
    placed before him and was entitled to find that it had not been  proved
    that the Claimant acted dishonestly.  Mr Brown submitted that the judge
    had not ignored the evidence submitted by the Secretary of  State,  but
    had balanced that evidence against the Claimant's evidence, and reached
    findings that were open to him.

16. At the conclusion of submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

17. The Secretary of State does not dispute that  she  has  the  burden  of
    proving that a proxy took the English test on behalf of  the  Claimant,
    and therefore the Claimant has acted dishonestly and sought  to  obtain
    leave  by  deception  and  therefore  it  was  correct  to  refuse  the
    application with reference to S-LTR.2.2(a).  It is contended  that  the
    judge failed to give adequate reasons for reaching conclusions that the
    burden of proof had not been discharged.  I find that the  most  recent
    relevant authority on adequacy of reasoning is Budhathoki (reasons  for
    decision) [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC) the  headnote  of  which  I  set  out
    below;

         It is generally unnecessary and unhelpful for  First-tier  Tribunal
         judgments to rehearse every detail or issue raised in a case.  This
         leads to judgments becoming overly long and confused and is  not  a
         proportionate  approach  to  deciding  cases.   It   is,   however,
         necessary for judges to identify and resolve key conflicts  in  the
         evidence and explain in clear and brief  terms  their  reasons,  so
         that the parties can understand why they have won or lost.

18. In my view the judge has discharged the duty set out above, in relation
    to adequacy of reasons, and I do not find any material error of law  in
    the First-tier Tribunal decision for the following reasons.

19. The evidence provided by the Secretary of State is referred to  by  the
    judge in paragraph 9, and amounted to  witness  statements  from  Peter
    Millington and Rebecca Collings, together with a  single  sheet  marked
    'Annex A - Evidence from ETS in respect of Syed Ali.'

20. The witness statements do not refer to the  Claimant.   The  statements
    were prepared in relation to an application for permission for judicial
    review, and the purpose of Peter Millington's statement is  to  provide
    an understanding of the work of ETS and the process and procedure  used
    by ETS to assist the Home Office in response  to  widespread  deception
    used by applicants applying for leave to enter or remain in the  United
    Kingdom.

21. The purpose of the statement from Rebecca Collings is  to  provide  the
    Tribunal with  an  understanding  of  the  purpose  of  Secure  English
    Language Testing (SELT) and how it is operated, and  the  role  of  ETS
    therein, and the approach to the cases already  considered  which  were
    reliant on a SELT certificate obtained from ETS.

22. It is evident that the judge considered both statements,  as  there  is
    reference to them in paragraphs 9-17 of his decision.  The judge  notes
    in particular that the evidence referred  to  by  Rebecca  Collings  in
    paragraph 30 of her statement, as being "information provided by ETS on
    individual cases was required for us to make decisions on an individual
    basis and in relation to the particular merits of their case"  was  not
    before the Tribunal.

23. I do not accept the submission made on behalf of the Secretary of State
    that the judge did not engage with the evidence.   In  my  view  it  is
    clear  that  he  has  engaged  with  the  contents  of  those   witness
    statements, and he took into account 'Annex A.' It was  submitted  that
    the judge had erred by not stating what was  contained  in  'Annex  A.'
    The judge does however note that this document  does  not  contain  the
    detailed information which Peter Millington records  in  his  statement
    was gathered.

24. The judge notes that 'Annex A' is not signed.  The  evidence  contained
    in that document confirms that the test centre was All-Educate Ltd, the
    Appellant's name, date of birth and certificate number, the test  date,
    and that 150 was scored for speaking and writing.   Under  the  heading
    'Inv/Quest' is the word 'invalid'.

25. No further information is contained within that document.  The document
    does not state why the test was invalid.

26. The Secretary of State criticises the judge for recording what evidence
    it would have been reasonable to have produced, to prove  the  presence
    of a proxy test taker.  It is correct that the judge did in  paragraphs
    10-17, refer to evidence that he would have expected to have  received,
    to prove the case against the Claimant.  In my view  the  criticism  is
    not valid.  It is indicative that the judge considered with  some  care
    the evidence that was provided, as he was able to  list  evidence  that
    was missing.

27. The judge  in  paragraphs  18-20  sets  out  the  Claimant's  evidence,
    describing this  as  credible  and  consistent,  and  noting  that  the
    Claimant spoke in clear and accurate English while giving evidence, and
    noting that the Claimant had taken up the invitation from the Secretary
    of State to take  another  English  language  test  with  another  test
    provider, and had passed that examination obtaining a higher grade than
    necessary.

28. The role of the judge was to assess the evidence and decide whether the
    Secretary of State had discharged the burden of proof.  In my view  the
    judge carried out that role, analysing the evidence, and  finding  that
    the burden of proof was not discharged.  In  my  view  the  judge  gave
    adequate reasons for reaching that conclusion.

29. It may be that  a  different  judge  would  have  reached  a  different
    conclusion, but that is not the point, and  I  find  that  the  grounds
    contained within the application for permission to appeal amount  to  a
    disagreement with the conclusion reached, but do not disclose an  error
    of law.

Notice of Decision

The making of a decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law such that  the  decision  must  be  set
aside.  I do not set aside the decision.  The appeal  of  the  Secretary  of
State is dismissed.

Anonymity

No anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  There has  been
no request for anonymity made to the Upper Tribunal and no  anonymity  order
is made.


Signed                              Date 15th September 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Because the decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands so does the  decision
to make a fee award.


Signed                              Date 15th September 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

