







UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46440/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 31 July 2014                              |On: 12 August 2014           |
|Prepared: 11 August 2014                      |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Mr Khadim Ndiaye
                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No representative and no appearance

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. I shall refer to the appellant as the Secretary of State fro the  Home
      Department and to the respondent as "the claimant."


   2. On the day of the hearing,  namely  31st  July  2014,  the  claimant's
      solicitors sent a fax informing the Tribunal that the claimant  wishes
      to withdraw his appeal against the decision of the Secretary of  State
      to refuse his application for a residence card. The  solicitor  stated
      that the claimant had only given them instructions that  morning.  The
      solicitors requested that their letter be accepted as a formal  notice
      of withdrawal.


   3. I am satisfied that the claimant has been given notice of the hearing.
      I consider that it is in the interests of justice to proceed with  the
      hearing, notwithstanding his failure to attend the hearing.


   4. The claimant is a national of Senegal, born  on  19th  May  1978.  His
      appeal against the decision of the respondent refusing his application
      made on 5th April 2013 for a residence card  in  accordance  with  the
      Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006  ("the  2006  Regulations")  was
      allowed under the Regulations but dismissed on human rights grounds in
      a determination promulgated by the First-tier Tribunal Judge  on  25th
      April 2014.


   5. The Judge found the claimant to be an unreliable witness. There was no
      evidence to confirm the claim that his brother had sent money  to  him
      in Senegal and accordingly the Judge did not find evidence that he was
      dependent on his brother whilst in  Senegal.  He  found  that  he  was
      probably living with his brother and dependent on him in the UK.


   6. On 18th June 2014,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Shimmin  granted  the
      Secretary  of  State  permission  to  appeal  against  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge's determination.


   7. It was contended that the Judge had erred in that he  had  found  that
      there  was  no  evidence  of  dependency  or  membership  of  the  EEA
      National's household by the claimant prior to his arrival  in  the  UK
      and as such, the claimant could not meet  Regulation  8(2)(a)  of  the
      2006 Regulations. Judge Shimmin  found  that  the  grounds  of  appeal
      disclosed an arguable error of law.


   8. No Rule 24 response was received from the claimant. He has  throughout
      been represented by solicitors.


   9. Both parties were directed to prepare for the  hearing  on  the  basis
      that, if the Upper Tribunal decides to set aside the determination  of
      the First-tier Tribunal, any further evidence including  supplementary
      oral evidence, that the Upper Tribunal may  need  to  consider  if  it
      decides to re-make the decision can be so considered at that hearing.


  10. No such evidence has been forthcoming.


  11. On 25th July 2014 the appellant's solicitors sent to  the  Tribunal  a
      copy of the  appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal.


  12. Mr Avery relied on the reasons for appealing.


  13. In an application by an extended family member for a residence card to
      join the EEA National who is resident here under the 2006 Regulations,
      he must show qualification as such before arrival in  the  UK-  Moneke
      (EEA - OFMs) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 000341 (IAC). Moreover,  Dauhoo  (EEA
      Regulations - Reg 8 (2) [2012] UKUT 79 (IAC) provides that  under  the
      scheme set out in Regulation 8(2) of the 2006  Regulations,  a  person
      can succeed in establishing that he  or  she  is  an  extended  family
      member in any one of four  different  ways,  each  of  which  requires
      proving a relevant connection both prior to arrival in the UK  and  in
      the UK.


  14. The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  expressly  found  that  there  was  no
      evidence of such dependency or membership of a household prior to  the
      claimant's arrival in the UK. In the circumstances, the appeal  should
      have  been  dismissed  with  reference  to  Regulation   8(2)(a).    I
      accordingly set aside the determination of the First-tier Judge.


  15. Having set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  I  would
      ordinarily re-make it. However, the claimant, as  already  noted,  has
      given instructions to his solicitors to withdraw  his  appeal  against
      the decision of the Secretary of State to refuse his application for a
      residence card. The notification sent to the Tribunal was requested to
      be accepted as a formal notice of withdrawal.


  16. I find that the appellant  has  formally  requested  to  withdraw  his
      appeal.  In the circumstances, I record that the appeal  is  withdrawn
      and  pursuant  to  paragraph  17(3)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
      Tribunals (Procedure) Rules 2005,  the  Tribunal  must  serve  on  the
      parties a notice that the appeal has  been  recorded  as  having  been
      withdrawn.


     Summary of Decisions


       Having found that there was  an  error  of  law  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal, I set aside        that decision.


       The claimant has  subsequently  withdrawn  his  appeal  against  the
decision of the     Secretary of State refusing to grant  him  a  residence
card. Accordingly, a notice that       the  appeal  has  been  recorded  as
having been withdrawn must be served on both       parties.


           No anonymity direction made.

                               Signed            Dated: 11 August 2014


                               C R Mailer
                               Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge




