
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46208/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 10th March 2016                    |On 11th April 2016                    |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MJ
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr F Aziz, of Maidstone Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appealed against the decision of Judge Malik  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 27th March 2015.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    FtT and I will refer to her as the Claimant.

 3. The Claimant is a female citizen of Pakistan born [ ] 1989 who  entered
    the United Kingdom on 22nd January 2012 as  the  spouse  of  a  British
    citizen.  Her visa was valid between 29th December 2011 and 29th  March
    2014.

 4. The Claimant and  her  spouse  have  three  children  who  are  British
    citizens.  On 27th March 2014 the Claimant applied for further leave to
    remain in the UK, using form FLR(M).  She had failed to pass  her  Life
    in the UK test, and required an extension of her stay  in  the  UK,  to
    enable her to re-take that test, so that she could make an  application
    for indefinite leave to remain.

 5. The Secretary of State refused the application on  20th  November  2014
    and made a decision to remove the Claimant.  The  reasons  for  refusal
    are set out in a letter dated  20th  November  2014.   In  summary  the
    Secretary of State contended that the Claimant had  used  deception  in
    order  to  pass  an  English  language  test.   The  test  result   had
    subsequently been declared invalid, and the Secretary of  State  relied
    upon S-LTR.2.2 of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules which is set out
    below;

         S-LTR.2.2

         Whether or not to the applicant's knowledge -
         (a)  false information,  representations  or  documents  have  been
             submitted in relation  to  the  application  (including  false
             information submitted to any person to obtain a document  used
             in support of the application);

 6. The Secretary of State noted that  following  information  provided  by
    Educational Testing Service (ETS) it was believed that  the  Claimant's
    speaking test indicated the presence of a proxy test taker.

 7. The Secretary of State did not accept, even if deception had  not  been
    used by the Claimant, that the Claimant could satisfy the  requirements
    of section EX.1 as it was not  accepted  that  she  had  established  a
    genuine relationship with her children, nor was it accepted that  there
    were insurmountable obstacles  to  her  family  life  with  her  spouse
    continuing outside the UK.  It was also not accepted that the  Claimant
    could satisfy paragraph 276ADE in relation to her private life, nor was
    it  accepted  that  there  were  any  exceptional  circumstances   that
    justified allowing the application outside the Immigration Rules.

 8. The Claimant's appeal was heard on 13th  March  2015.   The  FtT  heard
    evidence from the Claimant and her spouse and found the evidence of the
    witnesses to be credible, and did not find that the Secretary of  State
    had proved that the Claimant had used deception  to  pass  her  English
    language test.  The FtT recorded, at paragraph 34;

         "Consequently, for  this  reason,  I  find  that  the  Respondent's
         decision is not in accordance  with  the  rules  and  law  and  the
         Appellant should be granted an extension of her leave to remain  to
         enable her to re-take again the Life in  the  UK  test,  which  she
         acknowledges she did not pass."

 9. The FtT went on to consider Article 8 of the 1950  European  Convention
    on Human Rights, and found that the Secretary of State's  decision  was
    not proportionate, and therefore also allowed the appeal under  Article
    8.

10. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal relying upon two grounds.  Firstly it was contended  that  the
    FtT had failed to give adequate reasons  for  findings  on  a  material
    matter.  It was submitted that the FtT  was  wrong  to  find  that  the
    Secretary of State had not discharged the burden of proof  in  relation
    to the Claimant's deception.  It was contended that the FtT had  failed
    to provide adequate reasons for  rejecting  the  Secretary  of  State's
    evidence.

11. Secondly it was contended that the FtT made a material misdirection  of
    law in allowing the appeal on Article 8 grounds.  It was submitted that
    the proportionality assessment was incomplete, and based  on  selective
    elements of the evidence and was not adequately  reasoned.   Permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted.

Error of Law

12. At the hearing before me on 2nd November 2015, I heard submissions from
    both parties regarding error of law.  On behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
    State reliance  was  placed  upon  the  grounds  contained  within  the
    application for permission to appeal, and in addition it was  submitted
    that the Claimant's appeal  could  not  have  been  allowed  under  the
    Immigration Rules, as it was common ground that  she  did  not  have  a
    valid English language test certificate, which was  required  in  order
    for leave to be granted under the rules.  The FtT  had  not  considered
    this.

13. On behalf of the Claimant it was  pointed  out  that  the  lack  of  an
    English language test certificate had not been raised in the Grounds of
    Appeal, and it was explained that the Claimant had been unable to  take
    a  further  English  language  test  without  identification,  and  her
    identification had been held by the Home  Office.   It  was  only  very
    recently that the Home Office had provided to the Claimant a  certified
    copy of her passport, which would enable her to take a further  English
    language test.

14. I set out below my conclusions and reasons for finding an error of law,
    and setting aside the decision of the FtT;

         18.  I find no material error of law in the  consideration  of  the
             FtT, of the evidence produced by the Secretary  of  State,  in
             which it was contended that the Claimant had used deception to
             pass her English language test.  I  find  that  the  FtT  gave
             adequate reasons for concluding that the burden of  proof  had
             not been discharged by  the  Secretary  of  State.   A  recent
             relevant authority on  adequacy  of  reasoning  is  Budhathoki
             (reasons for decision) [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC) the headnote of
             which I set out below;


                  "It is generally unnecessary and unhelpful for  First-tier
                  judgments to rehearse every detail or issue  raised  in  a
                  case.  This leads to judgments becoming  overly  long  and
                  confused and is not a proportionate approach  to  deciding
                  cases.  It is, however, necessary for judges  to  identify
                  and resolve key conflicts in the evidence and  explain  in
                  clear and brief terms their reasons, so that  the  parties
                  can understand why they won or lost."


         19.  The evidence before the FtT comprised statements made by Peter
             Millington  and  Rebecca  Collings,  neither  of  which  refer
             directly to the Claimant.  In addition there  was  a  printout
             recording the Claimant's name, date of birth, nationality, the
             test  centre  and  test  date,  her  speaking  score,  and  an
             indication the test was invalid.


         20.  The FtT analysed the evidence contained  in  the  two  witness
             statements in paragraph 33 and in paragraph 34 noting that the
             Secretary of State's representative in making oral submissions
             had "accepted the evidence was thin".  The FtT  accepted  that
             the two witness  statements  indicated  that  there  had  been
             widespread abuse, but noted that the Secretary  of  State  had
             not provided any evidence of the recording of the  test  taken
             by the  Claimant,  and  was  not  satisfied  on  the  evidence
             presented that the Claimant had been part  of  the  widespread
             abuse of the system.


         21.  The FtT set out the evidence given by  the  Claimant  and  her
             husband in considerable detail.  The FtT  noted  the  evidence
             given by the Claimant's husband in relation to his involvement
             in funding the Claimant's course, and the meetings that he had
             with the college to update him on progress.  In  my  view  the
             FtT properly evaluated the evidence, and was entitled to reach
             the conclusion that the evidence submitted by the Secretary of
             State was insufficient to discharge the burden of proof.


         22.  However it does appear that the FtT then did  not  proceed  to
             consider the other issues raised in the Secretary  of  State's
             refusal letter, but found that because deception had not  been
             proved, the appeal should be  allowed  under  the  Immigration
             Rules.   The  FtT  recorded   at   paragraph   5   that   both
             representatives agreed that the application  should  not  have
             been considered by the Secretary of State  with  reference  to
             Appendix FM, because the Claimant's initial application for  a
             visa as a  spouse,  had  been  made  in  2011,  prior  to  the
             introduction of Appendix FM into the Immigration Rules in July
             2012.  However,  whether  the  application  should  have  been
             considered under the rules in force prior to the  introduction
             of Appendix FM, which presumably would have been paragraph 284
             of the Immigration Rules, or whether Appendix FM  should  have
             been considered, there is  a  requirement  that  in  order  to
             succeed under the rules, whichever version is used, an English
             language test certificate must be produced  showing  that  the
             required standard of English has been reached.  In  this  case
             it is common ground that the Claimant was  unable  to  produce
             such a certificate, as the certificate that she had  initially
             obtained, had been cancelled and declared invalid by the  test
             provider.


         23.  Therefore the appeal could not have  been  allowed  under  the
             Immigration Rules and the FtT  erred  in  indicating  that  it
             could.


         24.  I next consider the assessment by the FtT  of  Article  8.   I
             find  a  material  error  of  law   in   the   assessment   of
             proportionality.   The   FtT   did   not   factor   into   the
             consideration  of  proportionality  section  117B(1)  of   the
             Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  (the  2002  Act)
             which confirms that the maintenance of  effective  immigration
             controls is in the public interest.  The assessment of Article
             8 is contained within paragraph 35 of the  FtT  decision,  and
             there is no satisfactory reference or assessment of the public
             interest in the maintenance of effective immigration  control.




         25.  The FtT placed weight  upon  the  fact  that  parties  may  be
             separated for a prolonged period of time if the  Claimant  has
             to leave the UK and make an application  for  entry  clearance
             from abroad,  because  her  husband  did  not  currently  earn
             sufficient income to satisfy the minimum  income  requirement.
             The Upper Tribunal confirmed in Sabir [2014] UKUT 63 (IAC)  at
             paragraph 33 that the likelihood or otherwise of an individual
             not being able to meet the requirements of the rules for entry
             clearance is not a relevant consideration, and referred to  SB
             (Bangladesh) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 28.


         26.  For the reasons given above I conclude that the FtT  erred  in
             assessing Article 8, and also erred  in  allowing  the  appeal
             under the Immigration Rules.  The decision of the FtT  is  set
             aside and will be re-made by the Upper Tribunal.


         27.  However as the FtT did not err in considering the evidence  in
             relation to the Claimant's alleged deception, the finding that
             the Claimant did not  use  deception  to  obtain  her  English
             language test certificate is preserved.

15. The hearing was adjourned  to  enable  the  Claimant  to  give  further
    evidence so that the Upper Tribunal could re-make the decision.

Re-Making the Decision - Upper Tribunal Hearing 10th March 2016

16. The  Appellant  attended  the  hearing.   There  was  no  need  for  an
    interpreter and proceedings were conducted in English.

17. The Appellant had provided further evidence.  This indicated  that  she
    had completed the ESOL entry level 1 qualification.

18. Mr Harrison confirmed that he had received the documentation to confirm
    that the Appellant had passed the course, and  indicated  that  he  was
    satisfied that the Appellant had obtained the required qualification in
    English language, and as this was the only outstanding reason  why  her
    application had been refused, it was conceded that she was entitled  to
    be granted leave to remain and her appeal should be allowed.

19. Mr Harrison stated that it was  conceded  that  the  appeal  should  be
    allowed  under  the  Immigration  Rules,  which  because  the   initial
    application was made in 2011, related to paragraph 284.

20. I indicated that a written decision would be issued.

My Conclusions and Reasons

21. The Claimant's application was initially refused on the basis that  she
    had used deception in obtaining an English language qualification.  The
    FtT found that this was not the case, and although the decision of  the
    FtT was set aside, the conclusion  that  the  Appellant  had  not  used
    deception was preserved.

22. Therefore, as accepted by Mr Harrison, the  only  issue  that  remained
    outstanding  under  the  Immigration  Rules,  is  whether  or  not  the
    Appellant had obtained the necessary English language qualification.

23. As it was conceded on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  that  the
    Claimant had the necessary English language qualification, and  it  was
    conceded that her appeal should therefore be allowed, I  conclude  that
    it is appropriate to allow the Claimant's appeal under the  Immigration
    Rules.  I was not asked to go on and consider Article  8  of  the  1950
    Convention.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and  was
set aside.  I  substitute  a  fresh  decision.   The  Claimant's  appeal  is
allowed under the Immigration Rules.

Anonymity

An anonymity direction was made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   I  continue
that direction  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed                              Date 11th March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Although the Claimant's  appeal  is  allowed  I  make  no  fee  award.   The
Claimant had not passed the necessary English  language  qualification  when
the decision was made to refuse her application.



Signed                              Date 11th March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

