
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/46994/2014
                                                               IA/46989/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 January 2016                    |On 11 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH


                                   Between

                            Yetunde Kudirat Lawal
                                     P I
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr J Rendle, Counsel instructed by Brightway
                    Immigration and Asylum
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The First Appellant, who was born on 3 September 1968,  is  a  national
    of Nigeria. She was granted entry clearance on 20 August  2001,  on  25
    January 2002, 16 July 2003 and 7 September 2005,  which  suggests  that
    she was granted entry clearance and  was  in  the  United  Kingdom  for
    periods of time after these  dates.   She  did  not  leave  the  United
    Kingdom when her last period of leave expired.  On  3  March  2014  she
    applied for leave to remain on human rights grounds  but  on  29  March
    2014 the Defendant refused her application.

2.   In  her  decision  letter,  the  Respondent  accepted  that  the  First
    Appellant's daughter, the Second Appellant, was born here on [ - ]  and
    that she had lived here  for  at  least  seven  years  prior  to  their
    application for leave. But she concluded that it was  not  unreasonable
    to expect the Second Appellant to leave the United Kingdom as she would
    be returning to Nigeria with the First Appellant as a family unit.

3.   There were then judicial review proceedings and  the  Defendant  agreed
    to reconsider her decision but on 5 November 2014 she again refused  to
    grant the Appellants leave to remain and on 10 November 2014 she made a
    decision to  remove  them  to  Nigeria.   They  appealed  against  this
    decision on 21 November 2014 and on 1  July  2015  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Abebrese dismissed their  appeal.   They  appealed  against  this
    decision on 14 July 2015 and on 3 November 2015  Designated  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Zucker granted them permission to appeal.

4.   At the hearing before me, Mr Rendle argued that the determination  made
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Abebrese lacked substantial reasoning.  In
    particular, he submitted that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  not
    recorded the submissions made by the parties and I note  from  my  file
    that his Record of Proceedings was very short and he had  not  recorded
    any submissions made by the Appellants' counsel.

5.   Mr. Rendle  referred  me  to  extracts  from  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's decision. In particular, he noted  that  in  paragraph  13  the
    Judge says that  the  First  Appellant  "gave  evidence  during  cross-
    examination additionally the Tribunal therefore do not find it credible
    when the First Appellant claims that she would  find  it  difficult  to
    relocate to Nigeria as a whole".  I agree with the Appellants'  counsel
    that it is unclear from this sentence what was said  by  the  Appellant
    which was not credible and why that means it would not be difficult for
    her to relocate to Nigeria. Therefore, he did not give adequate reasons
    for a significant part of his analysis of the Appellants' case.

6.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Abebrese also added that "the  Tribunal  does
    not accept the submissions of Mr. Rendle on the above points". However,
    he does not record what these submissions were or why he did not accept
    them. In addition, the Record of Proceedings did not assist me  as  the
    Judge had not recorded Mr. Rendle's submissions.

7.   Counsel for the Appellants also asserted that the  Appellants  had  not
    said that the existence of Boko Haram gave rise to a right  to  asylum.
    Instead, he said that the Second Appellant had seen media reports about
    young girls being abducted by Boko Haram and had a subjective fear that
    a similar fate may await her in Nigeria and that this  impacts  on  the
    reasonableness of returning her there and should have been addressed by
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

8.   The Home Office Presenting  Officer  then  addressed  me  and  drew  my
    attention to paragraph 16 of the  decision  where  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Abebrese did consider whether it was reasonable  for  the  Second
    Appellant to go to Nigeria with her mother.  In  particular,  he  found
    that the First Appellant had spent most of her  life  in  Nigeria,  had
    family living there and was very familiar not only  with  the  language
    but the  social and economic circumstances in  that  country.  He  also
    noted that the Appellants would be returned  to  Nigeria  together  and
    that the First Appellant had been bringing the Second Appellant up here
    in the United Kingdom as a single parent. .

9.   In addition, the Home Office  Presenting  Officer  submitted  that  the
    Appellants were merely disagreeing with the Judge's findings  and  that
    viewed holistically the decision was one which  was  comprehensive  and
    lawful.

10.   However,  considering  the  totality  of  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge
    Abebrese's decision, I find that he did make material errors of law  in
    so far as he failed to clarify which evidence he had taken into account
    and provide cogent reasons based on that evidence  for  dismissing  the
    Appellants' appeal.

11.  Therefore, I allow the Appellants appeal against the decision of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Abebrese to dismiss their appeal. I then  gave  the
    Appellants permission to  submit  an  annual  report  from  the  Second
    Appellant's school and the letter from the Allahu Weehid Islamic  Group
    UK, dated 15 May 2015. The Appellants'  counsel  was  content  for  the
    Upper Tribunal to re-make the decision on their appeal.   Therefore,  I
    did not find that it is appropriate to remit the appeal to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and decided that I would continue to re-make the decision
    in the Upper Tribunal. I gave the parties  an  hour  to  consider  what
    further submissions they wanted to make on the merits of this case, and
    in particular the issue about whether it was reasonable to  expect  the
    Second Appellant to return to Nigeria.

De Novo Hearing

12.  The Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  said  that  she  relied  on  the
    Respondent's refusal letter and that  the  issue  was  whether  it  was
    reasonable for the Second Appellant to re-locate to Nigeria. She  noted
    that the First Appellant was the Second Appellant's  primary  and  sole
    carer and that the Second Appellant had no  contact  with  her  father.
    Therefore, her family unit would not  be  disrupted  if  she  moved  to
    Nigeria with her mother. She also relied on the case of Azimi-Moayed  &
    others v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2013]  UKUT  197
    (IAC).

13.  In addition, she noted that there was no evidence  that  the  existence
    of Boko Haram in Nigeria would give rise to  a  breach  of  the  Second
    Appellant's moral and physical integrity, as  described  in  Bensaid  v
    United Kingdom Application No. 44599/95. At most, it was said that  the
    Second Appellant had a  subjective  fear  of  Boko  Haram  having  seen
    reports about them in the media.  She then submitted that the fact that
    the Second Appellant was at school in the  United  Kingdom  was  not  a
    trump card and referred to EV (Philippines) &  Others  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  874  and  AM  (s117B)
    Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC). She noted that the Second Appellant  was
    in good health and the Appellants had had no leave to remain here.

14.  In  particular,  she  submitted  that  there  may  be  some  degree  of
    interference with the Appellants' private lives but that it should  not
    be exaggerated. She also noted that English was spoken in  Nigeria  and
    that the situation in ZH (Tanzania v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department [2011] UKSC 4 was different  as  the  child  was  a  British
    citizen. She also noted that the First Appellant did have some ties  to
    Nigeria as she had worked there and may be able to resume contact  with
    her other children who lived there.

15.  In response the Appellants' counsel  concentrated  on  whether  it  was
    reasonable to remove the Second Appellant from the United  Kingdom.  He
    noted that she only spoke English, was established and  doing  well  at
    her primary school and had integrated well  with  her  peers.  He  also
    noted that the entirety of  her  family  and  private  life  was  here,
    including her private life at the local mosque.  In addition, he relied
    upon the fact that her grandparents were dead, there was no network  of
    support in Nigeria and she had had no contact  with  her  half-siblings
    who lived there.

16.  The Appellants' counsel also  accepted  that  there  was  no  objective
    evidence that there was a  realistic  degree  of  likelihood  that  the
    Second Appellant would be abducted by Boko Haram. But he  continued  by
    saying that it was wholly wrong to underestimate the psychological make-
    up of a nine year old. He added that she had a subjective fear of  Boko
    Haram and it was totally unreasonable to uproot  her  from  the  United
    Kingdom and return her to a life of uncertainty and one where she would
    be subject to unjustifiably harsh consequences.

17.  It was not asserted by the Appellants that their removal  would  amount
    to a breach of their family life. It was clear from the  evidence  that
    they formed their own family unit and would not be  leaving  any  other
    member of the unit in  the  United  Kingdom.  The  Appellants'  counsel
    submitted that the removal of the  Second  Appellant  from  the  United
    Kingdom would mean that she would not be able to  form  a  relationship
    with her father or have  any  contact  with  him.  However,  the  First
    Appellant had confirmed that the  Second  Appellant  had  not  had  any
    contact with her father since she was one year old. She also  confirmed
    that he was a Nigerian citizen. It was not suggested that he was also a
    British citizen. Therefore, removing the Second  Appellant  to  Nigeria
    would not necessarily mean that she would have no contact with  him  in
    the future and it was merely speculative to argue that she would not be
    able to resume contact with him at any time in the future.

18.   The  First  Appellant  has  been  living  here  since  2005  and  will
    inevitably have developed a private life in the United  Kingdom  during
    that time. But it was not argued that she  was  entitled  to  leave  on
    account of this private life under or outside  the  Immigration  Rules.
    Instead, the Appellants' counsel submitted that the central  issue  was
    whether it was reasonable to  remove  the  Second  Appellant  from  the
    United Kingdom as she had lived here for all of her life  and  was  now
    nine years old. When considering this question I have  reminded  myself
    that  the  Second  Appellant's  best  interests  must  be   a   primary
    consideration.

19.  Paragraph 276ADE(iv) provides for leave to be granted to  a  child  who
    had lived in the United Kingdom for at least  a  continuous  period  of
    seven years where it would not be reasonable to expect her to leave the
    country. In Azimi-Moayed & others v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2013] UKUT 197 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal did find that:

          i) Lengthy residence in a country other than the state of  origin
             can lead to development of  social  cultural  and  educational
             ties that it would be inappropriate to disrupt, in the absence
             of compelling reason to the contrary. What amounts to  lengthy
             residence is not clear cut but past and present policies  have
             identified seven years as a relevant period.

20.  However, the Upper Tribunal also went on to find that:

         ii) Apart from the terms of  published  policies  and  rules,  the
             Tribunal notes that  seven years from age four is likely to be
             more significant to a child that  the  first  seven  years  of
             life. Very young children are focussed on their parents rather
             than their peers and are adaptable.

21.  The Second Appellant was born here and, although  she  has  lived  here
    for nine years, in the first  few  years  she  will  have  been  mainly
    focused on the First Appellant who will be removed to Nigeria with her.
    The Upper Tribunal also found that:

        iii) As a starting point it is in the best interests of children to
             be with both their parents  and  if  both  parents  are  being
             removed from  the  United  Kingdom  then  the  starting  point
             suggests that so should dependent children who  form  part  of
             their household unless there are reasons to the contrary.

22.  As was clear from the evidence, the Second Appellant has  been  brought
    up by the First Appellant and her father has had no  contact  with  her
    since she was one. Therefore, he has played no part in bringing her  up
    and she will be returning with the First  Appellant  who  is  her  sole
    carer.

23.  In paragraph 58 of EV (Philippines) the Court of Appeal held that:

         The assessment of the best interests of the children must  be  made
         on the basis that that facts are as they are in the real world  ...
         If neither parent has  the  right  to  remain,  then  that  is  the
         background against which the assessment is conducted.

24.  In the Appellants' case, the  First  Appellant  has  had  no  leave  to
    remain since 2005 and the Second  Appellant  has  never  had  leave  to
    remain. There was no evidence that the Second Appellant  suffered  from
    any physical or mental illness and her school report confirmed that she
    was doing well at school and had no special educational needs. She  had
    developed a private life through the mosque but there  was  nothing  to
    suggest that this could not be  replicated  in  Nigeria  at  a  similar
    mosque. There was also no evidence that the First Appellant  could  not
    obtain employment in Nigeria to support them both and forge  a  private
    life for them both. There was also no evidence to show that  the  First
    Appellant could not attend an English medium school in Nigeria.  Taking
    this and the totality of the  evidence  into  account  and  applying  a
    balance  of  probabilities  I  find  that  the  Appellants   have   not
    established that it would not be reasonable for the Second Appellant to
    be removed from the United Kingdom with the First Appellant.

25.  I have also considered whether the Appellants are entitled to leave  to
    remain outside the Immigration Rules. However, the Appellants have  not
    established  that  there  are  any  exceptional  or   very   compelling
    circumstances to justify such leave. At best they rely on the fact that
    the Second Appellant is doing well at school. However, I remind  myself
    that in paragraph 39 of EV (Philippines)  the  Court  of  Appeal  found
    that:

         "There was  no  reason  to  infer  that  any  interruption  to  the
         education of the elder child upon return to  Malawi  would  be  any
         more significant than that faced by any child forced to  move  from
         one country to another by virtue of the careers of  their  parents.
         Nor should the difficulties of a move from one  school  to  another
         become unduly exaggerated"

26.  In paragraph 60 the Court of Appeal also held that:

         "If the parents are removed, then  it  is  entirely  reasonable  to
         expect the children to go with them. As the immigration judge found
         it is obviously in  their  best  interests  to  remain  with  their
         parents. Although it is, of course  a  question  of  fact  for  the
         tribunal, I cannot see that the desirability of being  educated  at
         public expense in the UK can outweigh the benefit to  the  children
         of remaining with their parents. Just as we cannot provide  medical
         treatment for the world, so we cannot educate the world."

27.  In the alternative,  I  have  considered  the  Appellant's  case  under
    Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules. As stated above the Appellants
    have developed some level of private life  here  for  the  purposes  of
    Article 8(1) of the  ECHR.  Their  removal  would  be  justified  under
    immigration legislation due to the fact that the  First  Appellant  has
    overstayed and States are permitted to impose immigration  controls  to
    protect the interests of their own state.  The  remaining  question  is
    whether removal would be proportionate.

28.  When looking at this question, I have taken into account  section  117B
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. In  particular,  I
    note that the maintenance of  immigration  control  is  in  the  public
    interest and the Appellants  do  not  have  any  leave  and  the  First
    Appellant has overstayed since 2005.

29.  I also remind myself that in  AM  (Malawi)  the  Upper  Tribunal  found
    that:

         "An appellant can obtain no positive right to a grant of  leave  to
         remain from either s117B (2) or (3), whatever  the  degree  of  his
         fluency in English, or the strength of his financial resources."

30.  I note that the Appellants speak English but the  letter  submitted  at
    the appeal hearing states that they have been financially dependent  on
    support from the mosque. I have also given little weight to the private
    life developed by the First Appellant as  her  stay  here  was  firstly
    precarious and then unlawful. The Second Appellant's residence has been
    precarious  as,  although  she  was  born  here,  she  did  not  obtain
    indefinite leave to remain here. Therefore, I have  also  given  little
    weight to her private life.

31.  Sub-section 117B(6)  includes  the  same  test  as  that  contained  in
    paragraph 276ADE(iv) and note that in AM (Malawi)  the  Upper  Tribunal
    held that:

         "When the question posed by s117B(6) is the same question posed  in
         relation to children by paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) it  must  be  posed
         and answered in the proper context of whether it was reasonable  to
         expect the child to follow its parents to their country of  origin;
         EV (Philippines). It is not however a question  that  needs  to  be
         posed and answered in relation to each child more than once."

32.   Therefore,  I  adopt  my  findings  above  in  relation  to  paragraph
    276ADE(iv) and find that it would not be disproportionate to remove the
    Second and the First Appellants from the United Kingdom.

Notice of Decision

1.   The Appellants' appeal  against  the  decision  by  the  Respondent  to
    refuse them leave to remain in the United Kingdom is dismissed.


Signed   Date: 5 February 2016

Nadine Finch
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch

