
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46029/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, Birmingham              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4 November 2014                            |On 12 November 2014          |


                                   Before

                DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ROBERTSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                          MS NOELA KAWIRA MUCHUNKU
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Miss G Kiai, Counsel, instructed by Elizabeth
Millar, Solicitors.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Immigration History

 1. The Appellant in this appeal  was  the  Respondent  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing on 6 May 2014. However, for  ease  of  reference,  the
    Appellant and Respondent are  hereinafter  referred  to  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal. Therefore Ms Muchunku is referred to as
    the Appellant and  the  Secretary  of  State  is  referred  to  as  the
    Respondent.

 2. The Appellant is a female citizen of Kenya, whose date of  birth  is  9
    November 1976. Her appeal against the decision of the Respondent, dated
    17 October 2013, to refuse her application for leave to remain  on  the
    basis of her private and family life was allowed under Article  8  ECHR
    by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Griffith,  the  reasons  for  which  are
    contained within her determination dated 26 July 2014, it  having  been
    accepted before the  Judge  that  the  Appellant  could  not  meet  the
    provisions of the Immigration Rules.

 3. In the grounds of application it  is  submitted  that  that  the  Judge
    erred in  (i)  failing  to  consider  whether  there  were  exceptional
    circumstances not covered by the rules  as provided by  Gulshan  [2013]
    UKUT 00640 (IAC) and Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin), before going on  to
    determine the Appellant's appeal under Article 8 directly applied;  and
    (ii) in her consideration of the evidence (a) by  attaching  weight  to
    the Appellant's relationship with Mr Stephen Leadbeatter because it was
    commenced when her  immigration  status  was  precarious;  and  (b)  in
    failing to identify why Mr Leadbeatter would be unable to  relocate  to
    Kenya with the Appellant or why she could not return to make  an  entry
    clearance application. It is submitted that the  Tribunal  should  have
    found that the decision to remove was proportionate.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  McDade,
    who stated that it  was  arguable  that  the  Judge  gave  insufficient
    reasons to satisfy the test laid down  in  Gulshan  before  making  her
    findings in respect of Article 8.


 5. The Appellant filed a  detailed  Rule  24  Response,  in  which  it  is
    submitted that MM  v  SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  985  confirms  that  the
    intermediary step  of  needing  to  identify  compelling  circumstances
    before an Article 8 claim can be  considered  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules was of little utility, and that  in  any  event,  the  Judge  did
    properly direct herself in accordance with Gulshan, that  she  referred
    to the public interest and set out in detail the factors to  which  she
    gave weight in the assessment of proportionality.

Submissions

 6. Mr Avery relied on the grounds of application, submitting that:

        a. There was no reference to the Immigration  Rules  for  leave  to
           remain  in  the  UK  as  a  partner   in   the   assessment   of
           proportionality and therefore no reference to the  Secretary  of
           State's view of where the public interest lies in the assessment
           of proportionality. Without this starting point,  he  submitted,
           the overall starting point must be wrong and the Judge therefore
           erred in law.

        b. The Judge  also  failed  to  identify  compelling  circumstances
           before deciding  whether  the  appeal  could  be  determined  by
           applying Article 8 directly. There were  no  compelling  reasons
           and the outcome would not be unduly harsh. The Judge  points  to
           factors in  favour  of  the  Appellant  to  which  she  attaches
           considerable weight but no obvious reason is given as to why the
           Appellant did not simply seek  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  2
           Migrant. The Judge  also  referred  to  the  close  relationship
           between The Appellant and her family in the UK but the Appellant
           also had relatives in Kenya. The starting point for the  Article
           8 assessment was the relationship between the Appellant and  her
           partner and that was formed whilst  her  leave  in  the  UK  was
           precarious. The  Judge  considered  the  reasonableness  of  the
           Appellant's partner moving  to  Kenya  and  concluded  that  the
           disruption was not justified. There were, therefore, a number of
           quite serious flaws due to the failure to establish  a  starting
           point and due to lack of reasoning.

        c. As to the Rule 24 Response, which relied on MM to establish that
           there was no need to identify  compelling  circumstances  before
           applying Article 8 directly, in that case, the Court  of  Appeal
           was considering the lawfulness  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and
           Article 8 was being considered in a different context; far  from
           saying that the Gulshan approach was wrong, they  simply  stated
           that it made no difference.

        d. As to the factors identified in the Appellant's  favour  in  the
           Rule 24 Response at paragraph 14,  many  of  them  were  neutral
           factors.  The  fact  that  overstaying  was  not  deliberate  is
           neutral, as was the fact that she had lived in the UK  lawfully,
           bar short periods, for almost 14 years, and that  the  Appellant
           was of good character. People who wish to remain in the  UK  are
           expected to abide by their conditions of  leave.  The  Appellant
           may be pregnant but this is not a compelling factor nor  is  the
           fact that she is an experienced, specialist nurse working in  an
           occupation where there is a skills shortage.

 7. Miss Kiai relied on the Rule 24 Response and I have had regard to  them
    in my analysis and findings below. She additionally submitted that:

        a. The Judge made no reference to the provisions of the Immigration
           Rules because it was conceded that the Appellant could not  meet
           them. Permission  was  granted  on  the  basis  that  compelling
           circumstances were not identified but the  Judge  gave  adequate
           reasons for considering the appeal under Article 8; she referred
           to the test in Gulshan and then  set  out  the  reasons  why  it
           should be considered outside the Rules.

        b. The Respondent now raised a number  of  issues  which  were  not
           raised before the Judge; there was no reference to the Appellant
           making an application under Tier 2. Witnesses were tendered  for
           evidence and the Respondent's representative chose not to cross-
           examine them. The Respondent's  representative  at  the  hearing
           accepted the relationship between the Appellant and her partner,
           as set out in the determination. The Respondent's representative
           did not state that the Appellant and her partner could  live  in
           Kenya. The Judge considered the evidence before her.

 8. Miss Kiai stated that she had made submissions before the  Judge  based
    on R (Forrester) v SSHD 2008 EWHC 2307  (Admin)  (as  set  out  in  the
    skeleton argument before the First-tier Tribunal at p 14), because this
    case applied to the assessment. The fact that there were brief  periods
    of overstaying and that these were beyond her control was not a neutral
    factor. Furthermore, the Appellant was  pregnant,  her  partner  was  a
    British citizen and her child would also  be  a  British  citizen.  The
    Judge balanced all the factors before her. Permission  was  granted  on
    the Gulshan point only.

 9. Mr Avery in reply, stated that (i) the Judge was  obliged  to  consider
    the  issues  of  law  whether  or  not  raised  by   the   Respondent's
    representative; (ii) MM, at paragraph 29, only stated that Nagre  added
    nothing to the debate as to whether or not the Immigration  Rules  were
    lawful. It was not saying that Nagre and Gulshan should not be applied;
    (iii) the fact that witnesses were not cross-examined was not  relevant
    because the issue was in relation to the law not  the  facts;  (iv)  he
    could not see the relevance of Forrester, which appeared to be  a  near
    miss argument; (v) the only point at  which  the  public  interest  was
    considered by the Judge was at paragraph 33, when she referred  to  the
    wider public interest.

10. Following submissions, I reserved  my  decision,  which  I  give  below
    together with my reasons. When asked to make submissions on whether  or
    not a resumed hearing would be necessary if I were  to  find  that  the
    Judge had materially erred in law, Mr Avery submitted that there was no
    reason why I should not go on to remake the decision on  the  basis  of
    the findings made by the Judge without a  further  hearing.  Miss  Kiai
    stated that if I did find a material error of law in the  determination
    of the Judge, there should a resumed hearing because  the  matters  now
    raised by the Respondent would need to  be  addressed  with  additional
    evidence.

Decision and reasons

11. There was no dispute before me as to the findings of fact made  by  the
    Judge; the dispute related to (i) whether or not the Judge should  have
    gone on to consider  the  Appellant's  appeal  by  applying  Article  8
    directly; (ii) the assessment made by her of the public interest in the
    proportionality assessment; and  (iii)  the  weight  she  gave  to  the
    particular  factors  which  affected  her  proportionality   assessment
    exercise (the argument that she should have found that the decision was
    proportionate)  which  was  disguised  as   an   'inadequate   reasons'
    challenge.

12. This is a case in which both parties were represented at the First-tier
    Tribunal hearing and in which the reasons for refusal letter  dated  17
    October 2013 did not consider the Appellant's rights  based  on  family
    life with her partner. The fact that she was in a relationship  with  a
    British Citizen and was expecting  his  child  was  not  challenged  on
    behalf of the Respondent. In fact none of  the  evidence  tendered  was
    challenged and Mr  Avery  submitted  that  the  challenge  was  not  in
    relation to the facts.

13. Whilst the general guidance as  set  down  in  case  law  is  that  the
    Immigration Rules post 9 July  2012  (the  new  Rules)  establish  with
    greater specificity the Respondent's view of where the public  interest
    lies in Article 8 claims, there is no need for the Judge to set out  in
    her determination every part of  the  Rules  which  the  Appellant  has
    failed to  satisfy.  The  fact  that  she  has  not  referred  to  them
    specifically, in the same way that the Respondent's representative  did
    not refer to them specifically in submissions, does not mean  that  she
    did not have them in mind. She was entitled to accept  the  Appellant's
    representative's concession that  the  Appellant  could  not  meet  the
    Immigration Rules.  Contrary  to  the  submissions  on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent, the Judge in fact referred to the public interest  at  [31]
    and [32]. Mr Avery did not state what other matters within  the  public
    interest the Judge should have had regard to. The Judge  was  aware  of
    the need to conduct a balancing exercise. She  does  not  overlook  the
    negative factors (at [33] she refers to periods of overstaying  and  at
    [34] to the Appellant's immigration status when her  relationship  with
    Mr Leadbetter was commenced).

14. Mr Avery argues firstly that compelling factors were not identified and
    secondly that the factors to which  the  Judge  gave  weight  were  not
    compelling.  However,  firstly,  the  Judge  stated  that  there   were
    compelling factors "on the totality  of  the  evidence  concerning  the
    Appellant" and she then went on to the factors that were not considered
    under the Immigration Rules (bearing in mind  that  the  partner  route
    would not be open to the Appellant). When considering the  analysis  in
    Nagre, the Court of Appeal in MF (Nigeria) [2014] EWCA  Civ  confirmed,
    at 42, the analysis of  Sales J "...that in a "precarious" family  life
    case,  it  is  only  in  "exceptional"   or   "the   most   exceptional
    circumstances" that a claim based on Article 8 outside the Rules  would
    succeed"; and at paragraph 44, that "We would...hold that the new rules
    are a complete code  and  that  the  exceptional  circumstances  to  be
    considered in the balancing  exercise  involve  the  application  of  a
    proportionality test as required by the Strasbourg jurisprudence." This
    was the approach the Judge took and  her  approach  was  therefore  not
    flawed by legal error.

15. As to the submission that the factors the  Judge  considered  were  not
    significantly compelling, the Judge has, on  the  basis  that  the  new
    Rules did not result in an adequate consideration  of  the  Appellant's
    claim, considered it under Article 8 directly  applied.  There  was  no
    submission before her  that  facts  set  out  in  the  various  witness
    statements could not be described as 'sufficiently compelling'.  Absent
    the provisions of s 19 of the Immigration Act 2014, which  was  not  in
    force at the date of decision or at the date of hearing,  there  is  no
    checklist against which the weight to be attributed to various  factors
    is to be measured. The Judge did consider the fact that the Appellant's
    relationship was formed whilst she did not have settled status but  she
    had already lived in the UK lawfully for many years [34]. It is  to  be
    expected that where individuals have been residing and working lawfully
    there will be the development of relationships because those with valid
    leave do not reside in a vacuum  devoid  of  human  relationships.  The
    weight attributed to the various factors and the evidence is  a  matter
    for the Judge and if the Respondent wished to  argue  that  significant
    weight should not be attached to the various factors, the time to  have
    done this would have been before the First-tier Tribunal.

16. Mr Avery submitted that there was nothing to prevent the Appellant from
    applying for leave as a Tier 2 Migrant if her  occupation  was  on  the
    list of shortage occupations. This again was not a matter  explored  by
    the Respondent's representative at the First-tier Tribunal hearing  and
    the Judge does not have to give reasons on every aspect of the facts in
    order for her decision to be sustainable (see Budhathoki  (reasons  for
    decisions) [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC)). Mr Avery also referred to the fact
    that the Judge had taken into  consideration  that  the  Appellant  had
    almost resided in the UK lawfully  for  14  years  and  that  this  was
    suspiciously  like  a  near  miss  argument   (the   submission   under
    Forrester). However, this was not the only factor which the Judge  took
    into account; it was one of a number of factors.

17. Whilst another Judge may have reached a  different  conclusion  on  the
    facts of this case, the Judge did not materially err in  the  ways  for
    which permission  to  appeal  was  granted  and  the  grounds  and  the
    submissions amount to no more than a disagreement with the  conclusions
    of the Judge.

Decision


18. The decision of Judge Griffiths discloses no material errors of law and
    her decision must therefore stand.

19. I dismiss the Respondent's appeal.


Anonymity

20. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005.  No
    request has been made for an anonymity order and pursuant to Rule 14 of
    the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 I find no reason  to
    make an order.






Signed                                  Date 12 November 2014


M Robertson
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



TO THE RESPONDENT


     In light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a fee award
(Rule 23A (costs) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules
2005 and section 12(4) (a) of the Tribunals Courts and Enforcement Act
2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance Note: Fee Awards in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011). As the appeal has been dismissed,
Judge Griffiths' fee award is confirmed.




Signed                          Dated 12 November 2014

M Robertson
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
