
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46804/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21st March 2016                   |On 25th April 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                          mrs stephanie laure foya
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Nwaekwu (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  G  A
    Black promulgated on 8th July 2015, following a hearing at Taylor House
    on 23rd June 2015.  In  the  determination,  the  judge  dismissed  the
    appeal  of  Mrs  Stephanie  Laure   Foye,   whereupon   the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a female citizen of Cameroon and she was born  on  8th
    July 1988.  She appealed against the decision of the  Respondent  dated
    19th November 2014, refusing her application as the Sponsor of  an  EEA
    national exercising treaty rights in the UK pursuant to the Immigration
    (EEA) Regulations 2006.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that the Respondent Secretary of State  claims
    to have  invited  the  Appellant  on  two  separate  occasions  for  an
    interview in Liverpool, but there is no evidence of this  and  she  was
    entirely justified in not attending.  She also claims that her marriage
    to an EEA national, namely, Samy Panzu, a French national, is  entirely
    genuine and a valid marriage.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge was satisfied that the  Respondent  Secretary  of  State  had
    failed to demonstrate that  the  Appellant  had  been  invited  for  an
    interview at Liverpool on two separate occasions.  The  judge  referred
    to the relevant case law, and in particular Papajorgi [2012] UKUT 0038,
    which makes it clear that a marriage to an EEA national is prime  facie
    a valid marriage, provided that the Appellant  is  able  to  produce  a
    marriage certificate and his or her passport.  Thereafter, if there  is
    an issue taken as to the genuineness of the marriage, the burden  falls
    upon the Secretary of State to demonstrate the fact that this is a sham
    marriage.

 5. The judge held that the Respondent had

         "... failed to provide evidence  to  show  that  the  parties  were
         invited to attend a marriage interview.  The lack  of  evidence  in
         this regard establishes that the Appellant had good reason for  not
         attending the interviews" (see paragraph 12).

 6. However, the judge then went on to  consider  the  genuineness  of  the
    marriage himself in considerable detail.  The judge found that,  "there
    was no evidence to adduce to show  that  the  parties  were  cohabiting
    and/had joined  finances".   Both  the  Appellant  and  her  sponsoring
    husband turned up at the  hearing.   They  gave  oral  evidence.   They
    relied on the material submitted in support of the application  arguing
    that there was evidence of a genuine marriage.  However, the judge held
    that, "I do not find either of the witnesses to be credible as  to  the
    genuineness and subsistence  of  their  marriage"  although  the  judge
    accepted basic details as to the place of meeting,  date  of  marriage,
    and some factual information.

 7. The specific reasons why the judge rejected the appeal  were  then  set
    out in the determination (see paragraph 15).

 8. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 9. The grounds of application state that the Respondent had failed to show
    sufficient grounds for suspecting the marriage to be one of convenience
    and the judge had  erred  in  holding  that  there  was  in  the  event
    sufficient reason.

10. On 10th February 2016, permission to appeal was granted  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

11. On 22nd February 2016, a Rule 24 response was entered by the Respondent
    stating that the judge had given adequate reasons at paragraph  15  for
    finding that the Appellant was not credible and that,  "the  judge  was
    entitled to make those findings having heard  evidence  from  both  the
    Appellant and the Sponsor" (see paragraph 3).

Submissions

12. At the hearing before me on 21st March 2016, Mr Nwaekwu submitted  that
    the judge had already ruled in favour of the  Appellant  (at  paragraph
    14) by holding that the Appellant and the Sponsor were not invited  for
    interview as contended by the Secretary of State.  This being  so,  the
    judge was then wrong to go on to refuse the appeal himself  on  totally
    new grounds which were not raised originally.  Mr Nwaekwu also referred
    to the case of Miah, which requires fairness to be applied with respect
    to the determination of proceedings.

13. For her part,  Ms  Brocklesby-Weller  handed  up  documents  dated  8th
    October 2014 which are addressed to the Appellant and begin  by  saying
    that,

         "I am writing concerning your client's application for confirmation
         of your client's right to reside in the United Kingdom on the basis
         of your client's marriage to an EEA national.  In order to consider
         the matter further, your client and their spouse are  requested  to
         attend an interview on 5th November 2015 at 12.00pm".

14. There is also a follow-up letter dated 23rd October 2014 written in the
    same terms stating that, "we wrote to you on 8th October 2014 to invite
    them to attend an interview in  order  to  consider  their  application
    further".  The point about these letters is that there appears  not  to
    the Appellant herself but to "Moorhouse Solicitors"  in  Tottenham,  as
    the solicitors who were acting for the Appellant at the time.

15. There is, in fact, even a third letter dated 7th November 2014 from the
    Respondent Home Office explaining  to  Moorhouse  Solicitors  that  two
    previous letters on 8th October 2014 and 23rd October 2014 were written
    inviting the Appellant and her spouse for interview  and  they  had  no
    responded to either and that, "as your  client  has  failed  to  attend
    these interviews  or  notify  us  within  the  timescale  stated,  your
    client's case has been referred back to a case working team  to  decide
    their case on the information provided".

16.  Ms  Brocklesby-Weller  went  on  to  say  that  paragraph  12  of  the
    determination recognises that correspondence  was  sent.   It  is  just
    unfortunate that no Home Office Presenting Officer was in attendance on
    that date before Judge Black.  Once the Appellant and her  husband  had
    given oral evidence it was open to the judge to come  to  the  decision
    that he did.  He had specifically referred to a  lack  of  cohabitation
    between the parties and had not found the Appellant and the Sponsor  to
    be at all credible.  He was entitled to that view.

17. In reply Mr Nwaekwu submitted that the three documents  that  have  now
    been submitted do not form part of the  Respondent's  bundle.   It  was
    wrong to refer to them now.  He asked for there to be a finding  of  an
    error of law and for this matter to be remitted back to the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

No Error of Law

18. I am satisfied that the making of the decision  by  the  judge  do  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    the TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.   My  reasons
    are as follows.

19. First, I agree entirely with Mr  Nwaekwu  that  it  is  wrong  for  the
    Respondent Secretary of State to now  furnish  three  separate  letters
    which were purportedly written to Moorhouse Solicitors, but  which  did
    not form part of the Respondent's bundle, and a side of which has  only
    been attained during these proceedings.  This is indeed fundamentally a
    "fairness"  point  and  the  Appellant  and  his  representatives  were
    entitled to have due notice of this.  This is not  to  say  that  these
    three letters were not written to Moorhouse  Solicitors  and  they  may
    have been a failure to communicate the contents of these letters to the
    Appellant herself.  It is not for this Tribunal to decide  this  matter
    either way without hearing from Moorhouse Solicitors themselves.   What
    is important, however, is that the judge did not decide this matter  in
    a way that disadvantaged the Appellant.  The judge, in fact,  found  in
    favour of the Appellant (given that these  letters  were  not  produced
    before the judge with there being no Presenting Officer in attendance).
     At paragraph 12 of the determination, when the  judge  held  that  the
    "Respondent has therefore failed to provide evidence to show  that  the
    parties were invited to attend a marriage interview".

20. Given that no prejudice was caused to the Appellant by the issue of non-
    attendance at the interview, and given that  the  matter  was  in  fact
    resolved in favour of the Appellant, it is clear that the judge on this
    issue held that the Secretary of State  had  failed  to  discharge  the
    burden of proof upon her, which went to showing that this was indeed  a
    marriage  of  convenience.   The  Secretary  of  State  had  failed  to
    demonstrate this very issue as being proven in her favour.

21. Second,  however,  the  matter  did  not  end  there.   The  judge  did
    thereafter determine the issue himself.  He did  so  because  he  heard
    evidence both from the Appellant and the Sponsor.  Mr  Nwaekwu  submits
    that the judge decided the issue on an entirely different basis with no
    prior notice to the Appellant or her solicitors.  This  was  incorrect.
    It was always known to  the  Appellant  and  his  solicitors  that  the
    contention from the Secretary of State's department was that this was a
    marriage of convenience and the Appellant and the Sponsor attended  the
    hearing precisely on the basis that they would help  to  discharge  any
    illusions in this respect by showing that their marriage was  indeed  a
    genuine and subsisting one.  They were unable to show, however, to  the
    requisite standard, that they were cohabiting or had  joined  finances.
    It did not end there.  The judge made a number  of  clear  findings  of
    fact against the Appellant.

22. First, the judge held that when asked about personal details about  how
    they spent time together including recent social  outings,  details  of
    friends and the parties' hobbies or interests, the  evidence  given  by
    the witnesses were inconsistent, with one referring to the past time as
    being listening to music, and the other that he played  basketball  and
    watched television.

23. Second, the Sponsor was unable to give detailed addresses  of  all  the
    various properties that the parties had lived in over recent years  and
    was only able to name two addresses.

24. Third, the witnesses gave contradictory evidence about  the  film  that
    the claimant had seen together only a week  ago.   Whereas  one  person
    said that this was an adventure movie the other said this was a  horror
    movie.

25. Finally, the Sponsor said that they had last been out for a  meal  when
    they went to the cinema last week but then changed it to say that  they
    had eaten at home and then added that they went out to Nando's, whereas
    the Appellant said that they had not been out to a  restaurant  to  eat
    (see paragraph 15).

26. The judge also referred to the  fact  that  there  was  no  independent
    evidence from friends or relatives to confirm the relationship  between
    the parties.  The  Appellant's  bundle  contained  two  short  unsigned
    witness statements from the Appellant's best friend and  the  Sponsor's
    cousin.  The judge held that, "these statements  were  not  signed  and
    neither of the witnesses attended" (see paragraph 16).

27. Accordingly, the judge was entitled to come to  the  findings  of  fact
    that he did.  The decision in this respect is unassailable.

28. For what it is worth, I may point out  that  the  Sponsor  was  not  in
    attendance at this hearing, although the Appellant herself was with  Mr
    Nwaekwu.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    21st April 2016
