

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46546/2013;
IA/46543/2013;
      IA/46556/2013; IA/46552/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 23rd May 2014                              |On 28th May 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And
                                MIKHAIL GRES
                              NATALIA VASYUKOVA
                                 DANIIL GRES
                                 MAXIM GRES
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr A Gilbert, counsel, instructed by Elizabeth
Millar solicitor.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant (hereafter the SSHD) appeals a decision  of  the  First-
      tier Tribunal which allowed an appeal by  the  respondents  (hereafter
      the claimants) against decisions dated 21st October 2013 of  the  SSHD
      to remove them from the UK pursuant to s10 Immigration and Asylum  Act
      1999.


   2. Permission to appeal had  been  granted  on  the  basis  that  it  was
      arguable that the judge misdirected himself

                  "....as to Article 8 and in particular, failed to have due
                  regard to the decision of Gulshan [2013] UKUT  00640.  The
                  grounds argue that the judge failed  to  consider  whether
                  there were insurmountable obstacles to the  appellant  and
                  her family pursuing their family life together  in  Russia
                  and misdirected himself as to the  best  interest  of  the
                  minor children.
                  It is arguable from the determination that the  Judge  did
                  not properly consider the principles set down  in  Gulshan
                  and does amount to an arguable error of law.  It  is  also
                  arguable that the judge  attached  too  little  weight  to
                  Appendix FM..."


      Background


   3. Mikhail Gres entered the UK as a student on  4th  June  2001  and  was
      granted extensions of stay as  a  student  until  9th  April  2009;  a
      further application for leave to remain was  refused  and  the  appeal
      dismissed on 23rd March 2010; an application for permission to  appeal
      to the Upper Tribunal was refused on 16th June 2010. His wife, Natalia
      Vasyukova, arrived in the UK as  his  dependant  in  2006.  Their  two
      children were born in the UK on 16th July 2007 and 2nd  January  2011.
      The older child has started school here in the UK. All remained in the
      UK without leave to remain after June 2010.


   4. On 23rd December 2011 the claimants sought  leave  to  remain  on  the
      grounds of right to family life and private life under Article 8. That
      application was refused on 5th January 2013. Following judicial review
      proceedings, the application was reconsidered by the SSHD and  further
      refused,  having  considered  the  application  under   Appendix   FM,
      paragraph 276ADE and paragraph 353B, on 21st October  2013.  Decisions
      to remove the claimants in accordance with s10 Immigration and  Asylum
      Act 1999 were made the same date and served.  The  claimants  appealed
      those decisions and thus came before the First-tier Tribunal.

   5. The claimants' appealed on the grounds that there had been  a  failure
      to properly consider s55 Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009
      and that there had been a failure to  properly  apply  the  Strasbourg
      jurisprudence in relation to Article 8.

   6.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  set  out  the  claimants   background   in
      Russia/Ukraine, the oral evidence heard and the contribution  made  by
      the claimants to the UK both economically and socially. The First-tier
      Tribunal found that the claimants did not  meet  the  requirements  of
      Appendix FM, paragraph 276ADE and that there was nothing  unlawful  or
      unreasonable in the consideration by the  SSHD  of  the  consideration
      under paragraph 353B. There was no challenge to those findings  before
      me.

      Error of Law

   7. The grounds seeking  permission  to  appeal  are  fourfold.  Ground  1
      asserts that the First-tier Tribunal judge has failed to identify "any
      compelling circumstances which would render the  [claimants']  removal
      unjustifiably harsh". The First-tier Tribunal in [22] states  that  in
      accordance with Gulshan and Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin),  if,  after
      applying the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules,  there  may  be
      arguable good grounds for granting leave to remain outside the  Rules,
      then it is necessary for Article 8  purposes  to  go  on  to  consider
      whether there are compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised
      under the Rules. In [23]  the  First-tier  Tribunal  agrees  with  the
      submission by  the  claimants  that  there  are  such  compelling  and
      compassionate reasons and therefore went on  to  consider  the  appeal
      outside the Rules. There is no reasoning for this conclusion but I  do
      not agree with the SSHD's submission that this is an error of law. The
      oldest child has been in the UK for almost seven years,  was  born  in
      the UK and has started school here. Mr Gres had been  in  the  UK  for
      over 10 years by the date of the decision to remove him and it is thus
      plain that there may be factors which  require  consideration  outside
      the Rules.


   8. Ground 2 submits that the First-tier Tribunal judge erred  in  law  in
      finding that there would be an interference in family life on  removal
      because the claimants would be removed  together,  as  a  family.  She
      further asserts that the First-tier Tribunal judge erred in failing to
      balance the claimants' failure to  adhere  to  the  Immigration  Rules
      against the legitimate aim. The claimant responds that  there  was  an
      implicit engagement with the SSHD's legitimate  aim  in  paragraph  29
      where the judge refers to Mr Gres' lack of right to work alongside his
      employment, length of residence and the birth of two children.

   9. Ground 3 argues that the judge failed to consider whether  there  were
      insurmountable obstacles to the family continuing their  private  life
      outside the UK. The ground submits that "insurmountable obstacles"

                  ".. constitutes serious difficulties and "entail something
                  that  could  not  be  overcome,  even  with  a  degree  of
                  hardship....It   is   not   something   that   is   merely
                  unreasonable  or  undesirable....The  Rules   require   an
                  assessment   of   whether   removal   is   prevented    by
                  'insurmountable  obstacles'  rather  than  whether  it  is
                  'reasonable to expect' the family to leave together. It is
                  submitted that the changes to the Immigration  Rules  with
                  the Article 8 provisions introduced in July 2012 clarified
                  an important issue on  this  point.  Prior  to  that  time
                  caselaw listed possible relevant factors but  left  it  to
                  the individual decision maker in  an  individual  case  to
                  determine how best to balance the relevant factors,  based
                  on   that   person's   perception   of    public    policy
                  considerations. This resulted  in  divergent  outcomes  as
                  decision makers had to reach their own view on the  public
                  policy imperatives, without a  clear  statement  from  the
                  Secretary of State and Parliament on where public interest
                  lies. Since the new Rules came into force decision  makers
                  no longer operate in a policy vacuum. It  is  acknowledged
                  that the facts of each individual case  are  the  starting
                  point when considering proportionality, but they are  also
                  the starting point which then has to be  balanced  against
                  the public interest as reflected in  the  new  Rules.  The
                  public interest achieved by applying clear rules  must  be
                  measured by the effect of the rules across the board,  not
                  just in relation to an individual case."


  10. Ground 4 submits that the First-tier Tribunal  misdirected  itself  in
      the assessment of the best interest of the child, that the Rules  make
      clear that a child with less than seven years in the UK will not  have
      developed enough private life  to  outweigh  the  public  interest  in
      immigration control; that the judge failed to  weigh  in  the  balance
      that it would not be unjustifiably harsh to require a child with  less
      than seven years residence to travel to another country; that children
      whose parents are in the UK on a temporary basis only  can  reasonable
      be expected to leave  with  their  parents  and  that  the  First-tier
      Tribunal failed to  have  regard  to  these  issues  in  reaching  its
      conclusion. Reference is made to the italicised words in the  case  of
      Azimi-Moayed [2013] UKUT 00197 to support this proposition.


  11. In essence these  latter  three  grounds  amount  to  the  same  basic
      assertion namely that the First-tier Tribunal judge  failed  to  carry
      out a proper balancing exercise in the assessment of the evidence  and
      failed to weigh in the balance the countervailing factors. The grounds
      are misleading in that they assert that in some way the assessment  of
      proportionality has in some way changed since  the  implementation  of
      the changes in the  Rules  since  July  2014.  This  is  not  correct.
      Although the SSHD's position  as  to  the  public  interest  has  been
      clarified and set out in the Rules, the leading cases of the House  of
      Lords and the Supreme Court have not been overturned. There  has  been
      no change in the assessment  of  "insurmountable  obstacles"  and  the
      Tribunal is still required to  consider  the  proportionality  of  the
      proposed  removal  in  accordance  with  the  legitimate  aim  to   be
      maintained. This does of course mean that  the  Tribunal  must  engage
      with these matters.

  12. The First-tier Tribunal judge sets  out  the  five  Razgar  steps  and
      proceeds to consider the evidence before him finding,  properly,  that
      the substantive issue is the issue of whether the decision  to  remove
      is proportionate to the  legitimate  aim  of  maintaining  immigration
      control for the maintenance of the economic well being of the country.
       In [32] the First-tier Tribunal judge concludes

                  "Looking at the evidence in the round of the  [claimants']
                  work and situation in the United Kingdom I find  that they
                  have established family and private life here. It  follows
                  that  the   [claimants']   removal   does   represent   an
                  interference with their family and private life,  which  I
                  find is serious enough to engage the operation of  article
                  8 ECHR  in  light  of  the  time  they  have  spent  here,
                  particularly  the  third  [claimant].  I  find  that   the
                  interference has the  legitimate  aim  of  maintaining  an
                  effective control for  the  economic  well-being  of  this
                  country and is in accordance with the law. Nonetheless, in
                  a finely balanced decision, I find that in  light  of  [Mr
                  Gres'] contribution to the economy of the UK and his value
                  to  the  company   he   works   for   their   removal   is
                  disproportionate to the  achievement  of  that  legitimate
                  aim."


  13. There are a number of difficulties with this conclusion.  Firstly  the
      judge does not identify why removal would be an interference with  the
      claimants' family life - they would be removed together as  a  family.
      Secondly, although in general  terms  finding  that  the  SSHD  has  a
      legitimate aim of maintaining immigration control for the  well  being
      of the country, the judge does not engage with  the  specific  adverse
      factors of these claimants namely their residence  unlawfully  in  the
      UK, that Mr Gres has worked unlawfully, that they  had  no  legitimate
      expectation of being able to remain in the UK permanently having  come
      to the UK on temporary permits with no such expectation, that they  do
      not meet the Immigration Rules and that neither child has been in  the
      UK for a period in excess of seven years. Although these  matters  are
      referred to by the judge there has been no balancing of these  factors
      with the specifics of the  claimants'  case  in  the  context  of  the
      legitimate aim of the SSHD. Although the judge refers to  there  being
      no obligation on a  country  to  respect  the  choice  of  country  of
      residence, obstacles to developing  family  life  in  the  country  of
      origin will be relevant. There is no engagement with  the  factors  of
      return to their country of origin. Mere reference to the outcome of an
      appeal being 'finely balanced' is no substitute for close  and  proper
      analysis.


  14. I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal  judge  erred  in  law  in
      failing to properly consider the proportionality of  the  decision  to
      remove.

  15. I set aside the decision to be re-made.

      Re-making the decision

  16. Mr Gilbert submitted that there was a need for further  oral  evidence
      if I were to find the First-tier Tribunal judge erred in law such that
      the decision be set aside. I do not  agree.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
      judge heard oral evidence and made findings of fact on  the  basis  of
      the documentary and oral  evidence  before  him.  There  has  been  no
      challenge to the recording of that evidence or to the  findings  made.
      Although I reserved my decision as to whether there was  an  error  of
      law, I heard submissions from both parties in the  event  that  I  set
      aside the  decision  to  be  remade.  In  addition  to  the  oral  and
      documentary evidence relied upon, Mr Gilbert also  drew  attention  to
      the skeleton argument submitted to the First-tier Tribunal and  relied
      upon its contents.


  17. In addition  to the matters set out in the documentary  evidence,  the
      skeleton argument and the  submissions,  the  following  findings  are
      relevant:

   a. The claimants have been unlawfully in the  UK  since  the  refusal  to
      grant permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal,  namely  since  June
      2010;
   b. Mr Gres has been employed, albeit unlawfully, has paid tax and NI  and
      maintains good balances in his current account;
   c. Mr Gres is considered by  his  employers  to  be  one  of  their  best
      employees and has recently been promoted;
   d. The children were both born in the UK and have not  travelled  outside
      the UK;
   e. Mr Gres has been in the UK since June 2001;
   f. The adults and the  older  child  speak  good  English;  Mr  Gres  has
      maintained and accommodated himself and his family without recourse to
      public funds;
   g. few of the character witnesses seemed to be aware that the family were
      in breach of immigration laws; their evidence was "unbalanced";
   h. the third appellant will have spent 7 years in the UK by July 2014 and
      has begun school;
   i. the asserted inability of the third appellant  to  go  to  Russia  for
      schooling  or  because  of  language   difficulties   or   educational
      disruption was specifically rejected as  exaggerated  and  "not  based
      upon common sense";
   j. the third appellant has begun to engage with people outside his  home.




  18. On service of the decision to refuse him further leave to remain as  a
      student in 2009 Mr Gres would have been told that he no longer had any
      leave to remain in the UK and would be expected to leave the  UK.  His
      leave was extended by virtue of s3C Immigration Act 1971  pending  the
      final outcome of his appeal ie until June 2010.  The  application  for
      leave to remain on human rights grounds was made prior to the  changes
      in the Immigration Rules in July 2012. At that time,  lawful  presence
      in the UK for a period in excess of 10 years would generally  lead  to
      indefinite leave to remain. Mr  Gres  had  not  had  10  years  lawful
      residence by June 2010 when he ceased to be lawfully resident  in  the
      UK.


  19. Mr Gilbert drew attention to the fact that Mr Gres had  left  Chechnya
      when he was aged about 14/15 and gone to Ukraine.  He  has  spent  the
      vast majority of his life outside Russia and a lengthy portion of that
      time in the UK. He reiterated that the family were an economic benefit
      to the UK and that the work that Mr Gres undertook was of high  value.
      He stressed the difficulties the family would have on return to Russia
      - unfamiliarity with the country, social  and  employment  market  and
      that although they had some savings these were insufficient to provide
      the required buffer when supporting a young family  in  an  unfamiliar
      country. Although Mrs Vasyukova had  her  mother  and  grandmother  in
      Russia, they shared a 2 bedroom  flat  with  her  brother  who  is  an
      alcoholic and they would be unable to provide  the  necessary  support
      and assistance on their return as a young family.

  20. Ms Everett referred to the lack of specificity of the  nature  of  the
      engagement of the 6  year  old  outside  the  home.  Although  it  was
      asserted that the family were of economic benefit to the UK, this  did
      not appear to take account of state education or use of the  NHS.  She
      asserted that although there was a suggestion that  the  family  might
      need a permit to return to Russia there was no evidence to that effect
      and pointed out that he had come to the UK with a visa, he  must  have
      or have had a passport and there were in any event family  members  to
      return to at least in the short term. She submitted that  overall  the
      best interests of the 6 year old although of primary importance,  when
      considered with the other elements of the family circumstances did not
      lead to a conclusion that removal was disproportionate.

  21. I have considered the evidence and submissions before me. This  family
      have been in the UK on  temporary  visas  and  there  was  and  is  no
      expectation that this would lead to indefinite  leave  to  remain.  Mr
      Gres application for further leave to remain as a student was  refused
      in April 2009, such refusal being upheld on appeal. In terms of  delay
      the claimants did not make their 'human rights application' until some
      18 months after they had been refused  permission  to  appeal  to  the
      Upper Tribunal. The SSHD took her decision to refuse that  application
      a year later and then, after a consent order  before  the  high  Court
      reconsidered the decision some two months after that. There  has  been
      no unreasonable delay on the part of the SSHD and any  such  delay  as
      there has been has been  utilised  by  the  claimants  to  attempt  to
      further enhance their reasons for staying in the UK.

  22. Although it appears that  the  claimants  return  to  Russia  will  be
      difficult  this  is  merely  one  factor  amongst  the  whole  of  the
      background factors to be taken into account. That the oldest child has
      started school, has integrated well and has a full life in the UK,  in
      so far as a 6 year old can given that he  remains  primarily  involved
      with his close family, does not contradict the findings of the  First-
      tier Tribunal that relocation to Russia would not  create  educational
      difficulties as asserted. The children would  be  returning  to  their
      parents' country of origin and  there  was  nothing  in  the  evidence
      before me to suggest that the parents would be other  than  supportive
      and engaged as parents during their re-establishment. His interest and
      concerns are not of paramount concern but  are  factors  that  are  of
      primary assessment.

  23. The housing and employment market in Russia is inevitably different to
      that in the UK and the family will have to adjust. There  was  nothing
      in the evidence however to suggest that the conditions on return would
      be unreasonable or harsh, merely that there would be difficulties that
      would and could take some time to resolve. That this may and  probably
      would be difficult for the family is one consequence of having spent a
      lengthy period of time in the UK.

  24. During that lengthy period of residence I accept that the eldest child
      has started school here and knows no other country than the  UK,  that
      Mr Gres has been gainfully and productively employed and that he  will
      be a loss to his employers. That the eldest child is integrated in the
      UK in so far as a 6 year old can be, that there would be  difficulties
      for the family as regards employment and housing in  Russia,  that  Mr
      Gres is working and the family as a whole are integrated within the UK
      are not sufficiently compelling reasons to outweigh the  interests  of
      the SSHD in removal. The circumstances  and  consequences  of  removal
      will  not,  on  the  basis  of  the  evidence  before  me,  result  in
      unjustifiably harsh consequences for the  family  such  as  to  render
      removal disproportionate.




          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

     I set aside the decision

    I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing the appeal of the SSHD
    and thus dismissing the  claimant's  appeal  against  the  decision  to
    remove them from the UK.



                                    Date 27th May 2014
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Coker
