
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
IA/46712/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |      Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 February 2016                       |      On 16 February 2016           |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                            paul olasinbo akinola
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms L Appiah, Counsel, instructed by JF Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Sreeraman, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Hodgkinson (the judge), promulgated on 4 June  2015,  in
    which he dismissed the Appellant's appeal on Article  8  grounds.   The
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was in turn against the  decision  of
    the Respondent, dated 7 November 2014, to remove him  from  the  United
    Kingdom by way of directions under section 10 of  the  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 1999.

 2. The Appellant's Article 8 claim was based upon  his  relationship  with
    his partner (who had limited leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom),
    their own biological child and his three step-children.




Decision of the Judge

 3.  The  judge  concluded  that  the  Appellant  could  not  satisfy   the
    requirements of either paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration  Rules  (the
    Rules) (paragraphs 23 to 25 of his decision)  or  Appendix  FM  to  the
    Rules (paragraph 26).

 4. He then went on to consider the Article  8  claim  outside  the  Rules.
    Having regard to the ages of the Appellant's three stepchildren and the
    length of time that they had resided in the United Kingdom,  the  judge
    found that it would not be reasonable for these older children to leave
    the United Kingdom.  He found that the Appellant's departure from  this
    country would have a material effect upon his partner and the children.



 5. In paragraph 33 the judge made reference  to  section  117B(6)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002,  as  amended  (the  2002
    Act).  He states in clear terms that the Appellant had  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with his stepchildren, that they  were
    qualifying children with reference to section 117D of the 2002 Act, and
    that it would not be reasonable for those older children to leave  this
    country.  He then concluded that the Appellant's own  younger  son  did
    not fall into that category insofar as it would be reasonable for  this
    child to leave the United Kingdom.

 6. At paragraph 34 the judge considered that it was in the best  interests
    of the children for them to continue residing in the household of their
    mother and the Appellant.  The judge made it very clear that  it  would
    not be in the best interests of any of the children for them to go  and
    live in Nigeria.

 7. The judge goes on to consider the Appellant's poor immigration history,
    stating, at paragraph 36 that he had been an overstayer for a number of
    years.   This  being  the  case  little  weight  was  attached  to  the
    Appellant's family life with his partner.  The judge  directed  himself
    to relevant case-law including Beoku-Betts [2008] UKHL  39,  MM  [2014]
    EWCA Civ 985, Huang [2007] UKHL 11, and Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 Admin.

 8. In paragraph 43 the judge states:

         "...there are no properly arguable,  or  sustainable,  grounds  for
         giving consideration to the issue of the grant of leave  to  remain
         to the Appellant under Article 8 outside the Rules, on the basis of
         the  particular  circumstances  applicable,   which   circumstances
         include, but are not limited to, the duration of the  relationships
         affected by the Respondent's decisions."

 9. At paragraph 44 the judge says this:

         "The  importance  of  maintaining  effective  immigration  control,
         whilst not a factor outweighing the interests of the  children,  is
         nevertheless,  I  find,  still  a   very   important   factor   for
         consideration, which factor is  not,  I  find,  outweighed  in  the
         present instance by the interests of the children  based  upon  all
         the facts applicable to this appeal and to the Appellant."

10. At paragraph 45 the judge makes reference to the Appellant's  potential
    ability to maintain communications with  his  family  in  this  country
    through modern means.   He  also  refers  to  the  possibility  of  the
    Appellant making an entry clearance application  from  Nigeria  in  due
    course to rejoin his family in the United Kingdom.

11. Finally, at paragraph 46 he concludes that there are no  compelling  or
    exceptional  circumstances  to   render   the   Respondent's   decision
    disproportionate. Therefore the appeal was dismissed.



The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

12. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on three grounds relating  to
    Appendix FM, section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act
    2009, and an alleged misdirection as to section  117B(6)  of  the  2002
    Act.

13. Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce on 5 October 2015.
     She concluded that grounds 1  and  2  were  misconceived  but  granted
    permission on ground 3 (that relating to section 117B(6)  of  the  2002
    Act).



The hearing before me

14. There was (quite rightly) no attempt by Ms Appiah to resurrect  grounds
    1 and 2. Her core submission was that in light of the judge's  findings
    on  the  Appellant's   relationship   with   the   children   and   the
    unreasonableness of them leaving the United Kingdom he should then have
    concluded that section 117B(6)  was  in  effect  determinative  of  the
    Article 8 claim outside of the Rules.  In saying this she relied on the
    decision in Treebhawon and others (section 117B(6)) [2015]  UKUT  00674
    (IAC), a decision of the President postdating the  hearing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal but  one  which  nonetheless,  in  her  submission,
    simply clarifies the law as it has always been.

15. Ms Sreeraman submitted that Treebhawon is not a binding  authority  but
    is of persuasive value only.  It  is  the  Respondent's  position  that
    section 117B(6) is simply one factor amongst others  to  be  considered
    and weighed in the balance when considering Article 8 claims outside of
    the Rules.  She further submitted that  in  this  case  there  were  no
    compelling circumstances, that the  judge  had  in  fact  conducted  an
    overall balancing exercise and had reached sustainable conclusions.

16. I pointed out to both representatives the apparent contradiction within
    paragraph 44 of the judge's decision.  Ms Sreeraman submitted that when
    one looked at the ultimate conclusions  of  the  judge,  paragraph  44,
    whilst perhaps unfortunately worded, nonetheless did  not  represent  a
    material error of law.  Ms Appiah  submitted  that  there  was  a  true
    contradiction within this paragraph.

Decision on error of law

17. In my view there is a material error of law in the judge's decision.

18. Contrary to Ms Sreeraman's submissions I  find  that  the  decision  in
    Treebhawon does represent an accurate statement of the law  as  regards
    Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.  In clear terms  the  President  finds
    that where the three constituent elements of this  provision  are  met,
    there is no longer a public interest in the removal of  the  individual
    concerned.  With reference to paragraphs 14 to 24 of Treebhawon, I rely
    on  the  President's  analysis  of  the  relevant  provisions  and  his
    conclusions thereon.

19. In my view there is no material inconsistency  or  tension  as  between
    Treebhawon and SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387, as  was  implied  by  Ms
    Sreeraman's submissions. First, the Court of Appeal was  not  concerned
    with Part 5A of the 2002 Act. Their focus  on  claims  outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules did not encompass the 'regulating factors' set out in
    sections 117A-D of the 2002 Act. Second, the Court was not laying  down
    a legal test of "exceptionality" or "compelling circumstances": it  was
    describing the character of successful outcome decisions. Third, in any
    event it seems to me  quite  possible  to  regard  section  117B(6)  as
    representing  a  statutory  example  of  an  "exceptional  case"  or  a
    "compelling circumstance".

20. Applying Treebhowan to the appeal before me it is  clear  that  on  the
    judge's unchallenged findings, particularly at paragraph 33, the  three
    constituent parts relevant to section 117B(6) have  been  met  by  this
    Appellant: first, that he had a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
    with the children; second, that the children were qualifying  children;
    third, that it would not be reasonable for the qualifying  children  to
    leave the United Kingdom.  This being the  case,  the  public  interest
    element under section 117B(1) fell away.  The  judge's  attribution  of
    weight to the public interest at paragraphs 35 and (on a fair  reading)
    paragraph 44 was therefore  erroneous.  This  clearly  had  a  material
    effect on his decision as a whole.

21. As indicated above, paragraph 44 does not in  fact  contain  a  genuine
    contradiction. In view  of  the  judge's  ultimate  conclusion  on  the
    appeal, I am satisfied that the use of the first "not" in that  passage
    was simply an infelicitous slip when seeking to describe the children's
    best interests as a primary consideration. There is  no  error  of  law
    here.

22. In light of the above I set aside the decision  of  the  judge  on  the
    basis that he misdirected himself as to the effect of  section  117B(6)
    of the 2002 Act.

Re-making the Decision

23. None of the judge's findings  of  fact  have  been  challenged  by  the
    Respondent and they are preserved for the purposes of the re-making  of
    the decision.  Relying on the findings, in particular  those  contained
    within paragraphs 32, 33 and 34, the requirements of section 117B(6) of
    the 2002 Act have been met by this Appellant.

24. Applying Treebhawon, I conclude that the otherwise very weighty  public
    interest consideration in this appeal falls away.

25. The factors in section 117B(4) and  (5)  have  no  application  to  the
    family life enjoyed with the qualifying children.

26. It follows in my view that the appeal must succeed on Article 8 grounds
    outside of the Rules.

27. If it transpires that Treebhawon  is  incorrect,  I  would  nonetheless
    conclude that removal of this Appellant from the United  Kingdom  would
    be disproportionate in all the circumstances.

28. There is certainly no dispute  that  family  life  exists  between  the
    relevant individuals in this case and that removal would  constitute  a
    very significant interference with the  family  life.   In  respect  of
    proportionality the public interest would be a very significant  factor
    in the Respondent's favour and against the Appellant.  It is of  course
    very significant that the Appellant could not meet the requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules themselves.  This is on the basis of  the  status
    of his partner and the relevant children but for no  other  reason.   I
    factor in the Appellant's status or lack thereof whilst in  the  United
    Kingdom and therefore little weight is to be given to  the  development
    of the family life with the partner.  There is no dispute  relating  to
    the Appellant's  ability  to  have  maintained  himself  and  to  speak
    English.

29. As mentioned already, the three elements of section 117B(6) are met. In
    addition, I find that it would not be reasonable for the youngest child
    to leave the United Kingdom. His mother would remain  in  this  country
    because of  the  three  step-children,  and  there  has  never  been  a
    suggestion he should be separated  from  her.  Further,  as  the  judge
    found, it would be contrary to all of the children's best interests  to
    leave the United Kingdom. I agree.

30. The Appellant's removal would therefore entail a complete separation in
    terms of direct contact between him, his partner and the children. This
    too would be contrary to the children's best interests (again, I am  in
    agreement with the judge on this).

31. The ultimate question is whether  the  public  interest  in  this  case
    justifies outweighing the  best  interests  of  the  children  and  the
    separation  of  the  Appellant  from  his  stepchildren  and  his   own
    biological son. In balancing out all the relevant matters,  I  conclude
    that the following factors go to outweigh the public interest: the best
    interests of all the children in remaining in the United  Kingdom;  the
    best interests of all the children in remaining in the  same  household
    of the Appellant; the satisfaction of section 117B(6).

32.  For  all  of  these  reasons  I  conclude  that   removal   would   be
    disproportionate.





Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I re-make the decision by allowing the appeal on human rights grounds.


No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date: 11 February 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date: 11 February 2016



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor


