
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46529/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th February 2016                         |On 8th July 2016              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MISS HARJIT KAUR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. M Biggs of Counsel instructed by Hiren Patel
Solicitors



                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. This is an appeal against a decision  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       O'Garro promulgated on 4th August 2015,  in  which  she  allowed  the
       appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State  for  the  Home
       Department of 6th November 2014, to refuse the  application  made  by
       Miss Harjit Kaur  for  leave  to  remain  in  the  UK  as  a  Tier  1
       (Entrepreneur) under the Points Based System.


    2. The appellant before me, is the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
       Department. However for ease of reference,  in  the  course  of  this
       decision I shall adopt the parties' status as it was before the First-
       tier Tribunal.  I shall in this decision, refer to the  Secretary  of
       State as the respondent.


    3. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Holmes
       on 18th November 2015.   The  matter  comes  before  me  to  consider
       whether or not the determination by First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Garro
       involved the making of a material error of law, and if so, to  remake
       the decision.


    Background


    4. The background to the  appeal  is  uncontroversial.  The  appellant's
       immigration history is set out by the Judge at paragraphs [9] to [12]
       of her decision.  It was the decision to refuse  of  the  appellant's
       application made on 10th September 2014 for leave to remain as Tier 1
       (Entrepreneur) in accordance with  the  Points-Based  System  of  the
       Immigration Rules that gave rise to the appeal before the  First-tier
       Tribunal.


    5. The application was refused for the reasons set  out  in  a  decision
       letter dated 6th November 2014.  The appellant was awarded no  points
       for Attributes under Appendix A of the rules. The respondent referred
       to Appendix A,  Table  4  (d)  and  the  evidence  submitted  by  the
       appellant.  The respondent stated:


             "This evidence does not cover a continuous period,  commencing
             on the 11 July 2014 & up to?the date of your  application,  as
             stated in the immigration rules. Furthermore your website  was
             not registered by you. No other evidence  from  paragraph  41-
             SD(e)(iii) has been submitted


             The secretary of State is not satisfied, therefore,  that  you
             qualify for the award of points in this area.  The  acceptable
             evidence as defined in paragraph(s)  41  -SD  and  [46-SD]  of
             Appendix A of the Immigration Rules must be provided in  order
             for you to meet the criteria and be awarded points.


             As a result of the above, you have not demonstrated  that  you
             meet the requirements of the Rules to be awarded points  under
             provision (d) in the first row of Table 4 of Appendix A."


    6. The decision of the respondent went on to award no points  for  funds
       held in regulated financial institution(s), funds disposable  in  the
       UK or maintenance funds.  The respondent stated:


             "...We have not assessed your application  under  all  of  the
             potentially relevant criteria, because even  were  you  to  be
             awarded points against such criteria and  to  meet  the  other
             requirements, your application would still fall for refusal on
             the basis of no advertisements prior to 11 July 2014. For that
             reason, it is not necessary to reach a conclusion  as  to  the
             points that you might otherwise  have  scored  and  the  other
             requirements you might otherwise  have  met.  We  reserve  the
             right to consider these points criteria and other requirements
             in any future reconsideration of your application. "


The appeal before the First-tier Tribunal


    7. On 4th July 2015, First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Garro heard the  appeal
       and allowed the  appeal  for  the  reasons  set  out  in  a  decision
       promulgated on 4th  August  2015.   Paragraphs  [3]  to  [8]  of  her
       decision sets out the background to the respondent's decision of  6th
       November 2014.  At paragraph [16] the Judge  sets  out  the  relevant
       extracts from the Immigration Rules and at paragraphs  [20]  to  [34]
       she sets out her  findings  and  conclusions.   Having  set  out  her
       findings and conclusions, the Judge found at paragraph [34] that  the
       respondent's failure to  follow  her  own  policy  and  exercise  her
       discretion in the circumstances, makes her decision not in accordance
       with the law.  The Judge allowed the appeal to the  extent  that  the
       appellant's application remains outstanding before the respondent for
       a lawful decision to be made.


    8. Insofar as is material to the appeal before me, the Judge  states  in
       her decision:


             "20. This appellant's application falls under Table 4  (d)  as
             she has previously held leave as a Tier 1  (Post  Study  work)
             migrant and before the 11 July 2014 and up to the date of  her
             application she has  been  continuously  engaged  in  business
             activity as a director of a company, H &  R  Home  Improvement
             which I noted was registered as a Company on 7 July 2014.


             21.  I note that Paragraph 41 of Appendix  A  states  that  an
             applicant will only be considered to have access to  funds  if
             the specified documents in paragraph 41-SD are provided.


             22.  As the appellant's application falls  under  Table  4(d),
             the required specified documents is  found  in  paragraph  41-
             SD(e) and the issue for  me  to  determine   is  whether   the
             appellant had provided the required specified documents.


             ....


             24.  The bone of contention is whether the appellant submitted
             one of the documents found at 41-SD(e)(iii). This requires  an
             applicant to submit at least one out  of  the  four  different
             types of specified documents listed.


             25.  The appellant has provided a letter showing her  personal
             registration with a UK trade body linked  to  her  occupation,
             which is building and construction. I have seen a letter  from
             the Construction Industry Trade Alliance  dated  4  July  2014
             confirming the appellant's registration to that trade body.  I
             also  noted  in  the  letter  the  appellant's  representative
             submitted with  her  application  that  the  letter  from  the
             Construction Industry Trade Alliance was listed at  number  25
             on the list of documents that were submitted at the  time  she
             made her application


             26.   All  the  other  specified   documents   the   appellant
             submitted, such as advertising or marketing material  and  on-
             line links did not show dates covering the  period  before  11
             July 2014. They in fact showed dates in September 2014.


             27.  However from my reading of the  relevant  paragraph,  the
             appellant is only required to submit one  of  those  documents
             from the listed in 41-SD(e)(iii) and I find she had  submitted
             the required specified evidence when she made her  application
             because she  submitted  the  registration  document  from  the
             Construction Industry Trade Alliance"


    9. I pause there to observe that the respondent does not  challenge  the
       finding made by the  Judge  that  the  appellant  had  submitted  the
       required specified evidence as set out  in  41-SD(e)(iii),  when  she
       made her application because she submitted the registration  document
       from the Construction Industry Trade Alliance.


   10. The Judge went on in her decision to  consider  whether  the  further
       requirement at 41-SD(e)(iv) was met by the appellant.  She states:


          "28.     In addition to the documents required  in  41-SD(e)(iii),
             the appellant is also required to submit one of the  specified
             documents as set out in 41-SD(e)(iv)  which  requires  her  to
             show trading covering the period before 11 July 2014.


          29. The  specified  documents  could  be  either  a  contract  for
             services or a Bank letter confirming  the  date  the  business
             began trading.


          30. The contract for services the appellant  submitted  post-dated
             11 July 2014. I noted the date on  the  Contract  for  Service
             document she submitted had the date 2 September 2014


          31. The appellant had submitted a bank letter but the bank  letter
             which is dated 5 August  2014,  does  not  have  the  required
             information in the letter,  confirming  that  the  appellant's
             business was trading before 11 July 2014


          32. Having considered the evidence, in particular the bank letter,
             it is evident that it does not have the  required  information
             in the letter confirming that  the  appellant's  business  was
             trading before 11 July 2014.


   11. The Judge went on, at paragraph [33]  of  her  decision  to  consider
       whether the respondent should have requested the specified  documents
       under paragraph 245AA of  the  Immigration  Rules.   She  noted  that
       paragraph  245AA(b)(iv)  permits  the  respondent  to   contact   the
       applicant or his representative in writing and  request  the  correct
       documents where an applicant has  submitted  specified  documents  in
       which the document does not contain all of the specified information.
        The Judge states at paragraph [34] of her decision:


         "34. Having considered  Paragraph  245AA,  I  find  that  the  Bank
             letter  is   a   specified   document   which   falls   within
             245AA(b)(iv).    I find that as the bank letter  submitted  by
             the respondent was a specified document which had appeared  to
             the respondent not to contain all the  specified  information,
             confirming the date the business began trading, the respondent
             should have acted in accordance  with  her  policy   found  at
             245AA (b) (iv) and requested the document."


The Grounds of appeal


   12. The respondent notes  the  requirements  set  out  at  paragraph  41-
       SD(e)(iv) of Appendix A and claims that neither the contract nor  the
       bank letter provided by the appellant with her application  contained
       the specified information as defined by paragraph 41-SD(e)(iv).  They
       did not confirm that the appellant's business was trading  before  11
       July 2014.  The respondent states that  evidential  flexibility  does
       not apply to this case  and  as  the  appellant  cannot  satisfy  the
       requirements of the Immigration Rules, the appeal  should  have  been
       dismissed.


   13. Before me, Mr Kotas submits that the Judge erred in her understanding
       of paragraph 245AA of the  Immigration  Rules  and  the  respondent's
       evidential flexibility policy.   He submits that  the  appellant  had
       simply failed to provide evidence to establish that the appellant had
       been trading prior to 11th July 2014 and up to  three  months  before
       her application.  He submits that there was no evidence at all before
       the  respondent  of  any  trading  before  11th  July  2014  and  the
       evidential flexibility would  only  apply  when  the  respondent  has
       reason to believe that the evidence exists.


   14.  In reply, Mr Biggs submits that it was properly open to the Judge to
       find  as  she  did  at  paragraph  [25]  of  her  decision  that  the
       requirements of paragraph 41-SD(e)(iii) of Appendix A were met.    He
       submits that the Judge properly  went  on  to  consider  whether  the
       requirements of paragraph 41-SD(e)(iv) of Appendix A were also met by
       the appellant and the Judge properly acknowledged at paragraphs  [30]
       to [32] of her decision that the documents did not establish  trading
       activity before 11 July 2014. He submits that, the Judge had found at
       paragraph [20] of her decision that the company was registered on 7th
       July 2014 and  that  prior  to  11th  July  2014  the  appellant  had
       registered with a UK trade body,   the  Construction  Industry  Trade
       Alliance. He submits that there was therefore prima facie evidence to
       establish that the company was trading as at  11th  July  2014.   The
       evidence provided in support of the  application  included  a  letter
       from the bank, but unfortunately the letter did not confirm that  the
       business was trading before 11th July 2014. The letter from the  bank
       was  part  of  the  specified  evidence  set  out  at  paragraph  41-
       SD(e)(iv)(2)  of  Appendix  A,  and  in  accordance  with   paragraph
       245AA(b)(iv) of the Immigration Rules, it was  open to the respondent
       to contact the applicant or her representative  requesting  a  letter
       from the bank that contained all of the specified information.


Discussion


   15. The only reason relied upon by the respondent in her decision  letter
       of the 6th November 2014 for awarding the  appellant  no  points  for
       'Attributes' under Appendix A is that, the respondent  concluded,  on
       the evidence before her, that the evidence did not cover a continuous
       period, commencing  on  the  11th  July  2014  to  the  date  of  the
       appellant's    application.     The    respondent    simply    stated
       "...Furthermore your website was not  registered  by  you.  No  other
       evidence from paragraph 41-SD(e)(iii)  has  been  submitted...".   In
       other parts of the decision letter the  respondent  states  that  the
       appellant's application "...would still fall for refusal on the basis
       of no advertisements prior to 11th July 2014..".


   16. Having rejected the application because she was  not  satisfied  that
       the requirements  of  41-SD(e)(iii)  were  met,  it  seems  that  the
       respondent had not expressly gone on to consider whether the  further
       requirement at 41-SD(e)(iv) was met by the appellant.


   17. If the Judge had agreed with the respondent's concerns with regard to
       the evidence relied upon by the appellant that would  have  been  the
       end of the  road  for  the  appellant.   But  the  Judge  found  that
       paragraph 41-SD(e)(iii) was satisfied by  the  registration  document
       from the Construction Industry Trade Alliance.  The  Judge  found  at
       paragraph [27] of her decision that the appellant is only required to
       submit one of the documents from those listed in 41-SD(e)(iii).   She
       found  that  the  appellant  had  submitted  the  required  specified
       evidence when she made her application,  because  she  submitted  the
       registration document from the Construction Industry  Trade  Alliance
       that is dated 4th  July  2014.   That  finding  is,  as  I  say,  not
       challenged by the respondent in the grounds of appeal before me.


   18. I have carefully looked at the Certificate issued by the Construction
       Industry Trade Alliance dated 4th July 2014 that is  relied  upon  by
       the appellant and the letter from them of the  same  date  confirming
       that the appellant had become a  member  of  the  organisation.   The
       certificate and the letter certainly establish that  the  company  of
       which the appellant is a Director became a member of a UK trade  body
       linked to the appellant's occupation on 4th July 2014.  Paragraph 41-
       SD(e)(iii) of Appendix A requires an application to  provide  one  or
       more  of  the  four   specified   documents   (either   together   or
       individually) covering a continuous  period  commencing  before  11th
       July 2014 up to no earlier than three months before the date  of  his
       application.  The Certificate issued  by  the  Construction  Industry
       Trade Alliance confirms the membership as at 4th July 2014 and  falls
       within the three month period before the date of the application, the
       application having been made on 10th September 2014.


   19. It is uncontroversial that the appellant had provided a  letter  from
       the bank confirming that she is the sole authorised signatory to  the
       business account held by the company of which she is a Director.  The
       letter provides the account number  and  confirms  that  the  company
       holds an active business current account.  The letter  confirms  that
       the company has an active business account as at 5th August 2014  but
       does not, as is required by  Paragraph  41-SD(e)(iv)(2)  of  Appendix
       confirm the dates the business was trading during the  period  before
       11th July 2014.


   20. In my judgment, it was open to the Judge to find that the letter from
       the bank does not contain all the specified information and that  the
       respondent should therefore have acted in accordance  with  paragraph
       245AA(b)(iv).  She should at least  have  considered  contacting  the
       appellant or her representatives in writing to  request  the  correct
       document containing all the specified information.


   21. In my judgement, it was open to the Judge on the particular facts  of
       this appeal to find that the  appellant  had  been  deprived  of  the
       benefit of the respondent  giving  consideration  as  to  whether  to
       exercise discretion under paragraph 245AA(b)(iv) of  the  Immigration
       Rules.   In my judgement it was therefore open to the Judge to  allow
       the appellant's appeal to the extent that the appellant's application
       remains outstanding before the respondent for a lawful decision to be
       made.


   22.  It follows that in my  judgment,  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal discloses no  material  error  of  law  and  the  appeal  is
       dismissed.


Notice of Decision


   23. The appeal is dismissed and the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
       shall stand.


   24. No anonymity direction is applied for and none is made.

Signed                                  Date: 8th July 2016



       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia




FEE AWARD


The First-tier Tribunal made no fee award and the  decision  of  the  First-
tier Tribunal stands for the reasons  given  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
O'Garro.

Signed                                  Date: 8th July 2016


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
