

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46479/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 21st April 2016                            |On 25th April 2016           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                                 AHMED KADI

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Turner, instructed by Greater London Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS




   1. FtT judge M A Khan, in a decision promulgated  on  28th  August  2015,
      dismissed Mr Kadi's appeal against a  decision  dated  12th  September
      2014 refusing to vary his leave to remain on Article  8  human  rights
      grounds. Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb granted permission  to  appeal  on
      the grounds that it was arguable that the judge  had  failed  to  take
      into  account  the  report  of  Dr  Halari   a   consultant   Clinical
      Psychologist in respect of  the  family  circumstances  including  the
      appellant's elderly wife. Before the FtT judge it was accepted that Mr
      Kadi could not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules  but  it
      was arguable that the report  could  have  impacted  on  the  decision
      whether there were compelling circumstances such as  would  justify  a
      grant of leave outside the Immigration Rules.


   2. In a Rule 24 response, confirmed and relied upon  by  Mr  Tarlow,  the
      respondent asserts that even if the judge had  taken  account  of  the
      report, which it is submitted he had in the overall consideration,  it
      would have made no difference to the  outcome  given  the  credibility
      findings made. Whilst it is by no means certain that had  that  report
      been taken into account by  the  judge  the  appeal  would  have  been
      allowed, the apparent total failure by the judge to  have  any  regard
      whatsoever to the report displays a failure to  take  account  of  the
      evidence before him. There is no mention whatsoever of the  report  by
      Dr Halari; in Paragraph 18 of the decision the  judge  refers  to  the
      evidence he has taken into account and the report is not mentioned.


   3. It cannot be said that had the judge taken account of the report,  the
      credibility findings would have been the same. I am satisfied that the
      FtT judge erred in law in failing to  take  account  of  and  consider
      relevant evidence in  reaching  his  decision  and  I  set  aside  the
      decision to be remade.


   4. It may be that had the report been considered, there  would  not  have
      been adverse credibility findings to the extent made. That  in  itself
      may not result in the appeal being allowed but it  is  appropriate  in
      the scheme of the Tribunals Court and Enforcement Act 2007 which  does
      not assign the function of primary fact finding to the Upper Tribunal,
      that this appeal is remitted to the FtT for a fresh hearing.




          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision and remit the case to the First tier  Tribunal
    for a fresh hearing, no findings preserved.








                                    Date 21st April 2016
[pic]


Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
