

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/46297/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 14 July 2016                               |On 02 August 2016            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before:
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL

                                   Between

|           |Secretary of State for the Home Department        |Appellant    |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|           |Dominic Quang Akwo                                |Respondent   |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)                        |             |

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Hussian, of Counsel, instructed by Geeta Patel
& Co Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals against a decision of Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal P Stewart who, following a hearing on 9  September  2015,
    allowed the appeal of Mr Akwo (hereafter the "claimant") under s.82  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 against a decision  of
    the Secretary of State of 14  October  2013  by  which  the  respondent
    refused the claimant's application of 21 December  2012  for  leave  to
    remain in the UK on the basis of his family and  private life.

 2. The claimant is a 35-year old national of  the  Republic  of  Cameroon,
    born on 3 March 1981. He arrived in the UK on  6  July  2009,  aged  28
    years, with leave to enter as a Tier 5 migrant. He was granted leave to
    remain as a person exempt from immigration control due to his work  for
    a diplomat, until 20 June 2013.

 3. In November 2009, the claimant met a Ms Asiah Bt Ajum Obin,  a  British
    citizen born on 1 November 1969. They began to rent  property  together
    on 18 January 2010. Both undertook employment which  required  them  to
    "live-in" with their respective employers. Between 18 January 2010  and
    22 February 2012, physical cohabitation was intermittent although  they
    spent weekends and holidays together. They started to live together  on
    23 February 2012. Their son was born on 21 October 2012. The claimant's
    employer,  who  had  indicated  his  disapproval  of   the   claimant's
    relationship with Ms Obin, terminated his employment from  20  November
    2012. On 21 December 2012, he made  an  application  for  discretionary
    leave. This is the application that was the subject of the  refusal  of
    14 October 2013.  On 30 November 2014,  a  daughter  was  born  to  the
    claimant and Ms Obin.

 4. One of the issues taken in the decision letter was that, given that the
    claimant and Ms Obin had not lived together (i.e. physically cohabited)
    for a  period  of  at  least  two  years  prior  to  the  date  of  his
    application, she did not satisfy the definition of "partner" in GEN.1.2
    of Appendix FM of the Statement of Changes in the Immigration Rules  HC
    395 (as amended) (the "Rules"). This was one of the issues before Judge
    Stewart.

 5. The hearing before Judge Stewart was the  second  time  the  claimant's
    appeal was heard in the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT"). It was first heard
    before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal   Brenells   who,   in   a
    determination  promulgated  on  7  July  2014,  dismissed  the  appeal.
    Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  was  granted.  Following  a
    hearing on 31 October 2014, Deputy Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Davidge  set
    aside the decision of Judge Brenells and remitted  the  appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for the decision on the appeal  to  be  re-made  by
    another judge.

 6. The term "judge" will hereafter be a reference to Judge Stewart  unless
    otherwise indicated.

The Secretary of State's reasons for refusing the application

 7. The respondent considered the claimant's Article 8  family  life  claim
    under Appendix FM. The Rules provide criteria for leave to  be  granted
    under the partner route and the parent route. His  private  life  claim
    was considered under para 276ADE(1) of the Rules. His Article  8  claim
    was then considered outside the Rules. It is not necessary  for  me  to
    quote all of these provisions but it may be  helpful  if  I  quote  the
    definition of "partner" and the provisions of EX.1. and EX.2.

 8. A "partner" is defined in GEN.1.2 of Appendix FM. This provides:


        For the purposes of this Appendix 'partner' means -
        (i)      the applicant's spouse;
        (ii)     the applicant's civil partner;
        (iii)    the applicant's fianc�(e) or proposed civil partner; or
        (iv)     a person who has been living together with  the  applicant
           in a relationship akin to a marriage or civil partnership for at
           least two years prior to the date  of  application,  unless  the
           context otherwise requires.

 9. EX.1 and EX.2 of Appendix FM provide:


        Section EX: Exceptions to certain eligibility requirements for
        leave to remain as a partner or parent


        EX.1. This paragraph applies if
        (a)
            (i)   the  applicant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
        relationship with a child who-

            (aa) is under the age of 18 years, or was under the  age  of  18
                  years when the applicant was first granted  leave  on  the
                  basis that this paragraph applied;
                 (bb)  is in the UK;
            (cc) is a British Citizen or has lived in  the  UK  continuously
                  for at least the 7 years immediately preceding the date of
                  application; and

            (ii) it would not be reasonable to expect  the  child  to  leave
        the UK; or

      (b)   the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  a
        partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen, settled  in  the
        UK or in the UK with refugee leave or humanitarian protection,  and
        there are insurmountable obstacles to family life with that partner
        continuing outside the UK.

        EX.2.  For  the  purposes  of  paragraph  EX.1.(b)  "insurmountable
        obstacles" means the very significant difficulties which  would  be
        faced by the applicant or their partner in continuing their  family
        life together outside the UK and which could  not  be  overcome  or
        would entail very serious  hardship  for  the  applicant  or  their
        partner.

10. The Secretary of State refused the claimant's application  for  reasons
    which may be summarised as follows:

    i.     In relation to the application  under  the  partner  route,  the
       Secretary of State rejected the claimant's  assertion  that  he  had
       lived with a partner in a relationship akin to marriage for at least
       two years. The claimant therefore did not fulfil the  definition  of
       "partner" and could not meet the requirements of section R-LTRP. The
       decision letter then states:

           "We have carefully  considered  whether  EX.1  applies  to  your
           application  and  acknowledge  that  you  have  a  genuine   and
           subsisting  relationship  with  a  child  and  a   genuine   and
           subsisting relationship with your British partner  however  your
           application falls for refusal under the eligibility requirements
           of the Immigration Rules as set out earlier. These are mandatory
           requirements which apply to all applicants regardless of whether
           Ex.1 criteria  are  met.  As  you  have  failed  to  meet  these
           eligibility requirements, you cannot benefit from  the  criteria
           set out at EX.1."

    ii.    In relation to the  application  under  the  parent  route,  the
       Secretary of State refused the application because the claimant  did
       not have sole parental responsibility for his son because  he  lived
       with his partner and son in a family  unit.  He  therefore  did  not
       satisfy E-LTRPT 2.3 of Appendix FM. The decision letter then repeats
       the paragraph quoted above in relation to EX.1.

    iii.   In relation to private life, the Secretary of  State  considered
       that para 276ADE(1)(iii)-(v) of the Rules did not apply. In relation
       to  para  276ADE(1)(vi),  she  did  not  accept  that  the  claimant
       satisfied the "no ties" stipulation" because he had  "...  spent  28
       years in Cameroon and in the absence of evidence to the contrary".

    iv.    In relation to the  Article  8  claim  outside  the  Rules,  the
       Secretary  of  State  decided  that  there   were   no   exceptional
       circumstances.

11. The judge gave his reasons for allowing  the  appeal  at  paras  13-21,
    which read:


     "13.   The first submission advanced by Ms Heybroek for the  [claimant]
        is that the [claimant] and Ms Obin were "living together ... ... in
        a relationship akin to marriage" for more than two years  prior  to
        the date of application. The fact that they  were  required  during
        working time to "live-in" with their  employers  does  not  detract
        from the fact that, outside of  their  working  hours,  they  lived
        together in a relationship akin to marriage.


     14.    I test this submission by considering the position of  a  couple
        in employment without any requirement to  "live-in".  One  of  them
        changes jobs. The new job requires that member  of  the  couple  to
        live in on certain nights of the week. On other nights of the week,
        the couple continue to live as  before.   I  cannot  see  that  the
        relationship which previously, in this example, was akin to that of
        marriage is somehow altered by the demands of an employer.  And  my
        view does not alter if the example changes  whereby  both  of  them
        were to change jobs and enter employment  which  required  each  of
        them to sojourn nights of the week in accommodation provided by the
        new  employer.  Married  couples  can  find  themselves   in   such
        situations were [sic] one or both of them are required  by  his  or
        her employer to "live-in". Such an employer's requirement would not
        mean that such a period of employment was rendered to be  a  period
        of living apart for the purposes of section 1(2)(d) or (e)  of  the
        Matrimonial Causes Act 1973.


     15.    Therefore, I accept this submission: the [claimant] and Ms  Obin
        were "living together ... ... in a relationship akin  to  marriage"
        for more than two years prior to the date of application.  I  allow
        the appeal accordingly on that basis.


     16.    In the alternative, Ms Heybroek points out that, as at the  date
        of the  hearing,  the  couple  had  been  without  question  living
        together in a relationship akin to marriage in that they  had  they
        had [sic] been living in 26 Brunel Walk  since  23  February  2012.
        They may not have lived there together for a period  of  two  years
        immediately preceding the date of the reasons for refusal letter on
        14 October 2013 but the two years had been considerably exceeded by
        the hearing date. She has cited the ratio  of  AS  (Afghanistan)  v
        Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011] 1 WLR 385, CA  as
        having been upheld by the Supreme Court in Patel &  Others  v  SSHD
        [2013] UKSC 72. Once a notice under section 120 of the Nationality,
        Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 - a "One Stop Warning" -  has  been
        given (as it was in the reasons for refusal letter  of  14  October
        2013) then the [claimant] is  entitled  to  raise  any  grounds  of
        appeal, including grounds that he  now  substantially  fulfils  the
        same or different requirements of the Immigration Rules in response
        to the notice.


     17.    Ms Heybroek further argues that, as Case C-34/09  Ruiz  Zambrano
        made it clear  that,  where  a  child  is  a  British  citizen  and
        therefore a citizen of the European Union, a measure that  requires
        an EU citizen to leave the Union  would  be  contrary  to  EU  law.
        Thus, where a remaining child or indeed a remaining spouse  of  the
        individual to be removed is a British citizen and  therefore  a  EU
        citizen, it is not possible to require  that  child  or  spouse  to
        relocate outside of the EU or to submit that it would be reasonable
        for them to do so.  She cites Sanade [2012] I.N.L.R. 633 in support
        of this proposition.


     18.    Her argument is that this consideration affects the issue as  to
        whether there are "insurmountable obstacles" as set out in  [EX.1],
        being "very significant difficulties which would be  faced  by  the
        applicant or their partner in continuing their family life together
        outside the UK and which could not be overcome or would entail very
        serious hardship for the applicant or their partner.


     19.    Thus, if case law precludes the Secretary of State from  arguing
        that it is reasonable for the children in this case, both  of  whom
        are British citizens, from relocating outside the EU, there must be
        insurmountable obstacles to the [claimant] and Ms  Obin  continuing
        their relationship outside the EU.


     20.    Ms Heybroek makes a further  submission  that  the  decision  to
        refuse the [claimant] his application for further leave  to  remain
        failed to have regard to the welfare of the children who  would  be
        separated from their father if he is removed from the UK.  It  must
        be the case  that  such  separation  would  be  disruptive  to  the
        children and it is not  reasonable  to  assert  that  the  children
        should move out of the EU to overcome such enforced separation.  It
        seems to me the appeal must be allowed on this further ground  and,
        perforce, under Article 8.


     21.    Thus, on these alternative  grounds,  I  would  also  allow  the
     appeal."

12.  The  judge  did  not  consider  whether  the  claimant  satisfied  the
    requirements of para 276ADE(1),  no  doubt  because  he  considered  it
    unnecessary. Para 276ADE(1) was amended in the period between the  date
    of the decision and the hearing date, with effect from 28 July 2014. If
    the judge had considered para 276ADE(1), it would have  been  necessary
    for him to consider the amended version  of  para  276ADE(1)(vi)  which
    required the claimant to establish that there would be very significant
    obstacles to his reintegration in the Cameroon.

The Secretary of State's grounds

13. The grounds may be summarised as follows:

    i)     The judge adopted the claimant's  submissions  without  reasons,
        failed to record the Secretary of State's submissions and  did  not
        consider them.

    ii)    The judge erred in finding that the claimant  satisfied  GEN.1.2
        of Appendix FM because it was necessary for the  claimant  to  show
        that he had been living in a relationship akin to marriage  for  at
        least two years prior to the date of his application.

    iii)   He erred in his application of the Zambrano principle.

    iv)    He failed to consider whether it would be reasonable  to  expect
        the claimant to return to the Cameroon and make an entry  clearance
        application.

Assessment

14. It was established at the hearing before me that the Presenting Officer
    at the hearing before the judge did not make any submissions that  went
    materially beyond the decision letter. I am  therefore  satisfied  that
    there is nothing in ground (i).

15. I do not accept Mr Hussain's submission that the  decision  letter  did
    not put in issue the "insurmountable obstacles" requirement in EX.1 (b)
    in relation to the parent route. It is clear from the extract from  the
    decision letter quoted at my para 10 (i) above that  the  Secretary  of
    State took the view that it was not necessary to consider  whether  the
    claimant satisfied the requirements of EX.1 (b)  because  the  claimant
    did not satisfy the definition of "partner".

16. The reasons for the judge's finding  at  para  15,  that  the  claimant
    satisfied the definition of partner, are given at paras 13-14. It  will
    be seen that the judge did not, as he should  have,  consider  how  the
    phrase "living together" should be interpreted pursuant to the guidance
    in Mahad (Ethiopia) v Entry Clearance Officer (ECO) [2009] UKSC 16  and
    other leading cases such as Odelola v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2009] 1 WLR  1230.  Para  25  of  Mundeba  (s.55  and  para
    297(i)(f)) [2013] UKUT 00088 (IAC) sets out the relevant passages  from
    Mahad and Odelola, as follows (the emphasis is mine):

       "25.   The  law  is  settled  as  to  the  proper  approach  to   the
           construction of the Rules.  As observed by Lord Brown  in  Ahmed
           Mahad v ECO [2009] UKSC 16 at paragraph [10]:

             "There is really no dispute about the proper  approach  to  the
             construction of the Rules.  As Lord Hoffman said in  Odelola  v
             Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] 1  WLR  1230,
             1233 (paragraph 4):

                       'Further, like any other  question  of  construction,
                 this [whether a Rule change  applies  to  all  undetermined
                 applications or only to  subsequent  applications]  depends
                 upon the  language  of  the  Rule,  construed  against  the
                 relevant background.  That involves a consideration of  the
                 Immigration Rules as a whole and the  function  which  they
                 serve in the administration of immigration policy.'


                   That  is  entirely  consistent  with   what   Buxton   LJ
             (collecting  together  a  number  of  dicta  from  past   cases
             concerning the status of the Rules) had said in Odelola in  the
             Court of Appeal [2009] 1WLR 126 and indeed, with what  Laws  LJ
             said (before the House of Lords decision  in  Odelola)  in  the
             present case.  Essentially it comes to this.  The Rules are not
             to be construed with  all  the  strictness  applicable  to  the
             construction of a statute or statutory instrument but,  instead
             sensibly according to the natural and ordinary meaning  of  the
             words  used,  recognising  that  they  are  statements  of  the
             Secretary of State's administrative policy.   The  respondent's
             Counsel readily accepted that what she  meant  in  her  written
             case by the proposition 'the question of interpretation is  ...
             what the Secretary of State intended his policy to be' was that
             the court's task is to discover from  the  words  used  in  the
             Rules what the  Secretary  of  State  must  be  taken  to  have
             intended.  After all, under s.3(2) of the Immigration Act 1971,
             the Secretary of State has to lay the Rules before  Parliament,
             which then has the opportunity to disapprove them.  True, as  I
             observed in Odelola (paragraph 33): 'The question is  what  the
             Secretary of State intended.  The Rules are  her  Rules'.   But
             that intention is to be discerned objectively from the language
             used,   not   divined   by   reference   to   supposed   policy
             considerations.  Still  less  is  the  Secretary   of   State's
             intention to be discovered from the  Immigration  Directorates'
             Instructions (IDIs) issued intermittently to guide  immigration
             officers in their application of  the  rules.  IDIs  are  given
             pursuant to paragraph 1(3) of Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act  which
             provides that:


                       'In the exercise of their functions  under  this  Act
                 immigration officers shall  act  in  accordance  with  such
                 instructions (not inconsistent with the immigration  rules)
                 as may be  given  them  by  the  Secretary  of  State  ...'
                 (emphasis added)."

17. It is clear from paras 13-15 of his decision  that  the  judge  decided
    what was meant by the phrase "living together" by considering only what
    he himself considered the phrase must mean, whereas he  ought  to  have
    considered what the Secretary of State intended, such intention  to  be
    discerned objectively from the language used. There is no indication in
    his reasoning that he considered the Secretary of State's intention  at
    any point.

18. The parties ought to have assisted the judge not only  by  drawing  his
    attention to Mahad  and  the  other  cases  on  interpretation  of  the
    Immigration  Rules   but   specific   relevant   authorities   on   the
    interpretation of the phrase "living together". Nor  was  my  attention
    drawn to them at the hearing.

19. The parties should also have drawn the judge's attention (and mine)  to
    the decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Fetle  (Partners:  two-year
    requirement) [2014] UKUT 00267 (IAC). In that case, the Upper  Tribunal
    ("UT") (Mr C M G Ockelton, Vice  president  and  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Macleman) considered the meaning of the  phrase  "living  together"  in
    para 352AA(ii) of the Rules and concluded  that  cohabitation  was  not
    required for the purposes of  para  352AA(ii)  because  para  352AA(ii)
    includes the phrase "which has subsisted for two  years  or  more".  At
    para 9, the UT said that cohabitation is required for the  purposes  of
    Gen 1.2.

20. I acknowledge that the view of the UT in Fetle that  Gen  1.2  required
    cohabitation was obiter. Nevertheless, the view of the Deputy President
    is very persuasive. The failure of the  parties  to  draw  the  judge's
    attention to Mahad led him to misdirect himself, in that, it led him to
    interpret the definition of "partner" by considering  what  he  himself
    considered the term must mean, as opposed to discerning  the  Secretary
    of State's intention objectively from the  language  used.  It  is  not
    possible to say that he would have reached the same  interpretation  if
    he had adopted the correct approach pursuant to Mahad and been referred
    to Fetle.

21. Mr Hussain accepted that the judge's alternative finding  at  para  16,
    that the claimant satisfies the definition of "partner" as at the  date
    of the hearing, does not assist the claimant because the definition  of
    "partner" must have been satisfied as at the  date  of  the  claimant's
    application (made on 21 December 2012).

22. In relation to the Zambrano principle, the judge's attention was  drawn
    only to Sanade. He should have had his attention to more recent  cases,
    such as Harrison v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 1736. In the light of Harrison,
    the judge was plainly wrong to find that EU  law  was  engaged  on  the
    facts of this case. The claimant's children would not be  compelled  to
    leave the territory of the EU, given that his  wife  and  the  children
    could continue to live in the UK.

23. The judge's finding that there were  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the
    claimant and his partner continuing their relationship outside  the  EU
    and that it is not reasonable to expect their children to leave the  UK
    were inextricably linked to  his  finding  that  EU  law  was  engaged.
    Accordingly, the error in  misdirecting  himself  on  EU  law  and  the
    applicability of the Zambrano principle was material.

24. Accordingly, none  of  the  judge's  findings  can  stand.  It  is  not
    necessary for me to consider whether he ought to  have  considered  the
    possibility of the claimant  making  an  entry  clearance  application.
    However, the claimant should be ready to address that issue at the next
    hearing. In particular, he should note that the claimant  in  Chikwamba
    satisfied the requirements  for  entry  clearance.  There  was  nothing
    before the judge to show that the claimant satisfied the  accommodation
    and maintenance requirement in Appendix FM and  Appendix  FM-SE  as  to
    accommodation and maintenance. Given the  introduction  of  the  income
    thresholds and the requirements of Appendix  FM-SE,  the  principle  in
    Chikwamba is likely to be of assistance in a smaller  number  of  cases
    than  was  perhaps  the  case  prior  to  the  introduction  of   these
    requirements.

25. Accordingly, pursuant to s.12 of the Tribunals, Courts and  Enforcement
    Act 2007, read together with the above Practice Statement, I find  that
    the judge materially erred in law. I set aside his decision.

26. In the majority of cases, the Upper Tribunal  when  setting  aside  the
    decision will be able to re-make the relevant decision itself. However,
    the Practice Statement for the Immigration and Asylum  Chamber  of  the
    Upper Tribunal at para 7.2 recognises that it may not be  possible  for
    the Upper Tribunal to proceed  to  re-make  the  decision  when  it  is
    satisfied that:

       (a)  the effect of the error has been to deprive a party  before  the
           First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other  opportunity  for
           that party's case to be put to and considered by the  First-tier
           Tribunal; or

       (b)  the nature or extent of  any  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
           necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be  re-made
           is such that, having regard to the overriding objective in  rule
           2, it is  appropriate  to  remit  the  case  to  the  First-tier
           Tribunal.

27. The fact that this case has been remitted once previously and that  the
    case  requires  consideration  of  the  proper  interpretation  of  the
    definition of "partner" in GEN.1.2  together  point  towards  it  being
    appropriate for the Upper Tribunal  to  re-make  the  decision  on  the
    appeal. It is most unfortunate that the parties did not  remind  me  of
    the Mahad principles of interpretation or draw my attention to Fetle at
    the hearing. Had they done so, I could have considered this  issue  and
    delivered my decision in this Decision  and  Directions.  Nevertheless,
    this is not  something  that  should  prejudice  the  claimant  if  the
    appropriate course otherwise is for the case to be remitted to the FtT.



28. I am satisfied that the appropriate course is to remit the case to  the
    FtT. I am satisfied that Practice Statement 7(2)(a) applies, bearing in
    mind the Court of Appeal's judgment in JD (Congo) & Others [2012]  EWCA
    Civ 327 and, importantly, given the fact not only that the claimant won
    his appeal on the last occasion but  also  that  the  decision  on  his
    appeal would have to be re-made on the merits on all issues.

Decision and Directions:

      The decision of the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Stewart  involved
    the making of an error of law such that is falls to  be  set  aside.  I
    have set it aside. I direct that the claimant's appeal be  remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for the decision on the appeal to be re-made by
    a judge other than Judge Brenells and Judge P Stewart.





[pic]

Signed                                             Date: 30 July 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Gill
