
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46212/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  | Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 May 2016                         |On 7 June 2016                        |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               MR AFRIM GASHI
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Secretary of State: Mr T. Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:        Mr J. Dhanji, Counsel, instructed by Malik &
Malik, Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State  appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Wylie promulgated on 30 September 2015.  I  shall  refer
    to Mr Gashi and his wife as the appellant and his  wife  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant was born on 6 November 1965  and  he  appeals  against  a
    decision that was made by the Secretary of State on  4  November  2014.
    The application made by the appellant  was  for  him  to  remain  as  a
    refugee on the basis that he had a well-founded fear of persecution  in
    Kosovo.  That is no longer pursued before me and we therefore  turn  to
    the consideration of the Article 8 claim.

 3. The decision-maker recited  the  fact  that  the  appellants  would  be
    returning to Kosovo and the claim that this would violate  their  human
    rights.  It was recited that  the  appellant  had  entered  the  United
    Kingdom on 26 March 1998 after  claiming  asylum  in  Germany  and  was
    returned to Germany on 5 December 2000, his wife being returned  on  31
    January 2001.  The  German  authorities  then  returned  them  both  to
    Kosovo.  However both he and his wife left Kosovo on  23  January  2001
    and re-entered the United Kingdom on 25 March 2001 avoiding immigration
    controls and not contacting the Home Office until some eleven years had
    elapsed until 2012.

 4. The decision letter records that the appellant had no fear of return to
    Kosovo and expressed the view that he wanted to live and  work  in  the
    United Kingdom.  As a result of the appellant's own statement  that  he
    had no fear of return to Kosovo the Secretary of State inevitably found
    that there was no asylum claim.

 5. It was accepted that the appellant and his wife were married  and  that
    both were nationals  of  Kosovo.   The  decision-maker  looked  at  the
    various eligibility requirements in the Rules and noted  that  where  a
    situation as this has arisen and there was a partner route available it
    was a requirement of that route that the applicant's partner be  either
    a British citizen or present and settled in the UK or a refugee.

 6. Since none of those requirements  were  met  with  either  of  the  two
    parties it was inevitable that the  application  under  the  Rules  was
    going to be refused so the decision-maker  then  went  on  to  consider
    whether or not the appellant  met  the  requirements  of  sub-paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iii).  They had not done so because neither the appellant nor
    his wife had resided in the  United  Kingdom  for  twenty  years.   The
    decision-maker then went on to consider sub-paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) and
    the relevant test at the time namely whether there were any significant
    obstacles in the  appellant  and  his  wife  returning  to  Kosovo  and
    concluded that there were none.

 7. The decision-maker then went on to  consider  whether  there  were  any
    exceptional circumstances and came to  the  view  that  there  were  no
    exceptional circumstances.  There was no  reason  therefore  to  depart
    from the normal application of the public interest  criteria  contained
    within Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE and concluded that there  would
    be no violation of the couple's human rights were they to  be  returned
    to Kosovo.

 8. The judge recited in broad measure the immigration history that I  have
    set out.  He recorded the fact that the appellant and his wife  had  no
    children and she considered that the appellant and his  witnesses  gave
    evidence in a straightforward and genuine manner.  She accepted that he
    and his wife had no relatives or a home in Kosovo and that they have  a
    private life in the United Kingdom with friends.

 9. For my part I am entirely able to accept that  they  have  no  home  in
    Kosovo indeed it would be surprising if they did so having been  absent
    since 2001 and there is nothing implausible about the  fact  that  they
    have no relatives there but then of course the existence of a  home  or
    relatives is not a pre-requirement of removal in the  case  of  adults.
    It may be that, had they remained in Kosovo, there would have  been  no
    relatives either because there were none to be  had  or  because  those
    relatives had left the country.  Either way the fact that they  had  no
    home in Kosovo and no relatives there was certainly  not  determinative
    but it was a factor that the judge was entitled to take into account.

10. The judge then  went  on  in  paragraph  17  of  the  determination  to
    consider, applying the test then applicable, namely whether there would
    be any significant obstacles to his reintegration.  The judge concluded
    that there would be  such  significant  obstacles  because  Kosovo  had
    changed considerably from the country in which he and his wife grew  up
    in.  In my judgment it was an error of law on the  part  of  the  judge
    merely to use the fact that there have been changes  between  2001  and
    2015 as a reason for finding that this would, in itself, amount to very
    significant obstacles.  There  have  been  changes  in  Kosovo.   Those
    changes may well have been for the better.  There will doubtless  be  a
    great deal of modern technology which was not available in Kosovo as it
    was not available anywhere else in 2001.  There are therefore bound  to
    have been changes in the country but it is not clear from the  decision
    nor is it clear from any background  material  to  which  I  have  been
    referred what the changes have been in Kosovo which would amount to  an
    obstacle in the couple's reintegration.   They  have  clearly  spent  a
    considerable part of their lives in Kosovo.

11. There is no suggestion that the couple are  not  able  to  converse  in
    Kosovan or Albanian.  They are a couple who will be returning who  have
    a record of self-supporting  themselves  for  nearly  seventeen  years.
    That may have been working unlawfully because  they  had  no  leave  to
    remain but they are obviously able to work.  No one is suggesting  that
    there is any physical impediment to tier  working  and,  just  as  they
    arrived in the United Kingdom in  2001  without  a  home  and  with  no
    relatives in the United Kingdom and with no job, so too they  would  be
    returning to Kosovo without a home and without  relatives  and  without
    any established job at the moment.

12. Those factors alone do not amount to  significant  obstacles.   Indeed,
    anybody returning after a period away would be placed  in  exactly  the
    same position.  Therefore the reasons advanced by the judge for finding
    that it would  be  a  violation  of  their  human  rights  were  simply
    inadequate by reference to the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).



13. The judge  took  into  account  the  fact  that  the  couple  had  been
    financially   self-supporting   and   concluded   that   it   is    not
    disproportionate to the legitimate public aim to allow the appellant to
    remain in the United Kingdom rather than  removing  him  to  a  country
    where he has no family and no home.

14. I am quite satisfied that this is wrong in law.  Neither a home  nor  a
    family are a pre-requisite of a removal.  Indeed  in  most  cases  this
    would be the situation which faces  those  who  are  returning.   There
    could be no viable process of return if  it  was  predicated  on  there
    being family to support the appellant and if there had to  be  a  home.
    The simple result of this case is that there had to be evidence of what
    those very significant obstacles to re-integration  would  be  and  the
    fact that the country has changed considerably was not enough.

15. No other evidence has been identified to me or drawn  to  my  attention
    which suggests that there would be significant  obstacles.   These  are
    able-bodied people able to generate income, able therefore to  purchase
    those things which it is necessary for them to  survive  in  a  country
    which is becoming more and more sophisticated.  They will not suffer  a
    violation of their human rights by reason of being separated  from  the
    country of their nationality for a period of fifteen years.

16. In these circumstances there can only be one legitimate outcome  absent
    any exceptional circumstances which have not been presented.  There can
    only be one outcome and that is that this couple will be able to return
    to Kosovo without a violation of their human rights.  They  have  never
    had leave to remain; they entered the country clandestinely; they  have
    got no children who might act as a clog on their ability to return  and
    they have merely made use of  their  time  in  the  United  Kingdom  to
    support themselves and there is no reason why they should not do so  on
    return to Kosovo.

DECISION

               1) I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  made  a
                  material error of law and I set aside her decision.

               2)  I  re-make  the  decision  allowing  the  appeal  of  the
                  Secretary of State.

               3) I dismiss the appeal of Mr Gashi against the  decision  of
                  the Secretary of State on all the grounds advanced.

               4) No anonymity direction is made.






                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                                  5 May 2016

