
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46006/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 6 June 2014                                  |On 30 June 2014            |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON

                                   Between

                               Jacob Bannerman
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Praisoody of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Ghana who applied for a  Residence  Card
    as confirmation of a right to reside in the United Kingdom.  In support
    of that application he submitted a marriage certificate stating that he
    was married to his EEA sponsor  under  Ghanaian  customary  law  on  24
    November 2012 by proxy.

 2. The application was refused on the basis that the statutory declaration
    that had been provided  and  which  accompanied  the  registration  for
    marriage did not state the places of residence at the time of  marriage
    of either the appellant or his EEA sponsor.   The  Secretary  of  State
    could not therefore be satisfied that the  marriage  was  conducted  in
    accordance  with  the   Ghanaian   Customary   Marriage   and   Divorce
    (Registration) Law of 1985.  For that reason the Home Office could  not
    accept the  registration  of  marriage  or  the  statutory  declaration
    submitted as being valid  and  lawfully  issued  and  evidence  of  the
    relationship.

 3. The appellant appealed that decision and requested that the  appeal  be
    dealt with "on the  papers".   The  appeal  came  before  a  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  In a determination promulgated on 6 February 2014  the
    judge found that  she  was  not  satisfied  that  there  is  sufficient
    evidence that the marriage complied with the  relevant  laws  in  Ghana
    and furthermore found that she could not be satisfied that the  sponsor
    had capacity to enter into the marriage under the law of  her  country.
    The judge found also that she did not find that there is a relationship
    between the appellant  and  the  sponsor,  let  alone  a  durable  one.
    Thereafter the judge dismissed the appeal.

 4. The appellant did not accept the dismissal of the  appeal  and  applied
    for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  Submissions were  made
    that the judge erred in stating that if the  marriage  is  not  legally
    valid it is necessarily one of convenience; failed to provide  adequate
    reasons for finding the marriage is not legally valid,  and  failed  to
    provide reasons regarding the finding that the parties do  not  have  a
    durable relationship.

 5. The judge granting permission found it  arguable  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge erred in failing to adopt the approach to  validity  set
    out in Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU Law) Nigeria [2014] UKUT  24  (IAC)
    bearing in mind that a marriage certificate had been produced.

 6. I see considerable force in the appellant's argument that the  position
    is not as stated by the judge in  paragraph  15  of  the  determination
    where there appears to be a finding that if the marriage is not a valid
    one in accordance with the law then it is a marriage of convenience  to
    enable the appellant to apply for a residence card.  The  marriage  may
    not be valid due to technicalities but that does not automatically mean
    that the parties  to  the  purported  marriage  had  knowledge  of  its
    invalidity or that the parties entered into the marriage purely for the
    appellant to gain in terms  of  his  immigration  status.   An  invalid
    marriage may be contracted by two individuals who are  otherwise  in  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship.

 7. In the current appeal the appellant has provided a marriage certificate
    and its provision prima facie establishes a marriage that is valid  or,
    alternatively, a marriage considered  by  the  appellant  and  the  EEA
    national  to  be  one  that  is  valid.   Where  I  disagree  with  the
    appellant's representative is  in  stating  that  if  the  marriage  is
    considered to be valid by the appellant and the EEA  national  that  is
    crucial  to  the  issue  of  whether  the  parties  are  in  a  durable
    relationship.  A valid marriage certificate might be the starting point
    for evidencing a durable relationship but it cannot be  any  more  than
    that and to prove durability good evidence would need to be provided of
    the quality and strength of their relationship.

 8. As to that point the judge perfectly properly set out in  paragraph  21
    that there is no evidence in respect of the  relationship  between  the
    appellant and the sponsor, who is a Lithuanian  national,  and  who  is
    said to be exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom.  There is  a
    statement from the appellant that deals solely with the issues  in  the
    refusal of the application without referring in any way to the marriage
    itself.  Although the judge refers to there being a statement from  the
    appellant's wife I cannot find that document in the papers but  in  any
    event the judge reasoned that those statements  are  without  any  real
    purpose as they contain no useful information of fact.  I  can  see  no
    error by the judge therefore in coming to the conclusion that she could
    not find that there is a relationship, let alone a durable one, between
    the appellant and the sponsor.

 9. My conclusion is therefore that even though the judge may have erred in
    referring to the marriage as being one of convenience automatically  by
    reason of it not being a valid one, and even if the  finding  that  the
    marriage is not valid is incorrect by reason of the matters set out  in
    the grounds of appeal, this avails the appellant of nothing because  of
    the case of Kareem.

10. It is perhaps unfortunate that the  head  note  to  Kareem  appears  to
    suggest that the (mere) production of a marriage certificate issued  by
    a competent authority will usually be sufficient to show that a  person
    who is the spouse of an EEA national who is a qualified person  in  the
    United Kingdom can derive rights of free movement  and  residence.  The
    head note says also that in appeals where there  is  no  such  marriage
    certificate or where there is doubt that  a  marriage  certificate  has
    been issued by a competent authority, then the marital relationship may
    be proved  by  other  evidence  which  will  require  the  Tribunal  to
    determine whether a marriage was contracted.

11. The argument advanced is that a suitable certificate has been  produced
    and therefore the appeal should be allowed.

12. Although the Tribunal prepares the head note in cases that  it  reports
    and to that extent is more authoritative than a head note  prepared  by
    an academic commentator, it is not part of the decision and has  to  be
    understood with regard to the reasons  set  out  in  the  determination
    itself.

13. It is clear from Kareem that the Regulations are there to  ensure  that
    (as in this appeal) the Lithuanian sponsor will not be discouraged from
    exercising treaty rights in an EEA state of which she is not a national
    by reason of it being harder for her husband to join her here  than  in
    the country of which she is a national.  It is not,  however,  intended
    to encourage or permit  nationals  of  EEA  states  to  go  behind  the
    marriage laws of their country of nationality by recognising  marriages
    elsewhere in the EEA that would not be recognised in the EEA national's
    own country.  If a marriage is not recognised under the EEA  national's
    own law it is not a marriage for the purpose of the Regulations.

14. The decision in Kareem makes it plain that the claimant  has  to  prove
    that the marriage  would  be  recognised  in  the  EEA  national's  own
    country.  In such cases it is necessary  to  prove  that  the  marriage
    would be recognised not only in the appellant's home country  of  Ghana
    but also that it would be recognised in Lithuania too.  There has  been
    no attempt to do that and therefore I find  that  whether  or  not  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in the manner  already  described  that
    error is not material.  It has been established on the evidence  before
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge that the appellant has not shown that  he
    is entitled to reside in the United Kingdom as the husband  of  an  EEA
    national exercising Treaty rights.

Decision

15. For these reasons the decision of the First-tier Judge  is  upheld  and
    the appeal therefore remains dismissed under the 2006 Regulations.

16.  No  anonymity  direction  has  previously  been  made,  there  was  no
    application for one and I see no good reason to make such a direction.




Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton


