
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46643/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke          |             Decision and Reasons       |
|                                       |Promulgated                             |
|On 26th October 2015                   |             On 24th November 2015      |
|                                       |                                        |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT


                                   Between

                                 SAKINA BIBI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Khan, Solicitor of Bukhari Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


 1.  Before  the  Upper  Tribunal  the  Secretary  of  States  becomes  the
    appellant.   However,  for  the  avoidance  of  confusion  and  to   be
    consistent, I shall continue to refer  to  the  parties  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. On 7th July 2015 Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor  gave  permission  to  the
    respondent to appeal against the decision of Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Malik in which she allowed the appeal against the decision  of
    the respondent to refuse leave to remain on the basis of  private  life
    applying the provisions of paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

 3. In the grounds of application the respondent contended that  the  judge
    had failed to engage with the "legal threshold" namely the existence of
    very significant obstacles to  the  appellant's  integration  into  her
    country of origin, Pakistan.  Whilst the judge  accepted  that  medical
    treatment was available for the appellant  in  Pakistan,  she  had  not
    examined evidence to show that the  appellant  could  not  secure  paid
    carers in that  country.   In  particular  there  was  no  evidence  to
    corroborate the assertion made by the appellant's son about an  absence
    of carers.  Further,  the  judge  was  in  error  in  failing  to  give
    consideration to the possibility of  the  appellant's  close  relatives
    accompanying her either temporarily or permanently to Pakistan to offer
    care or set up a regime of  care.   Attention  is  also  drawn  to  the
    judge's acceptance that Section 117B(5) of the 2002 Act indicates  that
    little weight should be given to a private life established by a person
    at a time when their immigration status is precarious  yet  decided  it
    would be "unreasonable" for her to be separated from her family in UK.

 4. At the hearing before me  Mr  McVeety  confirmed  that  the  respondent
    relied on the grounds which I have  summarised  above.   He  also  drew
    attention to the judge's conclusion in paragraph 37, by reference to  a
    GP report, that there was no deterioration in  the  appellant's  health
    since her arrival in the United Kingdom.  He therefore argued that,  on
    the basis that the appellant was in the same medical condition  now  as
    she had been in Pakistan, she could return there to  live  as  she  had
    before.  In paragraph 36 the judge acknowledges that the appellant  had
    lived alone in Pakistan from 2008 until she came to the United  Kingdom
    in 2014. He also contended that the judge's Article 8 decision, outside
    the Rules, was inadequate failing to give proper weight to  the  public
    interest as defined in Section 117B(5).

 5. Mr Khan drew my attention to his skeleton argument.  In this he  refers
    to the appellant's previous  visits  to  the  United  Kingdom  and  her
    compliance with visa requirements on each  occasion  even  if  she  had
    overstayed her last entry visa.  He also emphasised that  it  would  be
    unsafe and unreasonable for the appellant to live in Pakistan where the
    appellant has no relatives and her health is of concern to her UK based
    children.  He also  contended  that  the  judge  had  applied  the  law
    correctly and directed herself appropriately  in  reaching  a  decision
    which was open to  her.   He  further  submitted  that  the  judge  had
    properly  identified  very  significant  obstacles  to  the   appellant
    returning to Pakistan.  No detailed consideration of Article  8  issues
    outside the grounds was required  as  the  judge  had  found  that  the
    appellant came within the provisions of paragraph 276ADE(5).

Conclusions

 6. At the end of the hearing I announced that I  was  satisfied  that  the
    decision showed an error on a point of law and, having  regard  to  the
    nature of that error, it would be appropriate  for  the  appeal  to  be
    heard afresh before the First-tier Tribunal.   The  reasons  for  those
    conclusions now follow.

 7. At paragraph 37 of the decision the judge accepts that the report  from
    the appellant's GP did not speak of any deterioration  in  her  health.
    Thus, it appears irrational that the judge should go on to decide  that
    the appellant would not be able to access the required level of care if
    returned to Pakistan when she had already lived alone in  that  country
    for several years following the unfortunate demise of  her  husband  in
    2008 whilst apparently caring for herself.  The judge does  not  tackle
    that self-evident inconsistency when reaching conclusions about care.

 8. The judge also accepts the assertions of the appellant's  son  that  it
    would not be  possible  to  obtain  assistance  for  the  appellant  in
    Pakistan without considering whether or not evidence should  have  been
    provided to support that arguable assertion such as a statement from  a
    medical practitioner in Pakistan to confirm  the  absence  of  suitable
    care facilities in the appellant's home area.

 9. Without cogent reasoning, the judge's  conclusion  that  the  appellant
    would face  very  significant  obstacles  to  her  re-integration  into
    Pakistan also appears perverse particularly  when  the  judge  has  not
    explained why the appellant cannot return  to  live  in  the  situation
    which prevailed for her in Pakistan before coming to the United Kingdom
    in 2014, especially when the appellant's  son  has  confirmed  that  he
    could afford to pay for his mother's care if returned.

10. The judge's conclusions are therefore flawed for the preceding  reasons
    and the decision should be set  aside.   The  matter  should  be  heard
    afresh by the First-tier Tribunal.  Having regard to the need for fresh
    findings of fact the remittal to the First-tier Tribunal  accords  with
    the Practice Statement for the Tribunal by the Senior President of 25th
    September 2012 at paragraph 7.2.

Decision

11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shows an error on  a  point  of
    law and is set  aside.   The  appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for hearing afresh.

DIRECTIONS

12. The appeal is to be heard afresh before the First-tier Tribunal sitting
    at Manchester on a date to be specified by the Resident Judge  at  that
    centre.

13. An Urdu interpreter will be required for the hearing.

14. The time estimate for the hearing is two hours.

15. The appeal should not be heard before Judge Malik.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt

