
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46956/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 September 2015                 |On 9 December 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MS FELICITY AGYEI BOAH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   On 16 March 2015, the respondent's appeal against a decision to  refuse
    to issue her with a residence  card  under  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the 2006 Regulations") was allowed by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Buckwell ("the  judge").   The  Secretary  of
    State was given permission to appeal against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal, on 8 May 2015.  In  directions  made  by  the  Principal
    Resident Judge, sent to the parties on 13 May, the parties were advised
    to prepare for the Upper Tribunal hearing on the  basis  that,  if  the
    decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  were  set  aside,  any  further
    evidence that might  be  needed  in  remaking  the  decision  could  be
    considered at the hearing.

2.   On 14 September 2015, two days before  the  hearing,  the  respondent's
    solicitors applied for an adjournment, on the basis that she was unwell
    and had taken  tablets  as  she  was  in  pain.   The  application  was
    unaccompanied  by  any  medical  or  other  supporting  evidence.   The
    following day, an Upper Tribunal Judge refused the adjournment as there
    was nothing to show that the respondent  was  not  fit  to  attend  the
    hearing.

3.   The appeal was listed for hearing at Field  House  at  10  a.m.  on  16
    September 2015.  There was no appearance by the respondent  or  by  her
    solicitors.  Enquiries revealed that no message had been left.   On  my
    instruction, my  clerk  made  a  telephone  call  to  the  respondent's
    solicitors.  She was told that the person with carriage of  the  matter
    was not in the office and that a telephone call would be  made  to  the
    Tribunal with any further news.  At 10.45 a.m., in the absence  of  any
    further information, I indicated that I would rise  until  11  a.m.  to
    enable the respondent or her solicitors to provide the  Upper  Tribunal
    with any update they might wish to provide.   Shortly after 11 a.m.,  I
    returned to the court room, having  been  informed  by  my  clerk  that
    nothing further had been received.

4.   It is apparent that there has  been  no  failure  of  service,  as  the
    application for the adjournment shows.  Notwithstanding the  directions
    sent to the parties in May, no further evidence has been made available
    by the respondent or her advisors.  The judge decided the appeal on the
    basis of the documentary evidence, the respondent having indicated that
    she did not require a hearing.  The evidence before me is the  same  as
    was before the judge.   I  had  regard  to  Rule  38  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008.   I  was  satisfied  that  the
    respondent and her solicitors were notified of the hearing and that  it
    was in the interests of justice to proceed.  I could  see  no  sensible
    reason to adjourn and neither party  would  benefit  from  any  further
    delay.  The respondent and her solicitors had clearly been given  ample
    opportunity to prepare for the case and, indeed, to provide evidence in
    support of the application for an adjournment.  At the very least,  the
    Upper Tribunal might reasonably have  expected  an  attendance  by  the
    solicitors, who have remained on the record as acting.

The Secretary of State's application for permission to appeal

5.   The judge took into account guidance given by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    Kareem [2014] UKUT 24 and found that the proxy  marriage  entered  into
    between the respondent and her French national sponsor  was  recognised
    under the law of Ghana.  The necessary formalities were complied  with.
    He concluded that the marriage fell to  be  recognised  by  the  United
    Kingdom and, as a result, the respondent was able to show that she fell
    within Regulation 7(1)(a) of the 2006 Regulations as a family member of
    an EEA national.

6.   In the light of that finding, the judge concluded  that  there  was  no
    need to consider whether the respondent fell within Regulation 8(5)  of
    the 2006 Regulations, on the alternative basis that  she  was  able  to
    show that she and her sponsor were in a durable relationship  and  that
    she was  entitled  to  require  the  Secretary  of  State  to  exercise
    discretion under Regulation 17(4) of the 2006 Regulations  with  regard
    to the application for a residence card.

7.   The judge went on to find  that  as  he  was  satisfied  that  a  valid
    marriage had been established, the respondent was entitled to  exercise
    family life in the United Kingdom and so  the  decision  to  refuse  to
    issue her with a residence card  was  unlawful  as  it  amounted  to  a
    disproportionate response.  She succeeded under Article 8 of the  Human
    Rights Convention.

8.   In the grounds, the Secretary of State contended that the  judge  erred
    in two respects. First, he failed to have  regard  to  the  requirement
    that a claimant must show that a marriage is recognised under  the  law
    of the EEA state of which her sponsor is a national.  This  requirement
    appears in paragraph 18 of the decision in Kareem, as explained  in  TA
    and Others [2014] UKUT 00316.  The  finding  that  the  appellant  fell
    within Regulation 7(1)(a) of the  2006  Regulations  was  flawed.   The
    judge also erred in not making findings in relation to the respondent's
    claim that she and her sponsor were in a durable  relationship,  within
    the meaning of Regulation 8(5).

9.   Secondly, the judge erred in allowing the appeal  under  Article  8  of
    the Human Rights Convention.  In the  respondent's  case,  the  adverse
    decision was simply to refuse to  issue  her  with  a  residence  card.
    There was no removal decision and no service of a notice under  Section
    120 of the 2002 Act.  In these circumstances, the respondent was unable
    to rely upon Article 8 and the judge erred in also allowing the  appeal
    on this basis.

10.  As noted above, permission to appeal was granted on 8 May 2015.

Submissions on Error of Law

11.  Ms Fijiwala handed up copies of the judgments  in  TA  and  Others  and
    Amirteymour and Others [2015] UKUT 00466.  She submitted that the judge
    erred in relation to the validity of the proxy  marriage  conducted  in
    Ghana.  There was no evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  that  the
    marriage  was  recognised  in  the  law  of  France,  the  country   of
    nationality of the respondent's  sponsor.   She  was  not  entitled  to
    succeed under Regulation 7(1)(a).  The judge also erred in  failing  to
    assess the case advanced under Regulation 8(5) of the 2006 Regulations.



12.  So far as Article 8 was concerned, the decision of the  Upper  Tribunal
    in Amirteymour showed that Article 8 was not engaged.

Conclusion on Error of Law

13.  The decision has been prepared by  a  very  experienced  judge  and  it
    contains a characteristically careful assessment of the evidence before
    him.  With some reluctance, however, I agree with Ms Fijiwala that  the
    decision contains errors of law.

14.  On page 8 of the Secretary of State's letter of  4  November  2014,  in
    which reasons were given for the decision  under  appeal,  there  is  a
    summary of Kareem which expressly refers to the need to consider, as  a
    "starting point", whether the marriage relied upon is recognised in the
    law of the EEA  sponsor's  country  of  nationality.   In  the  present
    appeal, the respondent claimed  that  she  was  validly  married  to  a
    citizen of France.  With great respect to the judge,  although  he  has
    referred to Kareem and other authorities bearing on  the  need  for  an
    assessment of the formal requirements for marriage in the law of  other
    countries, this "starting point" has  not  been  considered.   That  it
    remains an important part of the assessment is confirmed by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in TA and Others.  In the absence of any evidence showing that
    the proxy marriage conducted in Ghana was  recognised  in  the  law  of
    France, the respondent could not succeed under  Regulation  7(1)(a)  of
    the 2006 Regulations.

15.  It follows that the judge ought not  to  have  concluded  that  it  was
    unnecessary to consider the alternative case that  the  respondent  and
    her sponsor met  the  requirements  of  Regulation  8(5)  of  the  2006
    Regulations.  Although there was very little evidence indeed  regarding
    this case (see below) the judge was obliged to engage with  it,  as  he
    was with the Secretary of State's adverse findings on this aspect.

16.  So far as Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention  is  concerned,  the
    judge cannot be faulted for failing to take  into  account  Amirteymour
    and Others, as this important decision was  only  promulgated  in  late
    July 2015.  Nonetheless, it is clear that in the absence of  a  removal
    decision (under Regulation 19 of the 2006 Regulations) and notice under
    Section 120 of the 2002 Act, where the  decision  under  appeal  is  to
    refuse to issue a residence card,  a  claimant  cannot  rely  on  human
    rights grounds.  Article 8 is not engaged.

17.  For these reasons, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal,  containing
    material errors of law, is set aside and must be remade.

Remaking the Decision

18.  It will be convenient in this part of the  decision  to  refer  to  the
    respondent, Ms Boah, as the claimant and to the Secretary of  State  as
    the respondent.  I  again  had  regard  to  Rule  38  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  Taking into account the failure
    of the application for an adjournment, the  directions  served  on  the
    parties and the absence of the  claimant  and  her  solicitors,  I  was
    satisfied that it was appropriate and just to proceed.

19.  Ms  Fijiwala  said  that  very  little  supporting  evidence  had  been
    produced by the claimant.  She provided the  Secretary  of  State  with
    bank statements in her sponsor's name but there were none  in  her  own
    name or in joint names.  A tenancy agreement  was  made  available  but
    this was not accepted as reliable evidence by the Secretary  of  State.
    There was no evidence showing any cohabitation between the claimant and
    her sponsor before the date of the proxy marriage.

20.  The judge summarised the claimant's case briefly,  at  paragraph  8  of
    the decision, as he did the Secretary of State's response to it.

21.  There was nothing further from the  claimant.   Ms  Fijiwala  submitted
    that the Upper Tribunal should  draw  an  adverse  inference  from  her
    absence. There was no opportunity to cross-examine her or  her  sponsor
    on the durability of the claimed relationship between them. The  appeal
    fell to be dismissed.

Findings and Conclusions

22.  In this appeal, the burden lies with the claimant to  prove  the  facts
    and matters she relies upon and the standard of  proof  is  that  of  a
    balance of probabilities.

23.  The appeal was decided in the First-tier Tribunal on the basis  of  the
    documentary evidence made available, the claimant having indicated that
    she did not require a hearing.  Nothing further has been  provided  and
    there was no appearance in the Upper Tribunal by or on  behalf  of  the
    claimant.

24.  The documentary evidence provided in support of her case  is  extremely
    thin.  The Secretary of State took into account bank statements in  her
    sponsor's name  and  a  tenancy  agreement.   There  was,  however,  no
    evidence showing cohabitation before the date  of  the  proxy  marriage
    conducted in Ghana.  The overall conclusion reached by the Secretary of
    State was that the evidence did not show a valid marriage or a  durable
    relationship between the claimant and her sponsor.

26.  Dealing first with the claimant's  contention  that  she  falls  within
    Regulation 7(1)(a) of the 2006 Regulations as  the  spouse  of  an  EEA
    national present here exercising treaty rights, that case is simply not
    made out.  She has not produced evidence at any stage showing that  the
    proxy marriage is recognised in the law of France.  That is  sufficient
    to dispose of her appeal in this context.

27.  Moving on to Regulation 8(5) of the 2006 Regulations,  the  grounds  of
    appeal contain no detail at all.  The copy tenancy agreement,  dated  1
    March 2014, purporting to record a joint tenancy of a room in  a  house
    in Dagenham, was not accepted by the Secretary of State and  there  has
    been no response of any substance at all to that adverse  finding.   In
    isolation, it falls woefully short of showing a  durable  relationship.
    There has also been  no  substantial  challenge  to  the  Secretary  of
    State's findings regarding the  absence  of  evidence  of  cohabitation
    prior to  the  proxy  marriage  and,  again,  the  submission  of  bank
    statements in the name of the claimant's  sponsor  is  insufficient  to
    make out her case.

28.  The claimant has not shown that she and  her  French  national  sponsor
    have ever been in a durable relationship together.  She has  not  shown
    that she falls within Regulation 8(5) of the 2006 Regulations.

29.  So far as Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention  is  concerned,  the
    claimant's human rights are not engaged in this  appeal.   The  adverse
    decision was simply to refuse to  issue  her  with  a  residence  card.
    There is nothing to show that a removal decision has been made or  that
    she has been served with notice under section 120 of the 2002 Act.   In
    these circumstances, the decision in Amirteymour and Others falls to be
    applied.

30.  For these reasons, the grounds of appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    have not been made out and the appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

31.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal having been set  aside,  it  is
    remade as follows: appeal dismissed.


Signed   Date 17 September 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell



Anonymity

There  has  been  no  application  for  anonymity  at  any  stage  in  these
proceedings and I make no direction on this occasion.

Fee Award

As the appeal has been dismissed, no fee award may be made.


Signed   Date 17 September 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell

