
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46784/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 April 2015                              |On 30 April 2015              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                                     MN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Johnstone, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Mensah, instructed by Zacharia & Co, Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and to the  respondent
    as the appellant (as they appeared respectively before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).  The appellant, MN, is a citizen of Iran who appealed to the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Cruthers) against decisions dated 28 October
    1913 to refuse to vary his leave to remain in the United Kingdom and to
    remove him by way of directions under Section 47  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The First-tier Tribunal  allowed  the
    appellant's appeal on Article  8  ECHR  grounds.   The  respondent  now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The grounds assert that the judge failed to provide adequate reasons as
    to  why  the  appellant's  circumstances  were  either  compelling   or
    exceptional such that his appeal should be allowed under Article 8 ECHR
    outside the Immigration Rules.  Both  parties  accepted  the  appellant
    could not succeed in his  appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    appellant has a British citizen partner  (SB)  and  a  child  (LN)  the
    latter being born in 2009.  There appears to be  no  dispute  that  the
    relationship between the appellant, his partner and child is subsisting
    as continued whilst the appellant has  been  in  prison.   The  grounds
    assert that the judge failed to take  account  of  the  fact  that  the
    appellant  and  his  partner  began  their  relationship   whilst   the
    appellant's immigration status was precarious and that contact could be
    maintained from abroad by "modern means of communication".  The grounds
    also assert that the judge failed to take proper account  of  the  full
    extent of the appellant's offending and that  he  was  not  a  credible
    witness whose claims (eg. to have lost his ability to speak Farsi) were
    not reliable.  Finally, the grounds asserts that the Tribunal failed to
    have  proper  regard  to  the  public  interest  concerned   with   the
    appellant's deportation.

 3. Ms Johnstone, for the respondent,  developed  these  arguments  in  her
    submissions before the Upper Tribunal.  The appellant had succeeded  in
    an  appeal  against  a  deportation  order  in   January   2012.    The
    determination of the Tribunal in that  appeal  had  been  available  to
    Judge Cruthers and he took account of it.  However, the  appellant  had
    been arrested in May 2012 for class A drugs offences for which  he  was
    subsequently convicted and sentenced to imprisonment in September 2012.
     The appellant claimed that  he  had  been  entirely  truthful  in  his
    evidence before the previous Tribunal regarding his criminal  offending
    (at that stage his convictions were limited to offences other than drug
    dealing).  Ms Johnstone submitted that, had the previous Tribunal  been
    aware of the appellant's full offending history, it might have  reached
    a different decision on his appeal.

 4. I am not satisfied that the respondent has revealed any error of law in
    Judge Cruthers's determination.  At [43], Judge Cruthers noted that the
    appellant's claim to have been "entirely open with a Deportation Appeal
    Tribunal in January 2012" but went on to record that "I  found  nothing
    on the face of the January 2012  determination  itself  which  confirms
    what the  appellant  says  in  this  regard  or  contradicts  what  the
    appellant says in this regard."  Having read the determination  myself,
    I considered that statement to be accurate.  It is possible that  there
    was no reference  of  drugs  offences  in  the  previous  determination
    because the Tribunal had been deceived  by  the  appellant  but  it  is
    equally possible that reference to that criminal  behaviour  (predating
    the appellant's conviction) may not have been  considered  relevant  by
    the previous Tribunal  to  the  issues  before  it.   Judge  Cruthers's
    comments admit both possibilities and effectively classify the issue as
    "neutral" in his analysis, as Ms Mensah submitted.   However,  at  [50]
    Judge Cruthers wrote "in the light of the offence  that  the  appellant
    was subsequently sentenced for on 24 September  2012,  it  is  probably
    fair  to  say  the  Deportation  Appeal  Tribunal  underestimated   the
    seriousness of the appellant's criminal behaviour ...".  Again, I  find
    that to be an entirely reasonable finding based on the contents of  the
    previous  determination  and  Judge   Cruthers's   knowledge   of   the
    appellant's propensity to continue offending.  This is not a case where
    the judge has simply adopted the findings and reasoning of  a  previous
    Tribunal; rather, he has accurately identified the  likely  basis  upon
    which that Tribunal made its deliberations and  has  assessed  all  the
    relevant evidence up to and including the date of  the  hearing  before
    him.  Ms Johnstone's wider point, that nothing that the  appellant  has
    said should have been accepted by the judge because it was likely  that
    he had concealed his offending from the  previous  Tribunal,  does  not
    really penetrate to the heart of Judge Cruthers's analysis.   There  is
    little  indication  in  Judge  Cruthers'  determination  that  he   has
    proceeded on the basis that this appellant is a reliable witness  given
    the very dim view he took of his propensity to offend.   At  [54],  the
    judge noted that the appellant had not "denied the assertions ... as to
    him  having  used  a  series  of  false  names,  dates  of  births  and
    nationalities."   The  judge's  findings  about  the  nature   of   the
    relationship between the appellant, his partner and child  (which  were
    of particular importance in his analysis and conclusions) do not appear
    to have been based upon the appellant's own evidence but that of  other
    witnesses  whose  credibility  had  not  been  put  in  doubt  by   the
    respondent.  I find that Judge Cruthers has taken a clear-sighted  view
    of the circumstances in this case in the submission that he has  placed
    excessive faith on the evidence of an unreliable appellant is not  made
    out.

 5. I find that the same is true of the judge's assessment  of  the  public
    interest in this case.  There are many examples in his determination to
    show that he was well-aware of the appellant's  "horrendous  record  of
    criminal behaviour" [49] and the strong public interest concerned  with
    his removal from the United Kingdom.  I  also  find  that  the  judge's
    conclusion that the deportation of the appellant was likely to bring to
    an end all family life between the appellant, his partner and child was
    open to him on the evidence.  The respondent's  assertion  family  life
    might be continued by "modern means of communication" amounts to little
    more than disagreement with the finding of the judge.  Ultimately,  the
    judge at [64] concluded that the appellant's criminal activities ("very
    significantly more serious than was known  to  the  Deportation  Appeal
    Tribunal in January 2012") did not "quite justify the  bringing  to  an
    end of all family life between him [his partner and child]."  That  was
    not a conclusion which all  Tribunals  would  inevitably  have  reached
    given the same factual matrix.  However, that is not the point.   Judge
    Cruthers did not act perversely  or  irrationally  by  concluding  that
    there were exceptional and compelling reasons for allowing this  appeal
    outside the  Immigration  Rules.   He  achieved  one  of  the  possible
    outcomes available on the evidence and has supported  that  outcome  by
    cogent  and  adequate  reasoning.   He  has  not  taken  into   account
    irrelevant matters nor has he ignored relevant facts.  I find  that  he
    has not erred in law and as a consequence I dismiss  the  Secretary  of
    State's appeal.  I must, however, stress that I agree with the  judge's
    comments at [65] that any further criminal behaviour on the part of the
    appellant that may  well  lead  to  his  removal,  notwithstanding  the
    strength of the relationship with his family in the United Kingdom.

 6. I am aware that there a further deportation appeal  is  pending  before
    the First-tier Tribunal under reference DA/01578/2014.  Directions will
    now be made in the First-tier Tribunal for that appeal to be listed  as
    soon as possible.  Both representatives should ensure that a copy of my
    decision be brought to the attention of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    who may hear that appeal.


Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date 25 April 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


