
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46298/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                    |                Decision & Reasons    |
|                                       |Promulgated                           |
|On 17th November 2015                  |                On 12th January 2016  |
|                                       |                                      |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                     mr Solomon  Olufemi Oludare Okunnu
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Miss C Johnstone, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 20th September 1981.  The
    Appellant originally was granted leave to enter the  UK  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student on 15th October 2010.  That  leave  was  subsequently
    extended on two occasions; the latter as a Tier 1 (Post-Study) Migrant.
     On 2nd October 2014 the Appellant made a further application for leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom as  a  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)  Migrant
    under the points-based system  (PBS)  and  for  a  biometric  residence
    permit (BRP).

 2. That application was refused by the Secretary of State in a  Notice  of
    Refusal dated 3rd November 2014 on the basis that the Appellant had not
    submitted the evidence specified at paragraph 41-SD(e) of Appendix A of
    the Immigration Rules and that  as  a  result  the  Appellant  had  not
    demonstrated he met the requirements of the Rules to be awarded  points
    under provision (d) in the first row of Table 4 of Appendix A and  that
    he had submitted no evidence that he qualifies  for  points  under  any
    other provisions in the first row of Table 4 of Appendix A.

 3. The Appellant appealed and the appeal  came  before  Immigration  Judge
    Edwards sitting at Manchester on 3rd March 2015.   In  a  decision  and
    reasons promulgated on  6th  March  2015  the  Appellant's  appeal  was
    dismissed both under the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.



 4. On 16th March 2015 Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the Upper Tribunal.
     On 6th May 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Astle granted permission  to
    appeal.  Judge Astle noted that the grounds stated that the  Respondent
    had failed to comply with the directions of a previous judge  and  that
    the sole issue was that of payment for the  application  to  which  the
    case of Basnet [2012] UKUT 00113 (IAC) was  relevant.   It  was  argued
    that the judge decided the appeal did not  make  a  full  and  properly
    reasoned decision and failed to make proper findings  on  the  "Basnet"
    issue  and  that  it  was  arguable  that  the  judge's  reasoning  was
    inadequate.

 5. On 27th May 2015 the Secretary of State responded  to  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal under Rule 24.  The Rule 24 response noted that  although  brief
    the determination confirms that the judge had considered  the  evidence
    and had had  regard  to  Basnet.   It  contended  that  the  judge  was
    satisfied to the correct standard of proof that the  schedule  produced
    by the Presenting Officer made out the Respondent's case.

 6. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant appears in person as  he  did
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  The Secretary of State appears by  her
    Home Office Presenting Officer Miss Johnstone.

Submissions/Discussion

 7. Miss Johnstone takes me to the evidence that was before the  First-tier
    Tribunal as set out in paragraph 14 of  Judge  Edwards'  determination.
    She notes that the judge was aware that when the Appellant submitted  a
    correct application his original  leave  had  expired.   Thus  when  he
    submitted it he did not have an in-country right of appeal.  He  points
    out that the judge was correct to find that the Appellant was unable to
    produce to him bank statements showing payment of the fee and that  the
    Home Office Presenting Officer had handed to  him  a  schedule  showing
    that it had not been taken.

 8. She takes me to the decision in Mitchell reminding me that the decision
    of the Tribunal in Basnet does not put  the  burden  of  proof  on  the
    Secretary  of  State  where  the  application   was,   on   its   face,
    insufficiently completed.  Although it is  not  for  the  Secretary  of
    State to say why the funds were not accepted.

 9. She contends the judge had dealt with this issue and the suggestion put
    forward both in the Grounds of Appeal and referred to in the  grant  of
    permission to appeal was that the judge had failed to address the issue
    of Basnet properly.  She submits that he had.

10. I invited the Appellant that I  would  hear  any  submissions  that  he
    wished to  make  without  interruption.   Mr  Okunnu  advised  that  he
    understood the position and that all he wished to say was that  it  was
    his hope and intention to set up a public relations company.  What  his
    application was supposed to be  was  a  continuation  of  his  original
    application and he says that he does not know why  the  money  was  not
    originally taken.

The Law

11.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

12. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

13. The fact remains that the  Secretary  of  State  rejected  the  initial
    application.  Mitchell is clear  authority  Basnet  does  not  put  the
    burden of proof on the Secretary of State  where  the  application  was
    insufficiently  completed  or  in  this  case  not  accompanied  by  an
    appropriate fee.  It is clear that  the  burden  of  proof  is  on  the
    Appellant and the Appellant is  unable  to  discharge  this  burden  of
    proof.  Such issues have been addressed within  the  determination  and
    consequently the determination does not disclose a  material  error  of
    law.  In such circumstances the Appellant's appeal must fail.  That  is
    not to say that the Appellant will not ultimately be  able  to  develop
    his proposed business.  It  will  be  open  to  him  to  make  a  fresh
    application within 28 days of the completion of the appeal process.  No
    doubt if such an application is made this time he will ensure  that  it
    is properly completed and that the appropriate fee is paid.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses no material error  of  law
and the appeal is dismissed and the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge is maintained.


No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

