
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46595/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 16th June 2014                             |27th August 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL



                                   Between

                                     A I
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Richard Singer (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant's appeal against  a  decision  to  remove  her  from  the
    United Kingdom was allowed by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ross  ("the
    judge") in  a  determination  promulgated  on  22nd  March  2014.   The
    respondent applied for permission to appeal and permission was  granted
    on 1st May 2014.  It is convenient to refer to the Secretary  of  State
    as "respondent" and  to  the  respondent  to  the  application  as  the
    "appellant," as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

2.   The appellant entered the United Kingdom  in  May  2007  as  a  working
    holidaymaker but was made exempt from immigration control  in  December
    the following year,  after  she  joined  the  armed  forces.   She  was
    medically discharged from the army in May 2011.  Following  refusal  of
    an application for leave to remain outside  the  rules,  the  appellant
    brought an appeal which was  dismissed  in  August  2012.   There  then
    followed a further application for leave  to  remain  on  human  rights
    grounds, in  February  2013.   This  application  was  refused  by  the
    Secretary of State in July that year  and,  on  22nd  October  2013,  a
    decision was made to remove her as an overstayer, giving  rise  to  the
    present appeal.

3.   The appellant is HIV positive.  The judge took  into  account  what  he
    described as two important pieces of evidence which were not  available
    in the first appeal.  The first was a letter  from  the  National  AIDS
    Trust, dated 27th February 2014 and the second  was  a  letter  from  a
    consultant physician, referring to the  appellant's  recruitment  to  a
    clinical research trial, requiring regular follow-up for  a  period  of
    three years.  The judge took into account both items in his  Article  8
    assessment.  The first raised an issue of fairness in the  decision  to
    medically discharge the appellant from the army and the  second  showed
    that particular medical care was required during  the  clinical  trial.
    The judge found that although the medicines the appellant was currently
    prescribed might be available in Ghana, the particular  level  of  care
    she received would not be and that her removal would bring  to  an  end
    her participation in the important clinical trial (known  as  "Poppy").
    Although the appellant could not succeed  on  Article  3  grounds,  the
    judge found that Article 8 was engaged and  that  her  removal  at  the
    present time would be disproportionate.  He took into account  what  he
    found to be private life ties built  up  since  2007,  the  appellant's
    service in the army and her participation in the  clinical  trial.   He
    took into account the guidance  given  in  recent  decisions  including
    Nasim [2014] UKUT 0025 and Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

4.   In the respondent's  application  for  permission  to  appeal,  it  was
    contended that the judge erred by failing to have  due  regard  to  the
    general public interest in  firm  immigration  control.   A  number  of
    authorities were referred to in the grounds,  including  Akhalu  [2013]
    UKUT 400, FK and OK [2013] EWCA Civ 238 and  Shahzad  [2014]  UKUT  85.



5.   The judge erred in failing to take into account  the  "macro  elements"
    weighing in  the  public  interest  and  failing  to  identify  factors
    weighing against the appellant.

6.   Permission to appeal was granted on 1st May 2014.

Submissions on Error of Law

7.   Ms Isherwood adopted  the  written  grounds.   The  appellant  was  HIV
    positive but there  was  nothing  to  suggest  that  she  acquired  the
    condition  while  in  the  army.   She  arrived  here  as   a   working
    holidaymaker and then enlisted.  She apparently intended to  serve  for
    22 years but was discharged on medical  grounds.   The  judge  did  not
    properly take into account the public interest  in  her  removal.   She
    would be a  drain  on  resources.   Treatment  for  her  condition  was
    available  in  Ghana.   The  judge  appeared  to  acknowledge  this  in
    paragraph 14 of the determination  but  he  did  not  specify  how  the
    appellant's  circumstances  outweighed  the  public  interest  in   her
    removal.  Guidance was given in GS and EO [2012] UKUT 397, as  well  as
    in Akhalu.

8.   A proper proportionality  assessment  required  all  the  circumstances
    relied  upon  by  both  parties  to  be  taken  into  account  but  the
    determination failed  to  show  where  the  public  interest  had  been
    factored in.  The appellant was in the army for only two and half years
    and although emphasis on service might be appropriate, in this case  it
    had been for only a short period.  Participation in the clinical  trial
    might fall in the appellant's favour but the judge was obliged to  show
    how the Secretary of State's case for removal was outweighed.

9.   Mr Singer said that there was a clear line of  authority,  including  R
    (Iran), RE (Zimbabwe) and Miftari that showed that the  Upper  Tribunal
    should be slow to overturn a case where there was no clear legal error.
     The judge's decision in the present appeal was not vitiated by  error.
    He had before him the Secretary of State's case, set out in the  notice
    of decision and he heard submissions from two  representatives.   There
    was no error shown by a failure to refer  expressly  to,  for  example,
    Akhalu.

10.  It was not part of the appellant's case that  there  was  no  treatment
    available in Ghana.  This was clear from paragraph 16  of  her  witness
    statement.  What she would be lacking was the level of particular  care
    given to her during the clinical trial.

11.  Even if the judge omitted an explicit reference to the  legitimate  aim
    in pursuance of which the Secretary of State made  her  decision,  this
    did not amount to an error.  The judge was very experienced and he  had
    before him two experienced advocates.  He directed himself properly  in
    relation to Gulshan and it could not sensibly be suggested that he  did
    not have the public interest in mind as a salient factor.  It was clear
    from Miftari that it was not incumbent on the judge to  set  out  every
    feature of the evidence and every single factor.  What was required was
    a decision containing sufficient reasons.  In  the  present  case,  the
    judge set out the factors showing that  removal  was  unjustifiable  at
    present.  The appellant's case was not simply put  on  health  grounds.
    In some respects,  it  was  stronger  than  the  case  brought  by  the
    appellant in Akhalu, taking into account the appellant's service in the
    army and her participation in the medical trial.  The judge  considered
    fairness in the way that the appellant was treated by the army and this
    was a material factor.  Of course, the appellant in Akhalu won in  both
    the First-tier and the Upper Tribunals.  She came here with  leave  and
    was diagnosed while  that  leave  was  extant.   She  had  built  up  a
    substantial private life.  These factors  weighed  in  the  appellant's
    favour in the present case.  Paragraph  16  of  the  witness  statement
    showed that she had continued to make a contribution to community life.
     So far as GS and EO was concerned, this largely  concerned  Article  3
    but the obiter factors relating to Article 8 set out  in  the  judgment
    showed that the lawfulness of a person's presence here was material, at
    the time a diagnosis was made.

12.  The appellant was not subject  to  immigration  control  while  in  the
    army.  Her service and her participation in the clinical  trial  should
    not be dismissed as insubstantial matters.  This was not simply a  case
    where she would be a drain  on  NHS  resources.   Although  the  United
    Kingdom could not be the hospital of the world, she was diagnosed at  a
    time when she had leave, she had served in the armed forces and she was
    taking part in the clinical trial.  These factors were relevant and the
    judge did not err in taking them into account and giving  them  weight.
    The decision he made was open to him.

Decision on Error of Law

13.  The determination has been written by a very experienced judge  and  it
    is clear that he had the salient features of both cases  in  mind.   He
    properly took into account the  earlier  determination  as  a  starting
    point and made his own assessment, in the light  of  material  evidence
    which had come into being since.  In the Article 8 assessment, he  gave
    due weight to the medical evidence,  the  appellant's  service  in  the
    armed forces (albeit for  a  relatively  short  period  of  time),  her
    participation  in  the  clinical  trial  and  the  private  life   ties
    established by her here since 2007.

14.  The thrust of the Secretary of State's challenge is  that  he  did  not
    weigh in the balance the public interest in the appellant's removal  as
    an overstayer.  I accept, however,  Mr  Singer's  submission  that  the
    judge properly directed himself on the law and, in expressly  referring
    to guidance given in, for example, Gulshan, he also  had  in  mind  the
    legitimate aim being pursued by the Secretary  of  State.   Indeed,  in
    also taking into account guidance given in Nasim, the judge had in mind
    current authority reflecting the substantial weight to be given to  the
    public interest.  The determination shows  that  he  carefully  weighed
    factors on the other side  of  the  balance  showing,  in  the  unusual
    circumstances of this case, that the public  interest  was  outweighed.
    The judge did not err in setting out these matters in detail.

15.  There was no material misdirection on the law and I conclude  that  the
    judge did not misunderstand either party's case.  Although the  balance
    might have been struck differently by another judge, I  find  that  the
    conclusion reached in the present appeal was one which was open to him,
    in the light of the evidence.  The determination contains  no  material
    error of law and the decision shall stand.



DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

ANONYMITY

The judge made an anonymity direction and I direct that  it  shall  continue
until  varied  or  set  aside  by   the   Upper   Tribunal   or   a   court.







Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell



