
[pic]
st

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46023/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At Field House                       |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 29th October 2015                 |On 21st December 2015                 |
|                                     |                                      |


                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                MR CARL GRAY
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G. Counsel, instructed by JI Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C. Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. Although it is the respondent who is appealing for convenience  I  will
    continue to refer to  the  parties  as  they  were  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a national of Jamaica born on the 1st September 1959.

 3. On 14 May 2006 he applied for indefinite leave to remain under the  14-
    year long residence rule contained at paragraph 276B of the immigration
    rules then in place.

 4. There was gross delay on the part  of  the  respondent  in  reaching  a
    decision despite various reminders from the appellant's representatives
    and the intervention of  his  Member  of  Parliament.  The  appellant's
    representatives had  to  threaten  judicial  review  proceedings  which
    eventually resulted in a decision, albeit a negative  one,  on  the  30
    October 2014. In  the  decision  and  in  the  subsequent  appeals  the
    respondent has continued to accept that 14 years  residence  under  the
    former rules continues  to  be  the  test  applicable.(contra  Singh  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 74)

 5. The application  was  refused  on  the  basis  the  appellant  had  not
    established 14 years continuous residence as required  under  paragraph
    276B(i)(b).

 6. Paragraph 276 B (b) required not only 14 years continuous residence but
    also  consideration  of  whether  it  would  be  undesirable  to  grant
    indefinite leave.  Regard  was  to  be  had  to  the  applicant's  age;
    connections  with  the  United  Kingdom;  personal  history;   domestic
    circumstances; any criminality; any compassionate circumstances and any
    representations made.

 7. The refusal letter  set  out  paragraph  276B  in  its  entirety  which
    included the public interest considerations.  However,  it  focused  on
    the 14 years residence not being established and makes  no  comment  on
    the public interest considerations.

 8. The respondent then went on to consider paragraph  276  ADE  which  had
    been introduced in the interval and appendix FM. There is reference  to
    his personal circumstances and criminal convictions.

The First Tier

 9. The grounds of appeal consisted of generalities. The appellant's appeal
    was heard at Hatton Cross on 18 May 2015 before Judge Adio of the First-
    tier tribunal. The appellant was represented by Counsel. The respondent
    did not arrange representation.

10. In the decision allowing the appellant's appeal Judge Adio set out  the
    reasons for refusal in respect of paragraph 276B. The judge  summarised
    what took place at the hearing. The judge found  as  a  fact  that  the
    appellant has been in the United Kingdom for over 14 years. At  para.15
    onwards the judge gave a number of reasons. Firstly, the appellant  had
    adopted his witness statement in which he  said  he  had  been  in  the
    United Kingdom for  over  14  years.  He  was  not  subject  to  cross-
    examination, there being no presenting officer in  attendance.  In  his
    statement he indicated that he came to the United Kingdom  in  1964  at
    the age of 5 to join his parents.   The  judge  referred  to  a  school
    record produced showing he attended a primary school  on  21  September
    1964 and a secondary school to 1983.  The  judge  then  referred  to  a
    record of criminal convictions  spanning  1977  to  2003.  Furthermore,
    there was documentation the appellant had five  children  born  in  the
    United Kingdom in 1981, 1983, 1986 and 1990 and 1995. Based on this the
    judge concluded he had been residing in the  United  Kingdom  for  more
    than 14 years.

11. At paragraph 17 judge referred to public  interest  considerations.  He
    noted the appellant  had  committed  criminal  offences.  The  offences
    including robbery, theft, burglary and possession of class A drugs .The
    judge noted the last offence was in 2009. The judge noted the appellant
    came here as a child and concluded in later life, due to  homeless  and
    bad company, he had lost his way. He had five children here as well  as
    siblings. No deportation proceedings had been taken. The judge found he
    had no ties with Jamaica and that his life was more stable now  and  he
    was in a training programme and had accommodation.

12. In seeking permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  submitted  that
    satisfactory evidence of residence the requisite period  had  not  been
    provided. It was commented that only one  of  his  children  gave  oral
    evidence. Even if the appellant had been  here  for  14  years  it  was
    contended  the  judge  had  failed  to  consider  the  public  interest
    considerations in paragraph 276B (ii) adequately.

13. Mr Avery pointed out the burden of proof was upon the appellant to show
    the necessary 14 years  residence.  On  the  evidence  there  are  gaps
    particularly  after  his  conviction  in  2003.  Regarding  the  public
    interest considerations a submitted it was telling that  the  appellant
    was relying upon his criminal convictions to show his presence  in  the
    United Kingdom. He said the appellant had an appalling criminal  record
    and submitted the judge was dismissive of this at paragraph 19  of  the
    decision. The  appellant's  representative  relied  upon  the  skeleton
    argument advanced in the first-tier tribunal. It was  pointed  out  the
    appellant had lived for 31 years in the United Kingdom on  his  account
    and the judge had proper regard to rehabilitation.

Consideration.

14. The issue in the present proceedings is whether  on  the  evidence  the
    outcome was one open to the judge. The  first  criticism  made  by  the
    respondent is that the judge did  not  have  sufficient  evidence  upon
    which to base a finding of 14 years continuous residence.

15. It is my conclusion the judge gave adequate reasons based upon rational
    logic. The first piece of evidence was from the appellant himself.  The
    judge chose to accept this as true. It was open to  the  respondent  to
    send a presenting officer to the hearing to test the evidence but  this
    was not done. There was  also  evidence  relating  to  the  appellant's
    schooling. Furthermore, there was a record of  offences  from  1977  to
    2003 indicating his presence in the country.  Furthermore,  he  is  the
    father of five children born between  1981  and  1995:  again,  further
    evidence of his presence. All these points are rational and demonstrate
    his presence as effectively as paper  evidence.  There  is  nothing  to
    suggest he ever left United Kingdom and to do so would  mean  he  would
    face difficulty in returning.

16. It is also contended that the judge did not deal  adequately  with  the
    requirements  of  paragraph  276  B  (ii)  and  the   public   interest
    considerations. Because the refusal letter makes  no  comment  on  this
    aspect of the rules I had regard to Ukus (discretion: when  reviewable)
    [2012] UKUT  00307  (IAC).This  dealt  with  the  situation  where  the
    decision maker has failed to exercise a discretion. In  that  case  the
    Tribunal's jurisdiction is limited  to  a  decision  that  the  failure
    renders the decision 'not in accordance  with  the  law'  (s.86(3)(a)).
    Because the discretion is vested  in  the  Executive,  the  appropriate
    course will be for the  Tribunal  to  require  the  decision  maker  to
    complete his task. This point was not raised in the  leave  application
    and would mean the Secretary of State  was  arguing  her  decision  was
    unlawful. The point was also not raised at hearing.

17. On reflection, I do not find the present decision concerns the exercise
    of discretion as meant in the reported case. It could be argued that no
    issue was taken by the  respondent  on  the  public  interest  question
    because it was not referred to in the refusal  letter.  A  more  likely
    alternative however, is that the respondent saw no need to  plead  this
    in the alternative but  was  relying  on  the  14  year  issue.  Public
    interest considerations were referred to in relation to the new  rules.
    Whatever the format of the reasons for refusal letter it is clear  that
    the decision maker had this in mind.

18. The Judge does set out the public interest considerations at  paragraph
    17. The decision indicates awareness that the rules required  not  only
    14  years  residence  but  also  a   balancing   of   public   interest
    considerations. It is my conclusion the judge adequately has regard  to
    these factors which are set out at paragraph 17 to 19 of the decision.

19. The respondent seeks to criticise the judge for commenting on the  fact
    deportation  proceedings  were  never  taken.  In  my  view  it  was  a
    legitimate comment on the  part  of  the  judge,  particularly  as  the
    appellant had been detained for substantial  periods  on  a  number  of
    occasions.

20. In conclusion, I find the judge presented a balanced decision in  which
    the  relevant  factors  are  set  out  and  logical  reasons  for   the
    conclusions given.  I find the  respondent  is  now  simply  trying  to
    reargue the case, having failed to arrange a presenting officer at  the
    original hearing .Consequently, I see no material error of law and  the
    decision shall stand.

Decision.

The Secretary of States appeal is dismissed.

The decision of First-tier Judge Adio allowing Mr. Gray's appeal shall
stand.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly

