
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46902/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 28 January 2015                            |On 10 February 2015          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                           DESIGNATED JUDGE MURRAY


                                   Between

                         AGNESS MWAMBA NUTANDE BWALE
                      (Anonymity has not been directed)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Hart, Terence Ray Solicitors, London
For the Respondent:    Ms Vidyadharan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Zambia born on 29  December  1957.   She
    appealed against the decision of the respondent dated 10 September 2013
    refusing her application for leave to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
    outside the Immigration Rules.  Her claim is based on her  private  and
    family life in the United Kingdom, her health problems and her fear  of
    ill-treatment in Zambia.  She has not claimed asylum.  Her  appeal  was
    heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Clarke on 22  September  2014
    and dismissed under the Immigration Rules and on human  rights  grounds
    in a determination promulgated on 6 October 2014.

 2. An application for permission to appeal  was  made  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant.  Permission to appeal was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Shimmin.  He found there to be an arguable error of  law  in  the
    First-tier determination because the judge  failed  to  deal  with  the
    appellant's  Article  3  claim.   The  other  grounds  refer   to   the
    appellant's Article 8 claim.  First-tier Tribunal Judge  Shimmin  found
    that  these  grounds  are  not  strong  and  amount  primarily   to   a
    disagreement with the findings but found  that  they  remain  open  for
    argument.

The Hearing

 3. This is an error of law hearing on behalf of the appellant.   Mr  Hart,
    for the appellant, submitted that he does not agree with the permission
    to appeal relating to Article 8 and that he would be making submissions
    relating to Article 3 and Article 8.

 4. The representative submitted that Article 3 has been largely ignored by
    the judge although Article 3 is referred to  in  the  determination  at
    paragraphs 3, 6 and 11.  He submitted that at  paragraph  11,  although
    the judge refers to the ill-treatment meted out to the appellant by her
    husband's family  in  Zambia,  she  makes  no  findings  on  this.   He
    submitted that the judge does not  properly  consider  the  appellant's
    physical and mental health, her fear of return to Zambia and the rights
    of  her  family  in  the  United  Kingdom.   I  was  referred  to   the
    representative's skeleton argument at paragraph 16 dealing with Article
    3 and the appellant's real risk on return to Zambia. Her  physical  and
    moral integrity is also referred to in this paragraph.

 5. The representative referred to paragraph 8 of the grounds which  refers
    to paragraph 23 of the determination.   He  submitted  that  the  judge
    appears to have refused to deal with the substance  of  the  Article  3
    claim because the appellant did  not  explain  how  she  is  unable  to
    relocate within Zambia.

 6. I was referred to  the  refusal  letter  dated  10  September  2013  at
    paragraphs  18-23.   This  refers  to  Article  3.  The  representative
    submitted that the refusal letter is wrong  when  it  states  that  the
    appellant returning to Zambia would not  breach  the  United  Kingdom's
    obligations under Articles 3 and 8 of  ECHR  on  medical  grounds.   He
    referred me to the statement by Mary  Mutande  Mulrooney  in  which  Ms
    Mulrooney refers to the torture the appellant went  through  in  Zambia
    and he referred me to the statement of Sheila Ngosa which refers to the
    events which took place in Zambia when the appellant's husband died and
    how his family mistreated  the  appellant.   Sheila  Ngosa's  statement
    refers to the appellant being beaten by her husband's family and  death
    threats being made by them against her.  I  was  then  referred  to  Dr
    Elliot's statement and the drugs prescribed to the appellant, which she
    is still taking.  These are for depression and anxiety and he submitted
    that the judge was aware of this but did not  give  it  weight  in  the
    determination.

 7. The representative then  went  on  to  the  Rule  24  response  by  the
    respondent and submitted that there is an error at  paragraph  5  which
    states "Contrary to the grounds it does not appear that there  was  any
    attempt to address the  necessary  issues.   The  Presenting  Officer's
    minute  states  "Overall  much  time  spent  on  questioning  appellant
    regarding her ties to Zambia and the situation with her  brother-in-law
    threatening her not to speak to her son.  In essence asylum  was  being
    raised but taken at its highest the appellant can  internally  relocate
    or seek state protection."  He submitted that  this  is  in  effect  an
    Article 3 point and this is something that was not  considered  by  the
    judge.

 8. The representative went on to Article 8 submitting that the grounds  of
    application relating to Article 8 are not merely  a  disagreement  with
    the judge's findings.  He submitted that the  judge  failed  to  assess
    proportionality and made no mention of the case of Razgar  [2004]  UKHL
    27.  He submitted that at paragraph 27 of the determination  the  judge
    accepts that the appellant has a private life in the United Kingdom but
    the judge made no examination of the extent of that private  life.   He
    submitted that the judge was not right to state that the appellant  has
    no family life in the United Kingdom and submitted that she should have
    assessed this along with private life.  He submitted that the appellant
    has a place in the private lives of Mary Mulrooney and Sheila Ngosa and
    also with their 3 minor children.  He submitted  that  the  appellant's
    friends and their family members have had bad experiences in the last 3
    years.  Julie Bwalya's son Michael was murdered in 2010 in  the  United
    Kingdom  and  the  appellant's  friend  Clare   Tembo's   husband   was
    assassinated in Zambia in 2001.  Clare  has  also  had  a  stroke.   He
    submitted that  the  appellant  is  instrumental  in  supporting  these
    families.  This is a special dependency.  He  submitted  that  had  the
    judge looked properly at all the evidence she could have rejected these
    issues but she did not look at it and this is  an  error  of  law.   He
    submitted that although the judge found that  the  evidence  of  Sheila
    Ngosa and Mary Mulrooney lacked credibility, there is no mention of the
    statements of Julie Bwalya and Clare Tembo being disbelieved.

 9. The representative referred me to paragraph  28  of  the  determination
    which refers to the case of Edgehill and Another v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ
    402.  He submitted that based on this case the  judge  finds  that  the
    appellant has no family life in the UK although she  has  private  life
    here.  He submitted that the  judge  does  not  properly  consider  the
    length of time this appellant has been in the  United  Kingdom  and  he
    referred to paragraph 10  of  the  determination  in  which  the  judge
    accepts that the appellant falls within the terms of  paragraph  38  of
    Edgehill.  He submitted that the judge at paragraph 28  has  misapplied
    this case.  He submitted that it was wrong to apply the new Rules  when
    the old Rules were the relevant ones and the judge in her determination
    did not deal with the situation under the old Rules.  He submitted that
    the judge was wrong to find that the appellant is in the same  position
    as the applicant HB, in Edgehill.  He submitted that the judge has  not
    assessed the Article 8 evidence before her satisfactorily and  has  not
    properly dealt with the compelling  and  exceptional  circumstances  in
    this appellant's private life.  He submitted that if  paragraph  276ADE
    of the new  Rules  cannot  be  satisfied,  a  free-standing  Article  8
    decision has  to  be  made.   This  appellant  is  in  a  "grandmother"
    relationship with the minor children she stays with or has stayed with.
     This is supported by the witnesses and the  best  interests  of  these
    children have to be considered.  He submitted that although  the  judge
    refers to these children at  paragraph  26  of  the  determination,  no
    proper assessment of their best interests has been made.  He  submitted
    that the judge should have considered the case of Beoku-Betts  and  the
    effect the removal of  the  appellant  will  have  on  the  appellant's
    friends and their families, who, as a result of their relationship with
    the appellant are similar to family members.  He  submitted  also  that
    the judge has made no reference to the appellant's lack of  criminality
    during her time in the United Kingdom.

10. He submitted that the appellant has conceded that the 14 year rule  has
    not been satisfied but the judge should still have taken  into  account
    the length of time the appellant has been in the United  Kingdom  which
    is 13 years.  He submitted that at paragraph 29  of  the  determination
    the judge refers to the witnesses and the  appellant's  family  members
    wishing her to remain in the United Kingdom and goes  on  to  say  that
    taking the  case  at  its  highest,  public  interest  in  her  removal
    outweighs their rights.  He submitted that this is only an opinion  and
    when the judge refers to section 117 of the Nationality, Immigration  &
    Asylum Act 2002 she does not specify what part of this section  she  is
    dealing with.

11. I put to the representative that the  judge  is  clearly  referring  to
    public interest at paragraph 30. She also refers to this  at  paragraph
    29 and I pointed out that in the determination at paragraphs 12-22, the
    judge has given adequate reasons for coming to the conclusion  she  did
    about  the  credibility  of  the  appellant  and  her  witnesses.   The
    representative submitted that  the  judge  should  have  explained  her
    credibility findings more clearly.  I referred to paragraph 13  of  the
    determination in which the judge points out that when the appellant was
    interviewed she answered questions in a way which is not  supported  by
    the evidence that is now being put  forward.   He  submitted  that  the
    interview had nothing to do with this particular claim  but  I  pointed
    out that the appellant answered factual  questions  where  there  could
    only be a right answer or a wrong answer and no  explanation  has  been
    given for the discrepancies.

12. I was referred to the Home Office refusal letter  at  paragraphs  18-23
    under the heading "Article 3" and the Home Office reference to the  COI
    Report and the case of N v SSHD [2005] UKHL31.  He submitted  that  the
    refusal letter refers to the health care in Zambia  being  of  a  lower
    standard than that  in  the  United  Kingdom  but  the  judge  has  not
    considered this.  He referred to the country guidance case of  N  which
    states that a person has to demonstrate that their condition will  lead
    to their dying without medical  care  or  assistance  from  family  and
    friends  submitting  that  the  case  of  N  does  not  require  to  be
    considered.

13. The representative submitted that  internal  relocation  has  not  been
    dealt with in the determination.  The judge states that the appellant's
    family can support her in  Zambia.   He  submitted  that  it  would  be
    difficult for her to relocate at age 57  after  spending  such  a  long
    period in the United Kingdom.  He submitted that  the  appellant  could
    not get work in Zambia and that the judge's references to these matters
    have not been properly thought through.

14. The representative submitted that  there  are  errors  of  law  in  the
    judge's determination and I was asked to set the decision aside.

15. The Presenting Officer made her submissions submitting that with regard
    to the Article 8 issue the grounds of application are a  clear  example
    of mere disagreement with the judge's findings.

16. She submitted that the judge has balanced the evidence  and  given  her
    opinion.  She submitted that  the  judge  was  entitled  to  reach  the
    decision she did relating to Article 8.

17. The Presenting Officer went on to refer to  the  Rule  24  response  on
    which she is relying.  She submitted that there is no  misunderstanding
    or misinterpretation by the judge relating to  the  matters  raised  in
    paragraph 5, which the  appellant's  representative  objected  to.  The
    appellant can internally relocate or seek State protection in Zambia.

18. The Presenting Officer referred to Article 3  and  submitted  that  the
    judge has implicitly and consistently dealt with  this  throughout  the
    determination.   She  has  referred  to  it  at  paragraph  3  of   the
    determination and then goes on to consider  all  the  evidence  in  the
    round and the conflicting evidence  given  by  the  3  witnesses.   She
    submitted that the judge has made clear why she found them  not  to  be
    reliable  witnesses  and  this  has  been  properly  thought  out.   At
    paragraph 15 of the determination the judge refers to discrepancies  in
    the 2 death certificates and from paragraphs 16-21 of the determination
    the judge picks holes in the evidence given by the witnesses.  She then
    correctly states at paragraph 23 that the appellant  has  not  made  an
    asylum claim and states "The appellant has not explained how it is  she
    is not able to relocate within her country."   The  Presenting  Officer
    submitted that if the appellant thinks she will be badly treated by her
    husband's family, she can relocate in Zambia.  Although the appellant's
    evidence is that her uncle is a bad man, who threatened her, the actual
    evidence is against this as he raised the appellant's son and sent  him
    to study medicine in China.  The judge refers to internal relocation at
    paragraph 23 and goes on to consider the medical evidence at  paragraph
    24.  She states that there are mental health facilities in  Zambia  and
    help for people with depression and she submitted  that  based  on  the
    case of N which is the relevant country guidance case,  the  appellant,
    with her medical condition, can return to Zambia.

19. The Presenting Officer submitted that the judge has dealt properly with
    Article 3 relating to the appellant's health  and  internal  relocation
    and has given proper explanations for her  credibility  findings.   She
    submitted that the evidence before the  judge  contained  discrepancies
    and inconsistencies and on return to Zambia  the  appellant's  2  adult
    children can help her and support her.

20. The Presenting Officer submitted that this is an appellant who came  to
    the United Kingdom aged 43.  She stayed illegally and worked  illegally
    so when the appellant's representative states that the appellant has no
    criminality in her background, this is clearly not the case.

21. The Presenting Officer submitted that Article 3 has been properly dealt
    with by the judge in the determination.

22. With regard to Article 8 she submitted that Article 8  has  been  dealt
    with properly by the judge.  The judge dealt with the case of Edgehill.
     The Presenting Officer referred to the case of Haleemudeen [2014] EWCA
    Civ 558.  At paragraphs 40 and 41 it is stated that  the  judge  should
    deal with Article 8 on the basis of the appellant's private and  family
    life against the Secretary of State's policy as contained  in  Appendix
    FM and Rule 276ADE of the new Immigration Rules.  The case states  that
    these new provisions are a central part of the legislative  and  policy
    context in which the interests  of  immigration  control  are  balanced
    against the interests and rights  of  people  who  have  come  to  this
    country and wish to settle in it.  She then referred me to the case  of
    Rafiq [2014] EWHC 1644 (Admin) at paragraph 12 which refers to the said
    case of Edgehill and states that decision  makers  should  approach  an
    Article 8 claim using the test of the new Rules  bearing  in  mind  the
    provisions for exceptional circumstances.  The case goes  on  to  state
    that whether using the old Rules or the new Rules, the result should be
    the same.  I was then referred to the case of Singh  [2014]  EWHC  2330
    (Admin) which uses the same argument relating to Article 8.

23. The Presenting Officer submitted that based on the case law  the  judge
    was correct to approach this application based on the  new  Immigration
    Rules.

24. She submitted that this appellant does not  have  family  life  in  the
    United Kingdom.  Based on  what  the  judge  had  before  her  she  was
    entitled to make this finding. I was referred to paragraph  29  of  the
    determination which states  "Whilst  the  witnesses  and  their  family
    members wish her to remain, she has not shown that  they  are  her  own
    family."   The  judge  finds  that  the  appellant   has   no   special
    relationship with these people and based on what  was  before  her  the
    judge was entitled to find this.

25. With regard to private life the Presenting Officer submitted that  this
    appellant has been in the United Kingdom  illegally  and  has  built  a
    private life here while she was here  illegally.   She  submitted  that
    effective immigration control is important  and  in  this  case  public
    interest must outweigh the appellant's rights.  The appellant knew  her
    circumstances as  did  her  family  members.   It  was  submitted  that
    paragraph 30 of the determination first refers to section  117  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration & Asylum Act 2002 and when this is considered,
    particularly 117B, it is clear that the judge  is  saying  that  little
    weight can  be  placed  on  the  appellant's  private  life  which  was
    established when she  was  here  unlawfully.   The  Presenting  Officer
    submitted that Article 8 is not a freestanding matter.   The  appellant
    has shown that she prefers to  live  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  has
    established her life here, but she has done so while she has been  here
    illegally.

26. The Presenting Officer submitted that with regard to Article 3, even if
    I do not accept her submissions and even  if  the  judge  had  believed
    everything the witnesses had said, there would be no real risk to  this
    appellant on return to Zambia.  She submitted that the appellant can go
    to Zambia and can live anywhere there.  She has  family  members  there
    and she can continue her relationships with the people  in  the  United
    Kingdom while she is in Zambia.

27. She submitted therefore that the grounds of application  are  merely  a
    disagreement with the judge's decision and I was asked to  dismiss  the
    appeal.

28. The appellant's representative submitted that the 2 cases of Singh  and
    Rafiq refer to Edgehill and Haleemudeen but the  case  of  Edgehill  is
    relevant and should be given weight.  She submitted that the Article  8
    proportionality assessment in the determination is not  sufficient  and
    Article 3 has not been dealt with.

29. The  representative  submitted  that  the  effect  on  the  appellant's
    physical and moral integrity if she has to return to Zambia should have
    been dealt with in the determination but was not.  He submitted that he
    is relying on the grounds of  application  and  his  skeleton  argument
    submitting that the First-tier  Judge's  determination  should  be  set
    aside.

Determination

30. I am first of all going to consider Article 8 of ECHR and  the  way  in
    which it was dealt with in the determination.   The  permission  states
    that the grounds relating to  Article  8  are  not  strong  and  amount
    primarily to a disagreement with the judge's findings.

31. This is an appellant who has been in the United Kingdom for  almost  14
    years but has always been here illegally.  She has no  family  life  in
    the United Kingdom.  Her relationships in the United  Kingdom  are  not
    with family members. Her family members  are  in  Zambia.  Because  the
    evidence before the judge is found to be lacking in credibility, as  is
    explained in the  determination  at  paragraphs  12-21,  the  judge  is
    entitled to come to the decision she did.

32. The judge however accepts that the appellant has a private  life.   Her
    findings about this are coloured by the witnesses not  being  reliable.
    Because of credibility issues the  judge  places  less  weight  on  the
    strength of the relationships.  She finds there is no dependency  among
    the appellant and her other witnesses.  The judge  has  made  it  clear
    that she is aware that there are  children  of  the  witnesses  in  the
    United Kingdom but she finds that the appellant's private life  can  be
    maintained from a distance.  She points out that the appellant's family
    members are  in  Zambia,  including  her  son.   Section  117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration & Asylum Act 2002 deals with public  interest.
    Effective immigration control is in the  public  interest.   The  judge
    finds at paragraph 29 that the  public  interest  in  this  appellant's
    removal must outweigh her rights and the rights of  her  friends  here,
    including their children.  The main reason for this is because she  has
    lived and worked illegally for most, if not all  of  her  time  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The judge finds that  it  is  reasonable  for  her  to
    return to Zambia, pointing out that the appellant entered the UK  on  a
    transit visa and never intended to go to Germany which is where she was
    supposed to go.

33. The appellant's  representative  has  stated  that  no  proportionality
    assessment has been made by the judge  and  that  the  case  of  Razgar
    [2004] UKHC 27 has not been  referred  to.   It  is  not  necessary  to
    specifically refer to Razgar.  The judge has referred to Part 5A of the
    2002 Act and section 117 which deals with the relevant public  interest
    issues and has adequately explained why she finds that public  interest
    must outweigh this  appellant's  rights  and  her  friends'  and  their
    children's rights in the United Kingdom.

34. With regard to whether the old  Rules  or  the  new  Rules  are  to  be
    considered, the said cases of Haleemudeen,  Rafiq  and  Singh  make  it
    clear that the new provisions in the Immigration Rules  are  a  central
    part of the legislative and policy context in which  the  interests  of
    immigration control are balanced against the interests  and  rights  of
    people who have come to this country and wish to settle in  it.   Based
    on this, the results should be the same whether  considered  before  or
    after the July 2012 changes.  It is reasonable for a decision maker  to
    approach the Article 8 claim using tests under the new  Rules,  bearing
    in mind the provisions for exceptional circumstances.

35. There is no error of law  in  the  judge's  determination  relating  to
    Article 8.  The application is merely a disagreement with  the  judge's
    decision.

36. With regard to Article 3 this is referred to in the determination.   It
    is mentioned at paragraphs 3, 6 and 11 and at paragraph  23  the  judge
    states "The appellant never made any asylum claim and even if  she  was
    treated by the family in the way she describes, she has  not  explained
    how it is she is not able to relocate within the country." This  is  an
    Article 3 issue. With regard to  her  medical  condition,  the  refusal
    letter refers to the case of N which is the relevant  country  guidance
    case and has to be considered by the judge.  The judge deals  with  the
    appellant's medical condition at paragraph  24  of  the  determination.
    She notes that the appellant's mental health problems are being treated
    and managed and she notes that there is access to medical facilities in
    her own country.  There was nothing before the judge to  indicate  that
    on return to Zambia her medical  condition  would  lead  to  her  dying
    because of the lack of medical  care  or  assistance  from  family  and
    friends.  The appellant has not put forward any reasons for  her  being
    at real risk if she returns to Zambia  and  internal  relocation  is  a
    possibility for her.  She has family members there. Article  3  is  not
    engaged in this claim.

                                  DECISION

37. I find that the judge has dealt with Article 8 and Article  3  properly
    in her determination and that there is no error of law.

38. Although the appellant has been in the United Kingdom for a long  time,
    she cannot meet the terms of the Immigration  Rules.  This  must  weigh
    against her in any balancing exercise. Her time in the  United  Kingdom
    has been without status.  This is extremely important when human rights
    are being considered against public interest.

39. As there is no material error of law in the judge's determination,  the
    First-tier  Tribunal's  determination  must  stand.   The   appellant's
    application for leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  outside  the
    Immigration Rules is dismissed.

40. Anonymity has not been directed.



Signed        Date 09/02/2015

Designated Judge Murray
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
