
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46673/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |                Decision & Reasons    |
|                                       |Promulgated                           |
|On 10th December 2015                  |                On 4th January 2016   |
|                                       |                                      |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                          mr Rajeev Solomon Browne
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Akinbolu (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Hodgkinson, promulgated on 5th June 2015, following a hearing  at
    Hatton Cross on  20th  May  2015.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal of Rajeev Solomon Browne, who subsequently applied
    for, and was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  and
    thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of India, who was born on 10th March
    1974.  He appealed against the decision of the  Respondent  dated  31st
    October 2014, refusing his application to remain in the UK on the basis
    of his Article 8 human rights.  The Appellant's human rights  claim  is
    based upon the rights of his wife, Monali, his  daughter,  P,  and  his
    second daughter, A.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The nub of the Appellant's claim  is  that  he  graduated  from  Bombay
    University, and then worked on a cruise ship as a mini bar  supervisor,
    before coming to the UK as a visitor in 2003.   He  then  worked  on  a
    working holidaymaker's visa at the Crown Plaza  Hotel  from  July  2004
    until May 2005 and then  worked  for  the  transport  of  London  in  a
    clerical capacity, before returning to  India  in  February  2006  (see
    paragraph 16).  The Appellant was in India during the currency  of  his
    working holidaymaker visa, and he then applied for entry clearance as a
    student (see paragraph 17), which was then refused, but  the  Appellant
    then successfully appealed, and that appeal was heard in the UK and the
    Appellant succeeded in the appeal.  He remained in the UK as a  student
    until 31st August 2008 (see paragraph 17).

 4. On 17th November 2011, he applied to extend his  student  visa  but  he
    inadvertently omitted to  apply  for  his  wife  and  for  P,  and  the
    application was refused on 24th January 2012, on the sole basis that he
    did not satisfy all the components of  the  relevant  English  language
    test.  Nevertheless, the Appellant appealed and  when  he  did  so  his
    appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Kamara, who on  9th  July
    2012, allowed  the  appeal,  so  that  the  Appellant  had  Section  3C
    "continuing leave" to remain in this country.

 5. This being so, the Appellant claimed that he now had ten years'  lawful
    residence following his successful appeal in July 2012.  He claims that
    he, his wife, and P  had  established  private  and  family  life,  and
    subsequently on 7th October 2014, his  wife  gave  birth  to  a  second
    child, to P.  He claims he has never overstayed in the  United  Kingdom
    and he has not  ever  breached  the  Immigration  Rules.   He  has  not
    committed any criminal offences (see paragraph 20).

The Judge's Findings

 6. The judge held that,

         "The relevant period of the Appellant's leave having  commenced  on
         25th February 2004, and I have concluded that his Section 3C  leave
         ended in July 2012, it is clear  that  the  Appellant's  period  of
         lawful leave was little less than eight and a  half  years,  rather
         than the ten years claimed by him ..." (See paragraph 44),

    So that the Appellant had to  show  that  he  could  avail  himself  of
    paragraph 276B of the Immigration  Rules,  which  he  could  not.   The
    reason why the judge held that "the Appellant only had Section 3C leave
    until the end of July 2012, was that,  there  was  no  attempt  by  the
    Appellant  to  appeal  that  particular  immigration  decision."   (See
    paragraph 43).

 7. The judge went on to hold that P had been in the UK  for  seven  and  a
    half years (see paragraph 48); and that she  was  integrated  into  the
    education system in this country (see paragraph 53); and that she would
    be a stranger in India now  (see  paragraph  54);  and  that  the  best
    interests of the children was to remain in the UK.

 8. However, the Respondent's decision was a proportionate  one,  as  there
    had not been ever an expectation on the part of the Appellant to remain
    in the UK,  and  that  his  presence  in  this  country  had  become  a
    precarious one (see  paragraph  62),  such  that  the  public  interest
    required is returned.

Grounds of Application

 9. The grounds of application state that Judge  Hodgkinson  erred  in  his
    understanding of the findings made by Judge Kamara in her determination
    on  9th  July  2012.   This  was  a  case  where  there  two   separate
    determinations.  The earlier one was by Judge Kamara, and the one  that
    was currently being  appealed  was  by  Judge  Hodgkinson.   There  had
    additionally  been  two  separate  immigration  decisions.   The  first
    refusing to vary leave and the second to remove the Appellant by way of
    directions.  Judge Hodgkinson concluded that Judge Kamara had dismissed
    the appeal against the first immigration decision, but had allowed  the
    appeal against the second on the basis that  the  Home  Office  had  no
    power in law to make a removal decision, at the same time  as  refusing
    to vary leave.

10. The grounds stated that Judge  Kamara  had  in  fact  found  that  both
    immigration decisions are legally flawed and that therefore the  appeal
    against refusal to vary was allowed to  the  limited  extent  that  the
    application to vary remained pending before  the  Home  Office.   Given
    that this was so,  the  Appellant  would  have  been  entitled  to  the
    continued  benefit  of  Section  3C(2A)  of  the  1971  Act  and  Judge
    Hodgkinson should have considered paragraph  276B  of  the  Immigration
    Rules because by that time the appeal would have clocked up a period of
    residence by the Appellant of having  lawfully  been  in  this  country
    exceeding ten years.

11. Judge Kamara's determination had  said  (at  paragraph  38)  that  both
    immigration decisions were incorporated into a single notice, which was
    defective because there was merely a passing reference to Section 55 of
    the BCIA 2007 about the wellbeing of the Appellant's  children.   Judge
    Hodgkinson recorded this argument at  paragraph  40  of  his  decision.
    However, he did not give a reason for rejecting it.

12. On 26th August 2015, permission to appeal  was  granted  on  the  basis
    that, although there can be  no  disagreement  for  Judge  Hodgkinson's
    determination, and his legal analysis regarding Section 36C of the 1971
    Act in general, and although it cannot be gainsaid  that  Judge  Kamara
    was dealing with appeals against two  separate  immigration  decisions,
    nevertheless at paragraph 10 of her  determination,  Judge  Kamara  had
    recorded that the Grounds of  Appeal  included  an  argument  that  the
    decision was contrary to the law.  It is arguable that  she  had  found
    the variation decision to be unlawful because relevant factors had  not
    been considered.  Judge Hodgkinson did not engage with this part of the
    Appellant's appeal and his failure to deal  with  this  appeal  was  an
    arguable error of law.

13. If Judge Kamara had allowed the earlier appeal because both immigration
    decisions were unlawful, then it was arguable that the Appellant  still
    had Section 3C leave at the date of the  appeal  in  2014  because  his
    application to vary leave would have  remained  outstanding.   On  this
    rather protracted basis, the judge allowed the appeal  on  26th  August
    2015.

14. On 2nd September 2015, a Rule 24 response was  entered  to  the  effect
    that Judge Kamara was mindful that she was dealing  with  two  separate
    immigration decisions,  and  at  paragraphs  14,  18,  and  24  of  the
    determination of 9th  July  2012,  the  Appellant's  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules and Article 8 was dismissed.  The appeal was  allowed
    to a limited extent that Section 47 alone was  unlawful  (see  Adamally
    [2012] UKUT 414.

Submissions

15. In the submissions before me, Ms Akinbolu, appearing on behalf  of  the
    Appellant, submitted that if one looks at the  determination  of  Judge
    Kamara, promulgated on 9th  July  2012,  she  had  intimated  that  the
    Appellant had come to the UK only as a student in 2007  (see  paragraph
    22).   However,  Judge  Hodgkinson,  in  his  latest  appeal,  had  now
    confirmed that the Appellant had been in the UK since 2004.  There  was
    a gap here in 2006.  During this time the Appellant had  returned  back
    to India in order to make a new application.  But the effect of all  of
    this was that, since the relevant date  was  2004,  the  Appellant  had
    clocked up ten years of lawful residence.

16. Secondly, Judge Kamara may well have been wrong in splitting up the two
    decisions by the Secretary of State, when she recorded that,

         "The Respondent's decision to refuse to vary  leave  in  this  case
         included a further decision to remove the Appellant from the United
         Kingdom by way of directions under Section  47  of  the  2006  Act.
         Both decisions were incorporated in a single notice.  Other than  a
         passing reference to Section 55 of the Borders  Act,  no  paragraph
         395C removal factors were addressed when the variation decision was
         taken.  Consequently, I find that the Respondent's decision was not
         in accordance with the law, owing to the findings in Ahmadi."  (See
         paragraph 38).

17. The judge had then gone on to allow the appeal, "to the limited  extent
    that the  Respondent  reconsider  her  take  account  of  Ahmadi"  (see
    paragraph 40).  If at that stage the Respondent Secretary of State  had
    appealed that decision, the Appellant would not have had a leg to stand
    upon.

18. However, that decision  was  never  appealed.   The  Appellant's  leave
    continued and it continued lawfully.  In short, the Appellant now stood
    to be a beneficiary of the ten year lawful residence rule.  This appeal
    should be allowed simply on that basis.

19. For her part, Ms Holmes submitted that Judge Kamara  had  undertaken  a
    Section 395C assessment and had been unimpressed by this and  so  there
    was nothing further to consider.  She had recorded that,

         "I have attached a considerable amount of weight to the Appellant's
         admirable charitable work.  I have no doubt that he carries out his
         work with terminally ill patients and others as a demonstration  of
         his faith.  There were many heartfelt testimonies among the letters
         of support before me which obviously add to  the  strength  of  the
         Appellant's case ....." (Paragraph 32).

20. Judge Kamara, however, did not allow the appeal  on  this  basis.   She
    only allowed it to the limited extent that Ahmadi had not been properly
    taken into account.

Error of Law and Re-Making the Decision

21. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that  I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

22. This is a case where the Appellant entered the UK on 18th March 2004 on
    a working holidaymaker's visa, which  was  valid  until  25th  February
    2006.  He returned to India before the expiry of that valid leave.   He
    then applied from India again to re-enter as a student on 10th  January
    2006.  Although that application was initially refused, he succeeded in
    his quest following an appeal, and entry clearance was  issued  to  him
    and he re-entered the  UK  on  22nd  February  2007.   Since  then  the
    Appellant has had successive periods of leave as a student  until  10th
    November 2011.  Before the expiry of his latest period  of  leave,  the
    Appellant applied for further leave to  remain  as  a  student  on  7th
    November 2011.  The application was  refused  because  the  Appellant's
    English language credentials were not up to the mark.  He appealed.

23. When he appealed, judge Kamara dismissed the appeal under the  European
    Convention of Human Rights under Article 8, but held that the  decision
    was not in accordance with the law because both the Section 47 decision
    and the decision to refuse had been conflated under  a  single  notice.
    The Appellant's appeal was allowed.  The application was remitted  back
    to the Respondent Secretary of  State  for  a  lawful  decision  to  be
    undertaken.  When no further decision was undertaken,  the  Appellant's
    solicitors on 7th March 2014 submitted an application  under  the  long
    residence Rule (under paragraph 276B, and that application was  refused
    on 31st October 2014.  The Appellant appealed  against  that  decision,
    and Judge Hodgkinson on 3rd June 2014 dismissed the Appellant's appeal.
     The Appellant sought permission to appeal, which on 26th August  2014,
    was granted by Judge McCarthy.  The Appellant has now been  in  the  UK
    for ten years lawfully resident.  This is plainly the case.  The appeal
    must be allowed on that basis.  I so do.

24. I have therefore remade the decision on the basis of  the  findings  of
    the previous judge's, the evidence before  them,  and  the  submissions
    that I have heard today, and I allow this appeal for the reasons that I
    have given above.



Notice of Decision

25. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    allowed.

26. No anonymity order is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 18th December 2015



