
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/46524/2014
                                                               IA/46433/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 December 2015                   |On 28 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MA
                                     AU
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr Hussain, instructed by B Assured Law


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the respondent as the appellants and to the  Secretary
    of State as the respondent (as they appeared  respectively  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal).  The appellants, MA (aged  15)  and  AU  (aged  2
    years) are brother and sister and citizens of Pakistan.   They  entered
    the United Kingdom in July 2013 as child visitors.  They sought further
    leave to remain under  Article  8  ECHR  but  their  applications  were
    refused on 31 October 2014.  The appellants appealed to the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Myers) which, in a  decision  promulgated  on  6  March
    2015, allowed the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds.  The  Secretary  of
    State now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The circumstances in this case are unusual.  The appellants came to the
    United Kingdom to visit their uncle and aunt and with whom they are now
    living.  Both the uncle and aunt have parental responsibility  for  the
    appellants acquired after they  were  granted  a  special  guardianship
    order in respect of both children at Bradford  County  Court  in  March
    2014.  It appears that the uncle and aunt  are  childless  and  readily
    accepted the opportunity to, in effect, adopt the appellants when  they
    came to visit with their parents  from  Pakistan  in  July  2013.   The
    children continue to have contact by Skype  with  their  parents  on  a
    regular basis.

 3. The grounds of appeal assert that the judge paid insufficient attention
    to the fact that the appellants had  failed  to  satisfy  the  relevant
    Immigration Rule concerning adoption/de facto adoption.   Both  parties
    had  accepted  that  the  appellants  could  not  succeed   under   the
    Immigration Rules.  The grounds of appeal assert that the judge has, in
    effect, used  Article  8  as  a  general  dispensing  power  and  as  a
    substitute for the Immigration Rules.  The judge had failed to identify
    any unjustifiably  harsh  circumstances  or  exceptional  circumstances
    which would indicate that the children needed to remain living  in  the
    United Kingdom.  Family  ties  with  Pakistan  had  not  been  cut  and
    "various  legal  authorities"  (sic)  supported  the  view   that   the
    children's best interests would be served by allowing  them  to  remain
    living with their natural parents in  Pakistan.   The  judge  had  also
    failed to  give  insufficient  consideration  to  Section  117  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act.

 4. I find that Judge Myers has  produced  an  even-handed  decision  which
    readily identifies the factors weighing against these appellants in the
    Article 8  assessment  as  well  as  seeking  to  identify,  by  proper
    reference to the evidence, their best  interests  (Section  55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009)  The judge notes at [21]
    that a special guardianship  order  under  the  Children  Act  1989  is
    "usually intended for those children who cannot live with  their  birth
    parents and who would benefit  from  a  legally  secure  placement.   A
    parent cannot apply to discharge a special guardianship  order  without
    the permission of the court which is not  the  case  with  a  residence
    order made under Section 8 of the Children  Act  1989.   As  the  judge
    observed, a  special  guardianship  order  represents  something  of  a
    halfway house  between  residence  and  adoption;  unlike  adoption,  a
    special guardianship order does not end the legal relationship  between
    the child and his/her birth parents.  I note that the  Bradford  County
    Court had previously made residence orders in respect of  the  children
    in favour of the uncle and aunt in October 2013.  The first appellant's
    views as to where he wished to  live  and  with  whom  had  been  taken
    account of in the county court proceedings [22].  The judge also  noted
    that there was

         "... a report from [the first appellant's] school which showed that
         he had settled in well and was  making  excellent  progress.   [The
         second appellant] was observed to have a strong attachment both  to
         her uncle and aunt and was sometimes upset when her aunt  left  the
         room.  The assessment  of  the  aunt  and  uncle  found  that  they
         provided the children with good care and met all of their needs."

 5. The judge properly noted that

         "... the county court would have made  a  full  assessment  of  the
         children's best interests but would not  have  had  any  regard  to
         their immigration status and to some  extent  was  being  presented
         with a fait accompli because by that stage the parents had returned
         to Pakistan and the children were well-settled with their aunt  and
         uncle."

 6. The judge also refers to a report from a psychologist (Dr Latif)  which
    recorded the strong attachment between the children and  the  aunt  and
    uncle in the United Kingdom.  Demonstrating an even-handed approach  to
    the evidence, the judge [24] noted "some difficulties" with Dr  Latif's
    report including the failure of the expert to comment on the fact  that
    the second appellant had already  experienced  trauma  of  having  been
    removed from her birth parents who had returned to  Pakistan.   It  was
    plainly open to the judge to observe, notwithstanding those  misgivings
    regarding the report, that a further disruption to the child who is now
    older and whose bond with the aunt and uncle is stronger, would have  a
    negative impact upon her.

 7. The judge regarded the Section 55 analysis  of  the  respondent  to  be
    deficient [26] observing that no account had been taken of  the  wishes
    and feelings of the first appellant or indeed the reports and orders of
    the  Bradford  County  Court.   I  agree.   Decision  as   regards   an
    individual's immigration status, whether taken by the Tribunal  or  the
    respondent,  cannot  occur  in  a  vacuum  and  to  the  exclusion   of
    proceedings which may be occurring or have occurred before other courts
    and Tribunals, in this case Bradford County Court.

 8. At [27] the judge reserved harsh words for the uncle  of  the  children
    whose evidence regarding the circumstances in which the  children  came
    to remain in the United Kingdom she plainly did not accept.  The  uncle
    sought to persuade the judge that the children had arrived  as  genuine
    visitors and that a decision had only been  made  after  their  arrival
    that they should not return to Pakistan with the  parents.   The  judge
    rejected that account.  However, the judge correctly observed that  the
    intentions of the adults involved in this matter should not be  allowed
    to obscure the best interests of the children with which  the  Tribunal
    was concerned as a primary consideration.  In short,  the  judge  found
    the children's best interests should not suffer simply  in  order  that
    the deceit of the uncle and aunt (and the parents from Pakistan) should
    be in some way punished.  Moreover, the judge was aware of  those  very
    issues raised in the grounds at [28] as she observed that the  children
    are not British citizens and who have  no  right  to  an  education  or
    healthcare in the United Kingdom and whose ties to their birth  parents
    have not been severed.  Contrary to what the grounds assert, the  judge
    did have regard to Section 117 factors when  she  noted  at  [30]  that
    "family  life  in  this  case  was  established  when  the  appellants'
    immigration status was precarious ...".   Had  the  judge  ignored  the
    public interest concerned with the failure of this application  or  had
    she also ignored or sought to underplay factors which  weighed  against
    the appellants in the Article 8 analysis,  she  may  have  fallen  into
    error.  However, the judge's decision to allow the appeal on Article  8
    grounds can hardly be described as perverse  on  these  facts  and  the
    judge has, as I have observed, carefully set out the factors  both  for
    and against the appellants.   Another  Tribunal  may  have  come  to  a
    different conclusion but that is not the  point.   The  Upper  Tribunal
    should hesitate before interfering with the findings of the  First-tier
    Tribunal which are not perverse and  which  have  been  achieved  by  a
    proper analysis of the evidence.  In the circumstances, I can  identify
    no error of law in the judge's decision which would lead me to  set  it
    aside.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 1 January 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

