
[pic]
IAC-AH-dh-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46431/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 10 February 2016                      |On 5 April 2016                     |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                Nadeem ahmed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Khan, instructed by Broadway Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The respondent, Nadeem Ahmed, was born on 12 July 1984 and  is  a  male
    citizen of Pakistan.  I shall hereafter refer to the appellant  as  the
    respondent and the  respondent  as  the  appellant  (as  they  appeared
    respectively  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal).   The  appellant  had
    applied in September 2014 for leave to remain in the United Kingdom  as
    the spouse of a person settled in this country.  By a decision dated 31
    October 2014, that application was refused.  The appellant appealed  to
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Shimmin),  which,  in   a   decision
    promulgated on 8 June 2015 allowed the appeal.  The Secretary of  State
    now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There are two grounds  of  appeal.   However,  Judge  Molloy,  granting
    permission on  9  September  2015,  held  that  the  first  ground  was
    "unsustainable".  The appeal  before  the  Upper  Tribunal,  therefore,
    proceeded on the  second  ground  of  appeal  only.   This  is  an  ETS
    (Education Testing  Service)  case.   The  respondent  relied  upon  an
    earlier application made by the same appellant which had been  rejected
    on the basis of the respondent's assertion that the appellant had  used
    a proxy in order to undertake an English language examination.  At  the
    hearing before  Judge  Shimmin,  it  appears  that  Mr  Archibald  (the
    Presenting Officer) told the court that he did not "have  the  relevant
    witness statements to support the evidence relating to ETS."  He sought
    an adjournment of the hearing which Ms Khan (who also appeared for  the
    appellant before the First-tier Tribunal) resisted.  The judge  refused
    the application for the adjournment [15].

 3. Notwithstanding the Presenting Officer's submission before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal that the respondent had insufficient  evidence  to  prove
    its allegations, the grounds of appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  simply
    assert that "information provided by [ETS] indicates the presence of  a
    proxy test taker."  That decision has no  basis  in  the  light  of  Mr
    Archibald's admission that he was unable to prove dishonesty before the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 4. Further, the judge recorded  [27],  having  heard  the  appellant  give
    evidence in "good English",  that  there  was  "no  evidence  from  the
    respondent which would lead me to find that the appellant did not  have
    the ability to pass the  test  himself."   On  that  basis,  the  judge
    allowed the appeal.  The judge  went  on  to  note  the  provisions  of
    paragraph S-LTR2.2(a) which refers to documents submitted  in  relation
    "to the application" rather than in respect of a previous  application,
    as in the instant case.  The judge observed that,  "in  this  case  the
    document which is alleged was obtained dishonestly,  was  submitted  in
    relation to an earlier application.  Hence I  find  that  even  if  the
    earlier certificate was falsely obtained dishonesty cannot be relied on
    here."  The grounds of appeal challenge that observation.  I  find  the
    challenge is without merit.  I consider the comments of  Judge  Shimmin
    at the end of the decision to be obiter.  There was no need for him  to
    make the observation given that he had already found (as the respondent
    acknowledged to be the case) that the respondent was  unable  to  prove
    that the appellant had acted dishonestly.  Whether or not the judge was
    right to observe that and even if there had been  previous  dishonesty,
    it was not relevant to the present application.  The judge had  already
    concluded for legally valid reasons that the appeal should be allowed.





Notice of Decision

The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 17 March 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
