
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/46425/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 11 January and 16 February 2016   |On 23 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                ISHTIAQ SALMA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        IMMIGRATION OFFICER, Glasgow
                                                                  Respondent


Representatives:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Ghafar & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born on 19 October  1986.   She
    has not asked for an anonymity order.

 2. The facts are straightforward.  The appellant first came to the  UK  on
    an entry clearance visa as a spouse on 31 January 2011.  Her husband is
    of Pakistani origin and nationality and now  also  a  British  citizen,
    living in Glasgow.   They  have  two  young  daughters,  also  of  dual
    nationality.  The appellant has supplied minimal information about  her
    family, saying in her witness statement in the FtT simply that they are
    British citizens and that, "I would not  be  able  to  leave  them  and
    return to Pakistan.  I wish to continue living in the UK with my family
    and enjoy my family life in the UK."  The appellant obtained indefinite
    leave to remain on 4 December 2013, based on a certificate of knowledge
    of the English language and of life in the UK  (an  "ETS  certificate")
    obtained at Burnley on 25 September  2013.   On  28  October  2014  she
    arrived  at  Glasgow  airport  with  her  husband  and   family.    The
    Immigration Officer found her unable to communicate  in  English.   Her
    leave was cancelled, but temporary  admission  was  granted.   At  this
    stage, she filed her appeal to the FtT.

 3. After further investigations and in response to the appellant's grounds
    of appeal to the FtT, the respondent concluded in terms of  a  decision
    dated 21 January 2015 that the appellant obtained her  ETS  certificate
    through impersonation and deception,  and  confirmed  the  decision  to
    cancel leave.  With reference to Article 8 of the  ECHR,  the  decision
    says:

         "... the appellant may have established private and family life  in
         the UK, but no information has been submitted to why she could  not
         conduct such a life in her country of origin and how removal  would
         constitute ... a breach.  It is not unreasonable to suggest that if
         she wishes to  maintain  her  family  life,  she  can  do  this  in
         Pakistan."

 4. There were quite protracted proceedings in the FtT, where the appellant
    contended that she obtained  her  ETS  certificate  honestly.   In  her
    determination, promulgated on 15 July 2015,  Judge  Lea  found  that  a
    proxy sitter had been used and that the appellant knew her  certificate
    was  not  genuine.   The  appellant  does  not  dispute  those  factual
    findings, nor the conclusion that she cannot meet the  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules due to her use of deception.

 5. In respect of Article 8, outside the Rules, the judge said.

         "18.     ... the decision would result in an interference with [the
         appellant's] family life with her husband and two children.  I also
         accept given  the  terms  of  Mirza  [2015]  CSIH  28  that  it  is
         appropriate for me to conduct a case specific identification of the
         objective and the degree and nature of the interference with family
         life.   I  also  note  from  Khan  [2015]  CSIH  29  that   whether
         interference may be... proportionate... depends on an evaluation of
         the whole circumstances of the case.  Although Mirza makes it clear
         that a British citizen cannot be expected to leave the  UK,  it  is
         also pointed out in Mirza quoting from AB (Jamaica) that there is:

             "... a world  of  difference  between  expecting  the  foreign
             national, albeit now settled here, to return with  his  family
             to his country of origin ... and expecting a  British  citizen
             who  has  lived  all  their  life  in  the  UK  ...  to   find
             accommodation  in  a  foreign  country  or  to   forfeit   his
             marriage."

         19.      ... the appellant  has  used  deception  and  it  was  her
         husband's father who organised for her to sit the fraudulent  test.
         I do not accept that the appellant's husband would  not  also  have
         knowledge of this.  Although  the  appellant's  children  are  both
         British citizens and their parents' deception is not  their  fault,
         they are both of a very young age and will  not  have  formed  much
         private life outwith the immediate family  unit.   The  appellant's
         extended family are all in Pakistan and both the appellant and  her
         partner are from Pakistan.  It will not  necessarily  be  the  case
         that it would be in the best interests of the children to remain in
         the UK.  The best interests of the children in any event require to
         be balanced against the public interest in terms  of  section  117B
         [of the 2002 Act].  AM [2015] UKUT 260 shows  that  even  a  person
         with indefinite leave to remain may in some cases  enjoy  a  status
         which is "precarious" as  a  result  of  their  deception  ...  the
         appellant ... cannot  viably claim that her status  is  other  than
         precarious.  The appellant has also not shown that she is  able  to
         speak good English in terms of section 117B92)...

         20.      In the whole circumstances ... any interference  with  ...
         family life... is proportionate ... "

 6. The essence of the appellant's grounds  of  appeal  to  the  UT  is  as
    follows:

         "3.      It was an error to  balance  the  best  interests  of  the
         children against the public interest,  because  s.  117B(6)  states
         that where it is satisfied, the public interest  considerations  do
         not apply.

         4. In the context of s. 117B(6)  British  children  and  a  British
         parent can never reasonably be expected to relocate outside the UK,
         on the authority of Ogundimu [2013] Imm AR.

         On the authority of Mirza, it was  an  error  to  assume  that  the
         family would move to Pakistan.  The assessment  of  proportionality
         had to start from the assumption of  separation  from  the  British
         nationals.

         It was contrary to Zoumbas [2014] UKSC 75  to  reach  a  conclusion
         which separated young children from their parents.

         5. If public interest considerations were relevant, there was (i) a
         lack of clear findings on what was in the  best  interests  of  the
         children  (ii)  lack  of  clarity  over  whether  the   appellant's
         behaviour was treated as inherently more important  than  the  best
         interests of the children  and  (iii)  failure  to  ask  the  right
         questions in an orderly manner  to  avoid  the  risk  of  the  best
         interests being undervalued."

 7. On 11 January 2016 Mr Winter said  that  Treebhawon  [2015]  UKUT  674,
    reported subsequently to the preparation  of  the  grounds  of  appeal,
    supported the proposition at paragraph 3 of the grounds.  He went on to
    amplify the grounds, including a submission  that  although  the  judge
    referred to Mirza, she did not go to the part of  the  judgement  which
    bears on this case.

 8. Mr Matthews said that there was a  short  and  a  long  answer  to  the
    grounds.

 9. The short answer was that the judge's decision  under  s.  117B(6)  was
    justified on such (scanty) information as was before her regarding  the
    best interests of the children; that what was reasonable  depended  not
    only on those interests but on all the facts of the case; and there was
    no legal error in her answering the question posed by  the  sub-section
    as she did.

10. The longer answer involved an analysis that  the  authorities  did  not
    yield any rule that UK citizens might never reasonably be  expected  to
    leave the country, or any rule  that  proportionality  assessments  had
    always to be based on the assumption of separation of non-citizen  from
    citizen family  members;  that  if  Treebhawon  did  hold  that  public
    interest considerations were inapplicable, it was wrongly decided;  and
    that the balancing exercise even in respect of  s. 117B(6) was  firstly
    to be tested by reference to the Immigration Rules.

11. An adjournment was agreed, to give both sides  the  chance  further  to
    refine their positions.

12. The gist of the further submissions for the respondent is  as  follows.
    The complaint over how the FtT resolved  the  question  whether  it  is
    reasonable to expect the children to leave the UK is one  of  form  not
    substance.  The judge had decided that it was in the best interests  of
    the children to be with their parents but that did not  point  to  best
    interests being served by their remaining here, which was in line  with
    Zoumbas and with PW [2015] CSIH 36.   Further, the question of what was
    reasonable involved the best interests of the  children  as  a  primary
    consideration but went beyond that into public interest considerations.
     The best interests were to be balanced against the public interest  in
    the proportionality assessment, as settled by ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC
    4 and by Zoumbas.  S. 117B(6) did not change the law in  that  respect,
    its terms being identical to what appeared  in  the  Immigration  Rules
    before and since.  Treebhowan was (a) wrongly decided  (b)  apt  to  be
    misunderstood  and  (c)  not  binding  (although  likely  to  be  found
    persuasive in the UT).  Its construction of  s.  117B(6)  went  against
    other UT authority and was inconsistent with s. 117A(2).   The  matters
    in s. 117B(1) - (5) were all  to  be  taken  into  account  along  with
    anything else relevant to the public interest, which must  include  the
    Rules about using fraud to cheat the system.   In any event, Treebhowan
    even if correct held only that s. 117B(6) prevails over  s.  117B(1)  -
    (3).  Other public interest matters such as suitability under the Rules
    remain relevant.  Ogundimu and Mirza do not go as far as the  appellant
    argues.  The  appellant  made  no  substantive  case  about  where  her
    children's interests would be best served.

13.  The  appellant  counters  along  the  lines   that   public   interest
    considerations are irrelevant to s.117B(6); s. 117A(2) does  not  apply
    to s.117B(6); Treebhowan is not inconsistent with  previous  case  law,
    which did not go to the same issue; s.117B(6) being  statutory  is  the
    end point, and trumps the Rules; Ogundimu and Mirza are to  the  effect
    contended; and there was material relevant to the best interests of the
    children, "namely... to remain with both parents and this would  be  in
    the UK".  (It is not suggested that there was any  other  specification
    of those best interests; the point is offered as speaking for itself.)

14. In order to resolve these submissions, I think it is necessary  to  set
    out some of Part 5A of the 2002 Act and of the case law.

15. From the Act:

         'PART 5A Article 8 of the ECHR: public interest considerations

         117A Application of this Part

         (1)      This Part applies where a court or tribunal is required to
         determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-

             (a) breaches a person's  right  to  respect  for  private  and
             family life under Article 8, and

             (b) as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human
             Rights Act 1998.

         (2)      In considering the public interest question, the court  or
         tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

             (a) in all cases, to  the  considerations  listed  in  section
             117B, and

             (b) [applies to deportation of foreign criminals only].

         (3)      In subsection (2), "the public  interest  question"  means
         the question of whether an interference with a  person's  right  to
         respect for private and family  life  is  justified  under  Article
         8(2).

         117B Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in  all
         cases

         (1)      The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in
         the public interest.

         (2)      It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-

             (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)      It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
         financially independent, because such persons-

             (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)      Little weight should be given to-

             (a) a private life, or

             (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

             that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)       Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a   private   life
         established by a person at a time  when  the  person's  immigration
         status is precarious.

         (6)      In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,
         the public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom.

         ...

         117D Interpretation of this Part

         (1)      In this Part-

             "Article 8" means Article 8  of  the  European  Convention  on
             Human Rights;

             "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age  of  18
             and who-

                  (a)  is a British citizen, or

                  (b)  has lived in the  United  Kingdom  for  a  continuous
                  period of seven years or more;

             "qualifying partner" means a partner who-

                  (a)  is a British citizen, or

                  (b)  who is settled in  the  United  Kingdom  (within  the
                  meaning of the Immigration Act 1971 - see  section  33(2A)
                  of that Act).'

16. The line of authority on which the appellant relies  goes  back  beyond
    Ogundimu, but enough of the earlier cases emerges  from  the  following
    extract:

         "108.    In Sanade  and  others  (British  children  -  Zambrano  -
         Dereci) [2012] UKUT 00048 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal [Blake P and UTJ
         Jordan] asked the following question  of  the  Secretary  of  State
         (recorded at paragraph 93 of the decision):

             "Does the respondent agree that in a case where a non-national
             parent is being removed and claims it is a violation  of  that
             person's human rights to be separated from a child  with  whom
             he presently enjoys family life as an engaged parent,  that  a
             consequence of the CJEU's judgment is that it is not  open  to
             the respondent to submit that an interference can  be  avoided
             because it is reasonable to expect the child  (and  presumably
             any other parent/carer who is not facing  deportation/removal)
             to join the appellant in the country of origin?  If  not,  why
             not?"

         109.     Mr Devereux, at that time the Assistant Director UKBA  and
         Head of European Operation Policy, responded as follows:

             "We do accept, however, that in a case where a  third  country
             national is unable to claim a right to reside on the basis set
             out above it will not logically be  possible,  when  assessing
             the compatibility of their removal  or  deportation  with  the
             ECHR to argue that any  interference  with  Article  8  rights
             could be avoided by the family unit moving to a country  which
             is outside of the EU".

         110.     Having considered the Secretary of  State's  response  the
         Tribunal concluded (paragraph 95):

             "This means that where  the  child  or  indeed  the  remaining
             spouse is a British citizen and therefore  a  citizen  of  the
             European Union, it is not possible to require them to relocate
             outside of the European Union or to submit that  it  would  be
             reasonable for them to do so..."

         111.     The  Tribunal  further  clarified,  when  looking  at  the
         particulars facts of the case before it, that:

             "... as British citizens, Mrs  Sanade  and  her  children  are
             citizens of the European Union and as such entitled to  reside
             in the Union. The respondent properly accepts that they cannot
             be required to leave the Union as a matter of law..."

         112.     In  the  case  of  Izuazu  [2013]  UKUT  00045  (IAC)  the
         Secretary of State has confirmed that  the  response  continues  to
         apply, subject to a clarification  that  it  only  extends  to  the
         British citizen spouse or partner where  there  is  in  addition  a
         British citizen child. This approach is consistent with the  recent
         decisions of the Court of Appeal in DH (Jamaica)  [2012]  EWCA  Civ
         1736, and of the CJEU in O, S -v-  Maahanmuuttovirasto  [C  -356/11
         and 357/11: 6 December 2012].

         113.     Thus, in this appeal, TS cannot be required to  leave  the
         European Union to join the  appellant  in  Africa.  She  needs  her
         mother in order to exercise her residence rights in the  Union.  To
         require her mother to join the appellant in Nigeria (a country with
         which she has no ties of any sort and has never visited) is  either
         to require the child to leave the European Union, or the mother  to
         leave the child. In the latter eventuality there is no evidence  of
         anyone else able to adequately care for the child and so the  first
         issue would be reopened.  It is certainly  unreasonable  to  expect
         either TS or JD  to  relocate  to  Nigeria.  In  our  judgment  the
         obstacles to the mother relocating when she has to look  after  her
         young child in the United Kingdom are insurmountable, whatever  the
         term means."

17. The respondent seeks to distinguish the  present  case  from  Ogundimu,
    where the appellant's partner  and  her  child  had  no  connection  to
    Nigeria, and the child might have to leave the EU to be  cared  for  by
    her mother.  The respondent says that this  is  far  from  the  present
    case, where all are nationals of Pakistan, and that country is familiar
    to both the appellant and her partner.  The respondent seeks to justify
    the judge's approach in this case by further reference to Izuazu:

         "82.     Whilst we did not find an error  of  law  in  the  judge's
         conclusions that it would not be reasonable for Mr Akinola to  live
         in Nigeria, now we have found an error of law it is open to  us  to
         re-visit the question. We do not disturb the  primary  facts  found
         but note that we now know that Mr Akinola is a  dual  national.  He
         has retained his Nigerian nationality and has visited  the  country
         recently. We do not think that the indefinite  separation  of  this
         couple is inevitable if she is  removed  to  Nigeria.  Even  if  Mr
         Akinola had understandable reasons to want to remain in the  United
         Kingdom and relocation to Nigeria would be a hardship for  him,  we
         have seen nothing to suggest that he would not be  able  to  follow
         his wife to Nigeria.

         83.      In the particular circumstances of this  case,  given  the
         circumstances in which the relationship arose we conclude  that  it
         is not unreasonable for him to have to decide between retaining his
         residence in the United Kingdom and following his wife  to  Nigeria
         for the time being to continue family life there. In any event, the
         fact that it may not be  reasonable  to  expect  the  other  family
         members to relocate does not mean that in every case deportation or
         removal is disproportionate or not justified.

         84.      The facts are materially different from those of the  case
         of the successful appellant in Sanade where it was  not  reasonable
         to expect the spouse to leave the EU as in that case  the  claimant
         had been granted indefinite leave to remain before  committing  the
         offence and requiring the mother to leave would  also  require  the
         minor children to be compelled to do  so.  The  UKBA  continues  to
         accept that EU law prevents the state requiring an EU  law  citizen
         from leaving  the  United  Kingdom,  although  contends  with  good
         reason, that this is to be  distinguished  from  a  case  where  an
         independent adult can chose  between  continued  residence  in  the
         United Kingdom or continued cohabitation abroad."

18. The respondent says that is an example closer to the present  case,  an
    instance of it being found reasonable for a dual national  to  continue
    family life in his country of origin.

19. Regarding the appellant's proposition based on  Mirza,  the  respondent
    says that is a case best described as confined to its facts, and  cites
    the opinion of Lady Smith in Butt [2015] CSIH 72:

         "44.     Whilst some reliance was placed by the petitioner  on  the
         observations about the need, when considering the article 8 rights
         of an applicant's spouse, to have regard to the rights that flow to
         a person by reason of their being a British citizen (and thus  also
         imbued with the right to marry under article 12 ECHR), in the case
         of Mirza v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2015]  CSIH
         28, it was  accepted  that  each  case  turns  on  its  own  facts.
           Reference was also made to the case of Khan v Secretary of State
         for the Home Department [2015] CSIH 29 but  I  consider  that,  in
         common with Mirza, it turned on its own facts too.  In the  present
         case, the facts had been considered by two immigration  judges  who
         took account of the British nationality of  the  petitioner's  wife
         and what she said relocation would mean for  her.   Both  concluded
         that she could go to Pakistan and that there were no  good  reasons
         for her not to do so, albeit in circumstances where it would be for
         her to choose what to do but also in circumstances  where  she  had
         not said that she would not go with  the  man  she  had  chosen  to
         marry.  It was implicit in that approach and thus in  the  approach
         in the letter of 2 July 2013 that it was recognised that refusal of
         the petitioner's application might  result  in  the  spouses  being
         separated.  However, in the particular circumstances of this  case,
         it  was  concluded  that   the   weight   of   the   countervailing
         considerations relevant to legitimate aim  of  immigration  control
         was such that there were no realistic prospects of persuading a new
         immigration judge to reach a different decision."

20. The appellant replies that Butt did not disturb paragraph 20 of  Mirza,
    that Mirza was not appealed, and that in Butt the  respondent  did  not
    seek a bench of five to overturn Mirza.  However, in light  of  all  of
    the above, I am satisfied that the appellant goes too far in seeking to
    extract rules that UK citizens may  never  reasonably  be  expected  to
    leave the UK, that all proportionality assessments must be on the basis
    that all UK citizens will remain here, and that it is always separation
    of family members which has to be justified.

21. I think it fortifies that conclusion that  if  there  were  such  legal
    principles, the Immigration Rules, the respondent's policy instructions
    and the whole decision making structure would  stand  in  much  simpler
    forms than they do, and appeals such as the present one need not arise.
     The Rules, the statute and the case law appear to me to leave  it  for
    decision makers to assess what is reasonable or  proportionate  in  the
    circumstances of each case, whether involving UK citizen family members
    or not.  If s. 117B(6) means what  the  appellant  says,  it  takes  an
    unnecessarily circular route, and there ought to  be  provisions  which
    prescribe a result, not a question.  I do  not  accept  that  it  is  a
    question with an automatic answer.

22. I am satisfied that there was an open question before the judge, namely
    whether it was reasonable to expect the children to leave the  UK,  not
    one to which either the  Ogundimu  or  the  Mirza  train  of  case  law
    dictated an inevitable answer.  Mr Winter suggested towards the end  of
    his submissions that there is a distinction between proportionality and
    reasonability, and that the use in s. 117B(6)  of  "reasonable"  rather
    than "proportionate" might have significance.  There  are  distinctions
    to be drawn, although there is a large overlap.  In the absence of  any
    developed submissions on either side I do not explore  this  point  any
    further.  The judge decided what she thought  was  reasonable,  as  the
    statute required her to do.  Nor do I see anything in Treebhowan  which
    suggests that the judge went wrong by deciding as she did.  It is clear
    that she was swayed above all by finding nothing  unreasonable  in  the
    prospect  that  this  family  might  live  in  Pakistan.   As  said  in
    Treebhowan at paragraph 23, "... all will depend on the facts as  found
    by the tribunal".

23. The appellant's grounds at 5 (i) - (iii) amount to no more than the use
    of  formulae  drawn  from  case  law  to  dispute  the  best  interests
    assessment.  There  was  no  error  therein.   The  appellant  made  no
    substantial case that her children's best interests would be  adversely
    affected by any move to Pakistan.  She relied only  on  an  unjustified
    assumption that to remain in the UK must routinely be found  to  be  in
    the best interests of any child.

24. Absent any significant error of legal  principle  in  her  approach,  I
    consider that the judge's assessment of the outcome, in terms either of
    what is reasonable or of what  is  proportionate,  is  beyond  sensible
    dispute.

25. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.




           [pic]
           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


           17 February 2016


