
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/47780/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 27th October 2014                       |On 5th December 2014           |
|                                           |                               |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                               Mr Ali Cakallik
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Panagiotopoulou, Trott & Gentry LLP Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Turkey born on 10th  April  1974  and  he
    appealed against a decision promulgated on 2nd July 2014 by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Warren L Grant, who  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal
    with respect to Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules, on  human  rights
    grounds and under the Refugee Convention.  At the First  Tier  Tribunal
    hearing the grounds of appeal were amended to  include  Article  3  and
    according to Ms Panagiotopoulou also the Refugee Convention.

 2. Application for permission to appeal  was  made  as  in  particular  Ms
    Panagiotopoulou submitted that the judge had erred in his  approach  to
    the evidence. For example the appellant had not  been  asked  questions
    about his failure to advise the expert,  Dr  Smith  of  his  route  via
    Germany and the judge had not given the appellant  the  opportunity  to
    explain although discrepancies in his evidence were identified.

 3. I dismiss the challenge to the determination on the basis of comparison
    with the brother's claim because  the  appeal  of  the  brother  was  a
    completely separate consideration by the Secretary  of  State  and  the
    judge had no idea as to what evidence was before him.

 4. I find that the judge did make an overall credibility assessment and at
    [15] rejected the appellant's claim.   However, the judge  made  a  key
    finding with regard to the credibility of the appellant's evidence with
    reference to the expert report  but  the  judge  failed  to  raise  his
    criticism of the evidence with the appellant despite basing a key plank
    of his assessment on the failure of the appellant to  tell  the  expert
    that he did not come straight from  Turkey  to  the  UK  and  that  the
    appellant had misled the expert.  These were not put to the  appellant.



 5. Further, the judge referred to paragraph 63 to IK stating that  he  had
    no reason to be concerned on return to Turkey because he had never been
    brought before a court, let alone been convicted of an offence, and  it
    was not believed that as an  ethnic  Kurd  he  faced  ill-treatment  on
    return.

 6. It was the appellant's claim that he had been arrested  in  Turkey  and
    detained on a number of occasions.  The  findings  on  credibility  are
    important and link to the judge's assessment of  the  protection  claim
    bearing in mind that the judge had accepted that this  was  a  relevant
    matter for him to consider.  The findings of credibility would have  an
    impact on  the  findings  in  relation  to  past  persecution  and  the
    assessment of risk on return, in the light of IK  (Returnees,  Records,
    IFA) Turkey CG [2004] UKIAT 00312.

 7. The judge merely stated at paragraph 18:

         "I refer to paragraph 63 of IK.  He has no reason to  be  concerned
         on return to Turkey because he has  never  been  brought  before  a
         court, let alone been convicted of an offence.  I  do  not  believe
         that as an ethnic Kurd he faced ill-treatment on return.  I do  not
         find that he faces ill-treatment on account of his ethnicity or his
         faith."

 8. Paragraph 63 of IK refers to the computerised GBTS system which  refers
    to outstanding  arrest  warrants,  previous  arrests,  restrictions  on
    travel abroad and possible draft evasion, refusal to  perform  military
    service  and  tax  arrears.   The  arrests  were   distinguished   from
    detentions by the security forces followed by release  without  charge.
    It was also stated that GBTS was fairly widely accessible and available
    to the border police booth in Istanbul Airport and elsewhere in  Turkey
    to the security forces. On considering the claim there would need to be
    full consideration in relation to IK.

 9. Overall the judge appeared to reject  the  medical  evidence  that  the
    appellant experienced mental health problems and stated

    'He may well be suffering from  some  sort  of  depression  but  he  is
    receiving treatment and counselling and the basis for his depression is
    unclear given my findings relating to Dr Smith's report'.

10. The judge found there were no  compelling  circumstances  in  order  to
    consider the Article 8 claim outside the immigration rules. Bearing  in
    mind that I find the credibility  findings  are  unsafe  this  in  turn
    reflects on the lack of an assessment of the Article 8  matter  outside
    the rules.

11. I therefore set the decision aside on the basis that there has  been  a
    material error of law.

12. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified.  I set aside the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent
    of the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (ii) of the TCE 2007 and  further
    to 7.2 (b) of the Presidential Practice Statement.



Signed                                  Date 2nd December 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

