
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/47555/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10th August 2016                           |On 11 August 2016             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                              Mr Joseph Sheriff
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Sills (instructed by Protection of Human Rights)
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by  the  Secretary  of  State,
      with permission, in relation to a Decision and Reasons promulgated  by
      Judge Evans on 8th October 2015.

   2. The Appellant is a citizen of Sierra  Leone  who  appealed  against  a
      decision of the Respondent taken on the 19th November 2014  to  refuse
      his Human Rights claim.

   3. The Human Rights claim was made in response  to  notification  by  the
      Secretary of State that she intended to deport the Appellant.

   4. The First-tier Tribunal allowed the appeal.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
      initially refused permission to appeal which was then  granted  by  an
      Upper Tribunal Judge on 20th April 2016.

   5. However, after permission was granted, around the 21st June 2016,  the
      Upper Tribunal promulgated the reported case  of  Nkomo  (deportation:
      2014 rights of appeal) [2016] UKUT 00285 (IAC).  That is a decision of
      the Vice President of the Upper Tribunal and myself.  Paragraph  2  of
      the head note states as follows:-

   6. "In consequence, a person against whom a deportation decision was made
      in the period 10th November 2014 - 5th April 2015 may have no right of
      appeal if the decisions actually made  carry  rights  of  appeal  only
      under the new appeals provisions.

   7. The decision in this case fell within that time period.  I provided  a
      copy of Nkomo to both  representatives  and  gave  Mr  Sills  time  to
      consider matters as I had indicated that based on Nkomo the First-tier
      Tribunal's decision was in error because it  had  no  jurisdiction  to
      deal with it.

   8. Mr Sills then made submissions that Nkomo was wrongly decided and that
      there was jurisdiction to deal with the appeal and had been  from  the
      outset.  He argued that the two Orders referred to in Nkomo should  be
      interpreted in  accordance  with  what  was  the  clear  intention  of
      Parliament.  He referred to the fact that the Vice President in  Nkomo
      indicated that the meaning of the Orders  was  clearly  not  what  was
      intended.   He  argued  that  the  appeal  should  be  dealt  with  in
      accordance with legislative intent rather than what the Order actually
      said.

   9. I indicated that I considered myself bound by a decision of myself and
      the Vice President made as recently as June this year and on the basis
      of that case the First-tier Tribunal had no jurisdiction to deal  with
      the appeal and so made a material error of law in dealing with it.

  10. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed and the  decision  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal set  aside  in  its  entirety  as  the  First-tier
      Tribunal had no jurisdiction to hear the appeal.

  11. In redeciding the appeal I dismiss the Appellant's appeal for want  of
      jurisdiction.

  12. Mr Sills also made an application for costs against the  Secretary  of
      State.  I found that application to be wholly without merit given that
      at the time the Secretary of State took her decision and indeed  until
      the hearing before  me  no  one  had  appreciated  the  jurisdictional
      problem.

  13. There was  no  application  for  an  anonymity  order  and  I  see  no
      justification for making one.

   Decision


   The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is  allowed  such
   that the Appellant's original appeal against  the  Secretary  of  State's
   decision to refuse his Human Rights claim is dismissed


Signed                              Date 10th August 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin






