

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
IA/47369/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 February 2016                    |  On 4 March 2016               |


                                   Before

        The Hon Lord BURNS (Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal)
                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between


               The Secretary Of State For The Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                    Miss Olufunmilayo Omorinsola OLUGOGA
                           (No Anonymity Direction)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Layne, Counsel (instructed by Lannex
Immigration)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1.    The Appellant (the Secretary of State) appealed with  permission
           granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Brunnen on 16 December 2015
           against the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Sweet who
           had allowed the Respondent's appeal  against  the  Secretary  of
           State's decision  dated  3  November  2014  in  a  determination
           promulgated on 18 August 2015.  The Appellant is a  national  of
           Nigeria, who had applied for further leave to remain in  Tier  1
           as an  Entrepreneur  Migrant.   This  was  refused  and  removal
           directions were made under section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum
           and Nationality Act 2006.


      2.    Judge Sweet found that that the Respondent had demonstrated that
           she met the requirements of paragraph 245DD of  the  Immigration
           Rules, in that she had shown that she  was  registered  as  self
           employed with HMRC prior to 11 July 2014,  and  had  also  shown
           that she was actively trading prior to 11 July 2014.  Subject to
           the Secretary of State's being satisfied as to  the  genuineness
           of  the  business  under  paragraph  245DD(h),  the  appeal  was
           allowed.

      3.    Judge Brunnen considered it arguable that Judge Sweet had  erred
           by taking into account evidence that should have been  excluded,
           pursuant to section 85A(4) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
           Asylum Act 2002.  Had  such  evidence  not  been  admitted,  the
           appeal would have been dismissed.


      4.    Mr Wilding for the Appellant  submitted  that  Judge  Sweet  had
           manifestly fallen into legal error, as the grant  of  permission
           to appeal indicated.   The judge had  not  referred  to  section
           85A(4) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  nor
           Ahmed and Another (Points  Based  System:  admissible  evidence)
           [2014] UKUT 00365 (IAC).  The specified documents had  not  been
           submitted with the application.  Nor had the judge addressed the
           issue raised in the reasons for refusal letter as to the date of
           the advertising material produced, although he had noted that it
           was in issue at [7] of his decision and  reasons.   The  judge's
           findings at  [12]  and  [13]  were  based  on  post  application
           material, as the judge's use of the word "now"  signalled.   The
           original appeal could never have succeeded and the decision  and
           reasons should be set aside and a determination  dismissing  the
           original appeal substituted.


      5.    Mr Layne for the Respondent submitted that  the  relevant  rules
           were very complex and it was easy to go wrong.   The  Respondent
           had done her best and should not  be  penalised.   The  evidence
           identified by the judge showed that  the  HMRC  self  employment
           registration was in place prior to the Respondent's application.


      6.    The tribunal invited Mr Layne to take it to any documents  which
           supported that proposition.  The only  document  identified  (at
           page 30 of the Respondent's bundle) post-dated  the  application
           as it was dated 10 April 2015.  The accountant's letter (page 26
           of the Respondent's bundle) stated "We however await the receipt
           of  the  welcome   letter   from   the   HMRC   confirming   the
           registration."   The  tribunal  pointed  out  that  Mr   Layne's
           submission was thus  unsustainable.   Mr  Layne  was  given  the
           opportunity of conferring with  his  client.   He  added  noting
           thereafter.


      7.    Mr Wilding wished to add nothing by way of reply.


      8.    The tribunal indicated that the  Appellant's  appeal  succeeded,
           and reserved its determination which now follows.  The  tribunal
           finds that the judge had fallen into  material  errors  of  law.
           The Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant rules are  complex  but  Ahmed
           and Another (above) emphasises the restrictions which  apply  to
           the evidence which is admissible in Points Based System appeals.
            As Mr Wilding correctly submitted,  the  judge's  key  findings
           were based on inadmissible evidence.  Nor did  the  judge  reach
           any clear finding on the advertising material issue which he had
           earlier  identified;  see  paragraph  41-SD(e)(iii)(1)  of   the
           Immigration Rules.  The Respondent's own documents show that she
           made her application prematurely, before all  of  the  specified
           documents were available.  The reason why the documents must  be
           produced with the application is to enable them to  be  verified
           by the Home Office.  Simple errors by applicants  are  protected
           by paragraph 245AA of the Immigration Rules, but that  provision
           had no relevance to the present case and there was no submission
           to the contrary.


      9.    It follows that the decision and reasons  cannot  stand  and  is
           hereby set aside.   It was plain from the argument heard by  the
           tribunal that the original appeal could only be re-made  on  one
           basis, namely that the specified documents had not been provided
           with the  original  application  and  that  there  had  been  no
           application to vary the original application before the decision
           to refuse it had been made  by  the  Secretary  of  State.   The
           tribunal finds that the original Appellant has  failed  to  meet
           the mandatory requirements of paragraph 41-SD, as stated in  the
           reasons for refusal letter. The original appeal  is  accordingly
           dismissed.




      DECISION


      The making of the previous decision involved the  making  of  material
      errors on points of law. The Secretary of State's appeal  is  allowed.
      The original decision is set aside.


      The following decision is substituted:


      The Appellant's appeal is dismissed


      Signed                                  Dated






      The Hon. Lord Burns




      TO THE RESPONDENT
      FEE AWARD


      The appeal was dismissed so there can be no fee award


      Signed                                  Dated






      The Hon. Lord Burns
