
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/47167/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11th February 2015                        |On 23rd February 2015         |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                             Rachell Ann Sanchez
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Khan, Counsel instructed by PGA Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr M Shilliday, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of the Philippines and aged  26  years  old.
    Her appeal against the Secretary of State's decision dated 11th October
    refusing her leave to remain in the UK as a Tier  4  (General)  Student
    Migrant was dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Crawford  in  a
    determination promulgated on 26th June 2014.

2.   Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Goldstein  on
    27th November 2014 on  the  grounds  that  it  was  arguable  that  the
    Appellant's  CAS  had  been  amended  by  the  college  prior  to   the
    Respondent's  refusal.  There  was  a  correction  under  the   heading
    "Sponsor's Note" on the first page of  the  CAS  which  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge arguably failed to take into account in concluding  that
    the CAS was invalid.  At paragraph 12 of the  determination  the  Judge
    stated:  "I  have  seen  no  correspondence  that  confirms  that   the
    Appellant's  CAS  had  been  amended  by  the  college  prior  to   the
    Respondent's refusal."

3.   At the hearing Mr Shilliday conceded that the First-tier  Tribunal  had
    failed to take into account the correction evident on the face  of  the
    CAS and therefore the Respondent's decision to refuse  the  application
    was unlawful and the appeal should be allowed insofar as  the  decision
    of 11th October 2013 was not in accordance with the law.

4.   I pointed out that the passport number and  surname  on  the  CAS  were
    different to that of the Appellant.  Mr Shilliday noted that  the  date
    of birth was also different.  However, he conceded  that  these  points
    did not make any difference to his  concession.  In  the  interests  of
    fairness, the Respondent should reconsider the application  because  it
    was evident on the face of the CAS that the Sponsor had made a mistake.

5.   Accordingly, I find that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in law  in
    failing to consider the  Sponsor's  note  on  the  CAS  correcting  the
    Appellant's surname, passport number and date of birth. I set aside the
    determination dated 19th June  2014  and  remake  it.  The  Appellant's
    appeal is allowed insofar as the decision of 11th October 2013 was  not
    in accordance with the law.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 20th February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  fee  award
of any fee which has been paid or may be payable.



Signed        Date 20th February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
