
[pic]
IAC-BFD- MD

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/47365/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th August 2015                  |On 8th September 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                         Mr ezenwa christopher njoku
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss R Pickering of Counsel, instructed by Sheffield
                    Citizens Advice


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Ince) promulgated on 13th April 2014  in
    which it allowed the appeal of Ezenwa  Christopher  Njoku  against  the
    Secretary of State's refusal to grant him permanent  residence  in  the
    UK, under Regulation 15(1)(b) of the EEA Regulations 2006.

 2. For the purposes of this decision, I shall refer to  the  Secretary  of
    State as "the Respondent"  and  Mr  Njoku  as  "the  Appellant",  which
    reflects their respective positions before the FtT.

 3. The chronology setting out the  background  facts  to  this  matter  is
    unchallenged and I set out here the relevant  findings  extracted  from
    Judge Ince's decision.

         "The Appellant was born on 9 April 1973 in Nigeria - he is now aged
         41 years old.  He arrived in the UK on 22 April 2003.

         His future wife, Oghogho Ugokwe (the Sponsor), born in Nigeria  but
         then, and now, an Austrian national, arrived in the UK on 16  March
         2003.  The Respondent has accepted that  she  has  been  exercising
         treaty rights in the UK as an employed person since then.

         The  couple  began  living  together  in  early   2008.    Southern
         Electricity gas bills, addressed to them as joint  account  holders
         at the same address, show that they were cohabiting from  at  least
         28 July 2008.  Furthermore, they made an enquiry at  the  Sheffield
         Registry Office regarding marriage and received a written reply,  a
         letter addressed to them at the same  address  dated  16  September
         2008.  I pause there to  note  that  in  his  evidence  to  me  the
         Appellant stated that in fact they began living  together  in  2007
         but had no documentation to demonstrate this.

         On 13 August 2009 the couple were married according to a  customary
         traditional ceremony in Benin City in Nigeria.

         In 2010 the Appellant applied for a Residence Card as the unmarried
         partner of an EEA national, the  customary  Nigerian  marriage  not
         being accepted as a valid marriage.  That application  was  granted
         and the Appellant was issued with a Residence card as the unmarried
         partner of an EEA national on 3 August 2010."

    Judge  Ince  then  records  that  he  heard   submissions   from   both
    representatives.  Miss Pickering (who also  represented  the  Appellant
    before the FtT) referred him to the case of Idezuna  (EEA  -  permanent
    residence) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00474 (IAC).

 4. The Judge then noted at [23],

         "In particular,  Ms  Pickering  argued  that  the  issuing  of  the
         Residence Card in August 2010 was evidence of a right that  already
         existed under EEA law and the case  of  Idezuna  confirmed  that  a
         person can acquire as right of residence on the basis of historical
         fact."

 5. Before analysing the evidence submitted to  him,  he  noted  two  other
    issues which were raised and discounted.

       . that the Appellant and his Sponsor had been lawfully married  since
         2009 on the basis of a Nigerian customary marriage. He declined  to
         make a finding on that matter.

       . the Appellant and his Sponsor had now separated and  are  estranged
         but so far have not divorced. That remains the present position.

    As far as the Judge was aware, at the date of the hearing  before  him,
    the Sponsor continued to exercise Treaty rights as an employed person.

 6. Judge Ince allowed the appeal on this basis. As the Appellant had  been
    granted a Residence Card as the unmarried partner of an EEA national on
    3rd August 2010, this must mean that it was accepted by the  Respondent
    that the Appellant and his Sponsor had  been  cohabiting  as  unmarried
    partners since at least, the 3rd August 2008 (2 year qualifying  period
    for grant of a residence card).  He  decided  therefore  that  the  3rd
    August 2008 could be historically factored in to Regulation 15(1)  (b),
    even though the Appellant's residence card was only  issued  in  August
    2010. He concluded that the 'five year period' required  for  permanent
    residence would be met by 3rd August 2013. He allowed the appeal.

 7. Permission to appeal against Judge Ince's decision was granted on  10th
    June 2015.

The UT Hearing

 8. Before me Mrs Pettersen in her submissions kept chiefly to the lines of
    the grounds seeking permission. She expanded those  only  to  emphasise
    that the Judge had applied the wrong test in concluding as he did  that
    the start date for cohabitation was the point from  which  the  5  year
    qualifying period ran. This is not what the regulation says.

 9. Miss Pickering responded by rehearsing the arguments she raised  before
    Judge Ince. She relied  upon  Idezuna  for  the  proposition  that  the
    qualifying period of five years mentioned in Regulation 15(1)(b)  could
    be based on historical facts and therefore the clock started to run  in
    this Appellant's case from the commencement  of  co-habitation  between
    the parties and not as Respondent asserts from August 2010 when he  was
    issued with his Residence Card. She submitted  that  the  FtT  had  not
    erred and the decision allowing the Appellant's appeal should stand.

10.  Both  parties  were  in  agreement  that  this  matter  involved   the
    construction of "family member" within Regulation 15(1)(b).  Both  also
    agreed that should I find the Judge had erred I would be in a  position
    to remake the decision.

Consideration: Has the Judge Erred?

11. I am satisfied that Judge Ince's decision discloses an  error  of  law,
    such that it must be set aside and the decision remade.

12. I find that the Judge was wrong on two counts.

      i) To conclude that the period of co-habitation prior to the grant  of
         the Residence Card in 2010 counted towards the five year qualifying
         period for permanent residence.

     ii) The reliance placed on Idezuna was misconceived.

13. The relevant provisions in Regulation 15 read as follows:

         "15.-(1) The following persons shall acquire the right to reside in
         the United Kingdom permanently-

             (a) an EEA national who has resided in the United Kingdom in
             accordance with these Regulations for a continuous period of
             five years;

             (b) a family member of an EEA national who is not himself an
             EEA national but who has resided in the United Kingdom with
             the EEA national in accordance with these Regulations for a
             continuous period of five years;"

14. What constitutes a "Family member" is found in Regulation 7 of the 2006
    Regulations.

         "7.-(1) Subject  to  paragraph  (2),  for  the  purposes  of  these
         Regulations the following persons shall be treated  as  the  family
         members of another person-

             (a) his spouse or his civil partner;

             (b) direct descendants of his, his spouse or his civil partner
             who are-

                  (i) under 21; or

                  (ii) dependants of his, his spouse or his civil partner;

             (c) dependant direct relatives in his ascending line or that
             of his spouse or his civil partner;

             (d) a person who is to be treated as the family member of that
             other person under paragraph (3).

         (2) A person shall not be treated under paragraph (1)(b) or (c)  as
         the family member of a student residing in the United Kingdom after
         the period of three months beginning  on  the  date  on  which  the
         student is admitted to the United Kingdom unless-

             (a) in the case of paragraph (b), the person is the dependent
             child of the student or of his spouse or civil partner; or

             (b) the student also falls within one of the other categories
             of qualified persons mentioned in regulation 6(1).

         (3) Subject to paragraph (4), a person who is  an  extended  family
         member  and  has  been  issued  with  an  EEA  family   permit,   a
         registration certificate or a residence card shall  be  treated  as
         the family member of the relevant EEA national for as  long  as  he
         continues to satisfy the conditions in regulation 8(2), (3), (4) or
         (5) in relation to that EEA national and the permit, certificate or
         card has not ceased to be valid or been revoked.

         (4) Where the relevant EEA national  is  a  student,  the  extended
         family member shall only be treated as the family  member  of  that
         national under paragraph (3) if either the EEA  family  permit  was
         issued under regulation 12(2),  the  registration  certificate  was
         issued under regulation 16(5) or  the  residence  card  was  issued
         under regulation 17(4)."

15. I find that Regulation 7 paragraph 3 quite clearly states that in order
    to be treated as a family member, an extended family member is  someone
    who has been  issued  (my  emphasis)  with  an  EEA  Family  Permit,  a
    Registration Certificate or Residence  Card.  There  is  an  additional
    proviso which says that such a person will only be treated as a  family
    member for as long he continues to satisfy the conditions in Regulation
    8(2), (3), (4) or (5) in relation to that EEA national and the  permit,
    certificate or card has not ceased to be valid or  been  revoked.  That
    signifies to me the issue of the Residence card is the  start  date  in
    the process  of  acquiring  permanent  residency.   Therefore  in  this
    Appellant's case the clock starts to run from August 2010.  Of  course,
    any other conditions, necessary to a grant of permanent residence  will
    also have to be met. For that to happen the Respondent  will  no  doubt
    need to make the relevant enquiries and be satisfied  those  conditions
    are met.

16. That should be sufficient to dispose of this matter but it  is  correct
    that reliance was also placed on the case of Idezuna. Whilst  I  accept
    that Idezuna is good law for  the  proposition  that  historical  facts
    maybe included when assessing what amounts to a  continuous  period  of
    five years within Regulation 15, it does not say that historical  facts
    can be looked at 'in isolation' from the  rest  of  Regulation  15.  In
    Idezuna  the  appeal  revolved  around  what  constituted  the  5  year
    qualifying period after the issue of the residence card (on  marriage).
    Nowhere does it say that historical facts can count as qualifying  time
    before the issue of a residence card.

17. For the foregoing reasons, I find  that  the  decision  of  Judge  Ince
    contains an error of law such that the FtT's decision must be set aside
    and remade.

Decision

18. The appeal of the Secretary of  State  is  allowed.  I  substitute  the
    following decision. The appeal of Mr Ezenwa Christopher  Njoku  against
    the Secretary of State's refusal to issue a  permanent  Residence  Card
    under the EEA Regulations 2006 is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made


Signature     Dated

Judge of the Upper Tribunal



Fee Award

I have dismissed the original appeal and  upheld  the  Secretary  of  States
appeal there can be no fee award to Mr Njoku.


Signature     Dated

Judge of the Upper Tribunal
