
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/47824/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated         |
|On 18 March 2015                         |On 9 April 2015                   |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MURRAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     AMR MOHAMED NAGIB ABDELGAIL SHARARA
                       (ANONYMITY Direction not MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Vidyadiharan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No Representative


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of State,  however,
    for convenience I shall now refer to the parties as  they  were  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen  of  Egypt,  born  on  23  March  1988.   He
    appealed against the decision of the Respondent dated 23  October  2013
    refusing to issue him with a residence card as confirmation of a  right
    of residence under European Community Law, as  the  spouse  of  an  EEA
    National exercising treaty rights in the United  Kingdom.   The  appeal
    was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Phull on 28 October 2014.
    In her determination promulgated on 16 November 2014 the judge accepted
    that the appeal had been withdrawn by the respondent.

 3. An Application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by me as a Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge, on 20  January
    2015.  The grounds of application state that the Judge made a  perverse
    decision to the degree that it is irrational.  This  is  because  by  a
    Notice under Rule 17 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)
    (Immigration and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules  2014  the  First-tier  Judge
    accepted that the immigration decision taken by the  Respondent  on  23
    October 2013, has been withdrawn and she found that there was  no  good
    reason not to treat the decision as withdrawn.   (Paragraph  8  of  the
    determination.)

 4. The situation is that the Respondent sought to withdraw the immigration
    decision before the  hearing  to  allow  further  verification  of  the
    Appellant's documents to take place and a fax was sent to the  Tribunal
    to this effect on 23 October 2014.  A notice was sent by  the  Tribunal
    on 24 October 2014 stating:- "The Senior Judge directs withdrawal to be
    decided at the hearing, by the Tribunal Judge".

 5. The application to withdraw the immigration decision was renewed at the
    hearing and was refused by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Phull  who
    indicated that the hearing would proceed and evidence  would  be  taken
    from the Appellant and his wife.  This is recorded in a hearing  minute
    by the Presenting Officer who appeared at the  hearing.   The  Tribunal
    proceeded with the hearing and took evidence from the Appellant via  an
    interpreter and his EEA National wife.  Submissions were  made  by  the
    Presenting Officer  which  highlighted  significant  discrepancies  and
    omissions in the evidence.  In the determination the Tribunal does  not
    record the evidence taken or the submissions made.  At  the  conclusion
    of the hearing the Tribunal reserved its decision.  During the  hearing
    the judge made no further mention of the application  to  withdraw  the
    decision.

 6. The grounds submit that by refusing the  application  to  withdraw  the
    immigration decision at the outset of  the  hearing  the  Tribunal  had
    effectively estopped itself from treating  the  decision  as  withdrawn
    subsequent to the hearing and that it was procedurally unfair  for  the
    Tribunal  to  treat  the  decision  as  withdrawn  without  giving  the
    Respondent an opportunity to  make  representations  or  to  allow  the
    application to be withdrawn  in  light  of  the  evidence  taken.   The
    grounds state that  having  heard  the  evidence  and  submissions  the
    Tribunal should have decided the appeal on the evidence  presented  and
    the appeal should have been dismissed.

 7. The permission reiterates this and states that  there  may  well  be  a
    right of appeal in the circumstances of this case, as  when  the  Judge
    refused to accept the withdrawal of the decision she  then  raised  the
    hearing to one which was not solely procedural or preliminary.

The Hearing

 8.  The  appellant  attended  the  hearing  with  his  wife.   He  had  no
    representative.  He showed the  Presenting  Officer  and  the  Tribunal
    payslips, a P45 and details of his previous job and his current job.

 9. I asked the Presenting Officer to enlighten  me  about  the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing.

10. She submitted that the Secretary  of  State  applied  to  withdraw  her
    decision so  that  certain  documents  could  be  considered  but  this
    application was denied by  the  Judge  and  she  proceeded  to  a  full
    hearing, hearing evidence and submissions.  She submitted that this  is
    recorded in the minutes of the  Presenting  Officer  who  attended  the
    hearing.  She submitted that there were discrepancies in  the  evidence
    and  because  of  these  the  Respondent  expected  the  appeal  to  be
    dismissed, however, the  Judge,  having  refused  the  application  for
    withdrawal then decided that the decision had been withdrawn  and  made
    no mention of any of the evidence or submissions made at  the  hearing.
    She submitted that this must be an error of law.

The Determination

11. The Judge made a clear error of law as he raised  the  hearing  to  one
    which was not solely procedural or preliminary but made no  mention  of
    the evidence heard or the submissions  made  at  the  hearing,  in  her
    determination, instead accepting the withdrawal of the decision.

The Decision

12. I find there to be errors of law in the Judge's  determination  but  in
    the circumstances of this case I find that the only fair way forward is
    for  me  to  accept  the  Respondent's  application  to  withdraw   her
    immigration decision to allow further verification of  the  Appellant's
    documents.

13. The First-tier Tribunal's decision therefore stands.  Although there is
    a clear error of law it is not a material error of law.

14. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 1 April 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Murray
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
