

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
IA/47812/2014

                                               IA/47811/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 5 April 2016                          |On 29 April 2016                  |
|                                         |                                  |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SYMES

                                   Between

                               SHANTI ACHARYA
                          GHANASHYAM PRASAD KAPHLE
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Razzar-Siddiq (Universal Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. These are the appeals of Shanti Acharya, a citizen of  Nepal  born  26
      January 1984, and  Ghanashyam  Prasad  Kaphle  born  26  August  1978,
      against the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  their
      appeals against the decision of the Secretary of State of 13  November
      2014 to refuse their applications for further leave to remain.


   2. The immigration history provided by the Respondent sets out  that  the
      Appellants entered the United Kingdom on 13 October  2009  with  leave
      until 23 October 2011; their leave was extended until 21 December,  as
      a Tier 4 student and dependant, until its curtailment to expire on  22
      August 2014 following the Sponsor college's licence being revoked.


   3. Refusing the application, the Secretary of State found that, absent  a
      Sponsor with settled status neither had  a  viable  application  under
      Appendix FM and, as to their private life within the Rules, they  were
      not thought to have lost their ties to their home  country  such  that
      they would be unable to integrate there on a return. Any relationships
      that they had established in this country could be maintained remotely
      in the future.


   4. The application of 20 August 2014 was to remain based  on  Ms  Acharya
      being from a family which had given everything towards her  education.
      From October 2009 she had studied with Brit College  London,  studying
      Health  and  Social  Care,  with  a  view  to   studying   Hospitality
      Management. Following the revocation of Brit College's licence  on  21
      May 2014 her visa had been curtailed, leading her to become  depressed
      and unconfident. She had previously hoped to go into further education
      or to switch to Tier 2 as a sponsored employee. Her plans were  ruined
      by the college's demise and she had been unable to  obtain  a  further
      Certificate  of  Acceptance  for  Studies  (CAS)  despite   her   best
      endeavours to do so. She could not face starting out  again  in  Nepal
      and her husband had already sold his matrimonial property to fund  her
      education.


   5. At the outset of the  hearing  below  the  Appellants'  representative
      sought an adjournment on the grounds that she was unfit to attend  the
      hearing: the Judge refused this application as her NHS fitness to work
      statement referred to her being unfit for work due to  back  pain  but
      considered that insufficient to show she  was  unable  to  attend  the
      hearing. Her witness statement set out that she was pregnant  and  was
      experiencing complications: she had been advised by her consultant  to
      have a complete rest and to avoid anxiety and stress. Return to  Nepal
      would be difficult in the light of the earthquake and  the  consequent
      infrastructure damage. It would be deeply embarrassing in her  society
      for her to return to Nepal to make a fresh start, and the prospect  of
      their lives being shattered had caused her to develop depression.


   6. The First-tier Tribunal went on to determine and dismiss  the  appeals
      concluding that, whilst it accepted the factual  basis  on  which  the
      case was put forward, the Appellants were overstayers who had breached
      immigration and had always been aware of their short term  stay  here.
      It could be expected that return would involve some hardship given the
      earthquake, but they had always been aware of the need to return  home
      and Ms Acharya had the advantage of her qualifications  here  to  draw
      upon.


   7. Grounds of appeal argued  that  the  decision  had  been  procedurally
      unfair because


      (a)    The decision to refuse an adjournment was unfair;
      (b)    The Defendant Secretary of State had acted unlawfully in
      failing to consider relevant considerations;
      (c)    Given the Appellant had invested a lot of money with a view to
      securing her degree, she could arguably benefit from the principle
      articulated in CDS Brazil that a person with strong connections to
      this country and to a particular institution could, if committed to a
      particular educational sequence which would be seriously damaged by
      the immigration decision, might have established private life here
      with which interference was disproportionate.


   8. Mr Razzar-Siddiq submitted that the Upper Tribunal had acted  contrary
      to the fundamental common law principle of fairness in its decision to
      refuse  an  adjournment  application  which  had  the  consequence  of
      excluding the Appellants from their own hearing. Furthermore the First-
      tier Tribunal had been wrong to suggest that  they  had  breached  the
      Immigration Rules: in reality their leave had been curtailed and  they
      had made a timely further application prior to its new expiry date. Mr
      Tufan argued that the medical  evidence  had  not  clearly  shown  the
      Appellant would be unable to give evidence in her appeal.


Findings and reasons

    9. It is uncontroversial to recognise that the pursuit of fairness  lies
       at the heart of the Tribunal's overriding objectives. Where issues of
       fairness arise, on appeal the question is whether the procedure below
       was right or wrong, and is not to be  approached  via  the  prism  of
       rationality: "Whether fairness is required and what  is  involved  in
       order to achieve fairness is for the decision  of  the  courts  as  a
       matter of law. The issue  is  not  one  for  the  discretion  of  the
       decision-maker. The test is not whether no reasonable body would have
       thought it proper to dispense with a  fair  hearing.  The  Wednesbury
       reserve has no place in relation to procedural propriety" (see  Simon
       Brown LJ in Kingdom of Belgium (CO/236/2000 15 February 2000)).


   10. The First-tier Tribunal refused the adjournment  application  because
       it was not satisfied that medical evidence stating that one Appellant
       was unable to work demonstrated that she could not attend a  hearing.
       It seems to me that a  person  who  is  unable  to  work  because  of
       pregnancy-related issues may very well be physically compromised such
       that they cannot give evidence  in  important  legal  proceedings.  I
       accept that the Judge below erred in law in failing to have regard to
       this relevant consideration.


   11. As was stated in MM (unfairness; E & R) Sudan [2014] UKUT  105  (IAC)
       distilling the principles in R v Chief  Constable  of  Thames  Valley
       Police, ex parte Cotton [1990] IRLR 344 where there is unfairness "It
       is sufficient if an Applicant can establish that there is a real,  as
       opposed to a purely minimal, possibility that the outcome would  have
       been different". Pressed repeatedly from the Bench,  the  Appellant's
       advocate was unable to point to further evidence that would have been
       given that might have led to a different outcome on  the  appeal.  In
       these circumstances I cannot find that the error was a  material  one
       even to the relatively low standard envisaged by MM Sudan.


   12. Beyond the challenge to the refusal of the adjournment it  is  rather
       difficult to extract points of law from the grounds of appeal,  which
       are drafted as if the Secretary of State was the relevant  Defendant,
       in  judicial   review   proceedings,   rather   than   focussing   on
       demonstrating material flaws  in  the  reasoning  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal.


   13. As to the Appellants' claim that their rights protected by Article  8
       ECHR might be infringed by the immigration decision,  in  Niemietz  v
       Germany [1992] ECHR 80 at [29] the ECtHR recognised that private life
       goes beyond one's "inner circle" of relationships without  regard  to
       the "outside world" which one inhabits: one's "private life must also
       comprise to a certain degree  the  right  to  establish  and  develop
       relationships with other human beings."


   14. In CDS (PBS "available" Article 8) Brazil [2010]  UKUT  305  (IAC)  a
       strongly constituted Panel of the UTIAC found at  [19]  that  "people
       who have been admitted on a  course  of  study  at  a  recognised  UK
       institution for higher education, are likely to build up  a  relevant
       connection with the course, the institution, an educational  sequence
       for the ultimate professional qualification sought, as well as social
       ties during the period of study.  Cumulatively  this  may  amount  to
       private life that  deserves  respect  because  the  person  has  been
       admitted  for  this  purpose,  the  purpose  remains  unfilled,   and
       discretionary factors such as mis-representation or criminal  conduct
       have not provided grounds for refusal of extension or curtailment  of
       stay." Following the decision of the Supreme Court in Patel, in Nasim
       and others (Article 8) [2014] UKUT 25 (IAC) at [20] the UTIAC  stated
       that:


         "Patel and Others is a significant  exhortation  from  the  Supreme
         Court to re-focus attention on the nature and purpose of Article  8
         and,  in  particular,  to  recognise  its  limited  utility  to  an
         individual where one has  moved  along  the  continuum,  from  that
         Article's core area of operation towards what might be described as
         its fuzzy penumbra. The limitation arises, both from what  will  at
         that point normally be the tangential effect on the  individual  of
         the proposed interference and from the fact that, unless there  are
         particular reasons to  reduce  the  public  interest  of  enforcing
         immigration controls, that interest will  consequently  prevail  in
         striking the proportionality balance (even assuming that  stage  is
         reached)"


    and at [41] went on


         "on the state of the present law, there  is  no  justification  for
         extending the obiter findings in CDS, so  as  to  equate  a  person
         whose course of study has not yet ended with a person  who,  having
         finished their course, is precluded by the Immigration  Rules  from
         staying on to do something else."


   15. I cannot accept, based on the unparticularised assertions made in the
       application, that the Appellant has any private life  connections  of
       an intensity that  would  move  this  case  from  the  general  Nasim
       position into the compelling kind of case represented by CDS  Brazil.
       Proportionality is to be measured via factors including the  criteria
       identified in section 117B of the Nationality Immigration and  Asylum
       Act 2002, and his presence is precarious given he has only ever  been
       granted limited leave to remain as a student. Thus the  private  life
       they have established here is to be given only  limited  weight.  The
       First-tier Tribunal was wrong  to  treat  the  couple's  presence  as
       established in breach of the Immigration Rules given that they made a
       timely application for further leave to remain, but the fact  remains
       that had that mistake not been made, they would still  have  faced  a
       similar disadvantage in the public policy balancing exercise.


   16. The Appellants do not assert any  family  life  links  here,  whereas
       abroad they would have the advantage of their own extended family  to
       support them. One appreciates that the consequences of the earthquake
       will make life more difficult for them in the future, but it must  be
       borne in mind that, firstly, the classes of person identified  as  at
       particular risk of disadvantage in its aftermath are essentially  the
       vulnerable and do not include able-bodied young people, and secondly,
       that this complaint is of the vicissitudes of life to which flesh  is
       heir, akin to naturally occurring illness, which (at least in a  case
       where no strong Article 8 rights are established) could only raise an
       impediment  to  removal  in   the   most   exceptional   humanitarian
       circumstances: see N v United Kingdom 2008 47 EHRR 885, Sufi and Elmi
       8319/07 [2011] ECHR 1045 at [282], referencing circumstances  "solely
       or even predominantly attributable to poverty or to the State's  lack
       of resources to deal with a naturally occurring phenomenon, such as a
       drought ..."


   17. I accept that during their residence in this country they  will  have
       established friendships and something by way of connections here  but
       I cannot accept that this amounts to such  a  fundamental  aspect  of
       either Appellants' identity as to make the interference with  private
       life occasioned by removal disproportionate. It  is  to  be  presumed
       given Ms Acharya's length of studies in the United Kingdom  that  she
       speaks good English and that she has been financially independent, so
       those considerations do not count heavily against them.  However  she
       has always been present in an immigration capacity that was temporary
       and the couple's ensuing presence here has been precarious. There  is
       no disproportionate interference with their private  life  occasioned
       by the immigration decision.


          Decision:

    The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  upheld  as  there  is  no
    material error of law within it.  The appeal is dismissed.



Signed:                                            Date: 27 April 2016
[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Symes
