
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA471182014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham   |Determination & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 12th February 2016                    |On 13th June 2016                   |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                              mr Basam Alhassan
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No legal representation
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge James, promulgated on 16th March 2015,  following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham on 17th February 2015.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal of Basam Alhassan, who subsequently  applied  for,
    and was granted, permission to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matters
    comes before me.

The Grant of Permission

 2. On 23rd July 2015, permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that this concerned  an  Appellant  who  was  not
    represented.  There was an email on file dated 18th March 2015 in which
    the Appellant asked for documents to be returned to him, which she  had
    forwarded to the Tribunal for his appeal, but which were not considered
    by the judge.  On 23rd March 2015, the documents were returned  to  him
    by the Tribunal  in  a  letter  which  states,  "please  find  enclosed
    documents which were  submitted  for  the  above  appeal".  The  appeal
    reference  is  IA/47118/2014.   The  documents  are  listed   as   "tax
    documents, Republic of Ghana documents, letters, photos, utility  bills
    and wage slips".  Nevertheless, in a decision dated  12th  March  2015,
    and promulgated on 16th March 2015, these documents were  not  referred
    to by the Tribunal Judge.  Yet, in a letter dated 23rd March  2015,  it
    was apparent that the Tribunal was in  possession  of  the  Appellant's
    documents which were returned to him on  23rd  March  2015,  after  the
    decision  had  been  promulgated.   The  Upper  Tribunal,  in  granting
    permission now held  that  it  was  arguable  that  there  had  been  a
    procedural  irregularity  which  has  led  these  documents  not  being
    considered by the judge, which is capable of affecting the outcome.

 3. On 7th August 2015, a Rule 24 response was entered  by  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State to the effect that the Tribunal had directed  itself
    appropriately.   The  Grounds  of  Appeal  allege  that  the  Appellant
    submitted documents which were not considered  by  the  Tribunal.   The
    Secretary of State, however, has no way of knowing what was, or was not
    before the judge on the day of the paper hearing.  However, the  burden
    of proof was upon the Appellant to show that documents were before  the
    Tribunal.  The burden was upon the Appellant to show  that  they  would
    have made a material difference to the outcome  of  the  appeal.   That
    burden had not been discharged.

Submissions

 4. At the hearing before me on 12th February 2016, Mr  Alhassan,  appeared
    in person and explained that he comprised a family of two brothers  and
    a girl, all of whom were born as triplets.  He had got married to a EEA
    national, by way of a proxy marriage which was conducted in  accordance
    with the laws of Ghana, and this lady,  a  French  national,  had  also
    become the wife of a Pakistani national, and this had upset him and his
    relationship was now in difficulty.  Mr Alhassan stated before me that,
    "she was seeing other men and I said I am not that  kind  of  a  person
    where you are seeing other people".

 5. For his part, Mr Mills submitted that the Appellant's  application  was
    rejected because  there  was  a  suggestion  that  deception  had  been
    involved.  Initially it was suggested that the  Appellant  was  from  a
    family of twins but he was now suggesting that they were triplets.   In
    any event, there had been an application from  someone  with  the  same
    date of birth and the same parents as the Appellant.  The  papers  were
    not served on the Respondent Secretary of  State.   But  even  if  they
    were, these papers which the Appellant claims to have been sent by post
    to the Tribunal and received by them  were  not  considered,  were  not
    relevant to the essential issues that were before the Tribunal.   There
    really was only one issue before the Tribunal, and that was whether the
    marriage that the Appellant alleged to have contracted  with  a  French
    national, was in compliance with the law of  an  EEA  country,  namely,
    France in this case, and not in accordance with the laws of  Ghana,  as
    the Appellant claimed.  This had been established in the  leading  case
    of Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT 00024.  The  documents
    that the Appellant had referred to, as having been sent to the Tribunal
    but not considered by the Tribunal  were  tax  documents,  Republic  of
    Ghana documents, letters and photos and utility bills.  None  of  these
    really dealt with the manner in which the marriage had been contracted,
    which was a proxy marriage, and not in  compliance  with  the  laws  of
    France.  Therefore, even if the documents had been  considered  by  the
    Tribunal on that occasion, in what was a "paper  hearing",  the  appeal
    would not have succeeded.  It would have been lost on the Kareem point.



 6. Second, the additional question was whether the Appellant could succeed
    on the basis that he had  a  "durable  relationship"  with  the  French
    national  under  Regulation  8.   However,  if  the  sponsoring  French
    national was not going to come  to  court  and  give  evidence  it  was
    difficult to see how  the  durable  relationship  could  be  proved  by
    evidence before the Tribunal.  In any  event,  the  Appellant  was  now
    reluctantly conceding that the relationship  had  broken  down  because
    this French national had also married a Pakistani  national  (a  matter
    expressly  referred  to  by  the  judge   at   paragraph   8   of   the
    determination),  and  that  the  marriage  was   now   in   difficulty.
    Therefore, there could have been no finding of  there  having  been  in
    existence a durable relationship.

 7. In reply, the Appellant said that he now had a  girlfriend.   Her  name
    was Umu.  She was a Senegalese national.  He did not know  her  status.
    He could not say whether she had leave to remain.  However, he went  on
    to confirm that his relationship with the French national whom  he  had
    allegedly married broke up one and a half years ago.  He said that this
    was prior to the hearing of 17th February 2015 before  Judge  James  in
    Birmingham.

No Error of Law

 8. I am satisfied that that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did
    not involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)
    of TCEA 2007), such that I should set aside the decision.   My  reasons
    are as follows.  First, the sole issue in this appeal was  whether  the
    Appellant's marriage  was  valid  in  accordance  with  the  law.   The
    relevant law was the  law  of  the  EEA  national  whom  the  Appellant
    purported to marry.  Under  French  law,  it  is  relevant  that  proxy
    marriages  are  not  allowed.   The  Appellant  furnished  evidence  in
    relation to proxy marriages in Ghana and that was entirely relevant  as
    explained in the case of Karim [2015] UKUT 00024.

 9. Second, and in any event, it is the Appellant's evidence today that his
    relationship with the French national broke  down  before  the  hearing
    before Judge James on 17th February 2015.  This  was  because  she  had
    married other people as well.  As such, that the relationship could not
    succeed under Regulation 8 as a durable relationship either.

10. Third, in cases of this kind, it is invariably going  to  be  the  case
    that where the nature of the marriage is put in issue by the  Secretary
    of State, the failure of one or both Appellants (as is the  case  here)
    to attend court and give evidence, and  explain  to  the  Tribunal  the
    nature of their marriage, will inevitably lead to them being unable  to
    show that the marriage was a genuine and subsisting one.  This was what
    the Tribunal found in this case.

11. The Tribunal was entitled to do and  it  gave  compelling  reasons  for
    reaching these conclusions at paragraphs 9 and 10 of the determination.
     The fact that documents were sent, which were essentially in  relation
    to the situation in  Ghana,  and  were  not  considered,  was  entirely
    irrelevant to the issue before the Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

No anonymity order is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 11th June 2016
