
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/47856/2014
                                                               IA/47863/2014
                                                               IA/47869/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 September 2018                          |On 22 October 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                           r B M (First Appellant)
                           p C (Second Appellant)
                            A C (Third Appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms C Brown, Counsel, instructed by Haris Ali
Solicitors (Kilburn)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. In a decision posted on 13 July 2018 I set aside for  material  error  of
law the decision of Judge Shiner of the First-tier Tribunal (FtT) sent on  4
May 2017 dismissing on  the  papers  the  appeals  of  the  appellants,  all
citizens of Brazil, against the  decision  made  in  November  2014  by  the
respondent refusing their asylum and human  rights  claims.  The  first  two
appellants are husband and wife. The third appellant  is  their  child,  now
aged 9 years 11 months.  A previous appeal hearing before  FtT  Judge  Majid
(who allowed their appeals) was also set aside for material error of law.

2. In part because the case  had  already  been  before  the  FtT  twice,  I
considered it unwarranted for the case to be remitted again.  I stated  that
there was unlikely to  be  dispute  as  to  most  of  the  background  facts
concerning the family circumstances and immigration history.

3. At the resumed hearing before me, I heard submissions from  the  parties.
Mr Bates said that the  respondent  accepted  that  following  the  guidance
given by the Court of Appeal in  MA  (Pakistan)  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705  the
outcome of the appeals turns largely on whether,  by  virtue  of  the  third
appellant being a qualifying child (one who has resided in the UK  for  more
than seven years), there exist powerful reasons why she should  be  expected
to leave the UK.  He accepted that according to the approach set out by  the
Upper Tribunal in MT and ET [2018] UKUT 00088 IAC the  longer  a  child  has
remained in the UK the more  the  public  interest  in  removal  diminishes.
Nevertheless, there were powerful reasons why the third appellant  could  be
expected to leave the UK. She was a national of  Brazil.  She  had  extended
family in Brazil. She had been born into a  Brazilian  family.  She  has  no
health difficulties. She can continue her education in Brazil and she as  at
an age where she has not yet  formed  significant  friendships  outside  the
family and when friendships change in any event.  She  is  of  an  adaptable
age. Her best interests lay in remaining with both her parents. The  removal
of the appellants would take place together. It  would  not  interfere  with
her nuclear family. Her brother (who is entitled to reside in the UK as  the
family member of an EEA national) was now an  adult  and  lived  separately.
The immigration status of all three appellants has always  been  precarious.
Her father is a long-term overstayer and made use of false  documents.  That
meant  that  he  could  not  meet  the  suitability  requirements   of   the
Immigration Rules.

4. Ms Brown submitted that whilst there was a suitability issue in  relation
to the position of the first appellant that should not impact  on  the  best
interests of the child assessment and that in turn should reduce its  impact
in the context of the proportionality assessment. In  respect  of  the  best
interests of the child assessment, it was accepted that the third child  was
distanced from her country of nationality. In this case there was  a  letter
from the third appellant making clear her wish to stay  in  the  UK.  Whilst
children aged 9 changed classes  and  schools  as  they  progressed  through
their education, they typically did retain some friends and changes of  this
sort should not be equated with changing countries. The fact that the  third
appellant was nearly 10 was important because the Upper Tribunal in  MT  and
ET [2018] UKUT 00088 IAC has made reference to a sliding scale and  she  was
nearly 3 years over the 7 year period when she became  a  qualifying  child.
Her first language was English. She is very close to the age  when  she  has
an entitlement to stay on  the  basis  of  10  years  residence.  The  first
appellant's conviction dated from before 2012 and was  not  at  a  level  to
trigger automatic deportation. It was just the one  conviction  and  he  had
shown remorse for it. It did not constitute a powerful reason for  requiring
the third appellant to leave the UK. Whilst the immigration  status  of  all
three was precarious, the second appellant had had leave to remain for  some
period. It was open to the  Upper  Tribunal  to  depart  from  the  norm  of
attaching little weight to the third appellant's  family  and  private  life
because of precarious immigration status.   Furthermore,  both  her  parents
had been outside Brazil for 17 and 16 years.

My assessment

5. Whilst I have set aside the decision of the FtT  judge,  I  observe  that
the appellants' grounds did not challenge the judge's  primary  findings  of
fact. What is in dispute is evaluation of those  findings  of  fact.  It  is
common ground that the principal issue in this case is whether it would  not
be reasonable to  expect  the  third  appellant  to  leave  the  UK.  It  is
recognised that if it would  not  be  reasonable,  then  it  would  then  be
disproportionate to require the first two appellants to leave. In  terms  of
the Immigration Rules, the relevant rule relating to the third appellant  is
para 276ADE(1)(iv). Under the NIAA  2002  the  most  relevant  provision  is
s.117B(6).

6. As regards the third appellant, I must apply the guidance set out  in  MA
(Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ  705  which  in  turn  confirmed  that  given  in
relation  to  assessments  of  the  best  interests  of  the  child  in   EV
(Philippines) [2014] Civ 874 per Clark LJ at [34]-[36].

7. In relation to the best interests  of  the  child  assessment  (in  which
context  the  immigration  history  of  the  first  two  appellants  is  not
relevant), the fact that she has lived all her life in the  UK  and  resided
here for nearly 10 years and has a brother here means that she has put  down
roots here. Her first language is English and all her  education  has  taken
place in the UK. She also attends a Sunday school  church  group.  She  does
not have any knowledge of Brazilian society; the FtT judge  found  that  she
has no connections with Brazil other than with her parents.  She  has  never
lived there or visited there. On the  other  hand,  she  is  a  national  of
Brazil and  has  working  knowledge  the  Portuguese  language  through  her
parents. It is not suggested  that  her  parents  have  brought  her  up  in
ignorance of Brazilian customs and traditions. Her brother is now  an  adult
aged over 20 and he  lives  separately.  She  has  no  health  difficulties.
Taking into account all relevant factors relating to her best  interests,  I
conclude that to require her to leave would significantly disrupt  her  life
and  on  balance  it  is  in  her  best  interests  to  remain  in  the  UK,
particularly bearing in mind the period of nearly  10  years  that  she  has
lived here. I carry forward this finding into my proportionality  assessment
which, as explained earlier, principally turns on the issue  of  whether  it
would be reasonable to expect the third appellant to leave the UK.

8. There are certainly valid reasons for expecting the  third  appellant  to
leave the UK. They include those mentioned already  in  the  context  of  my
assessment of the best interests of the child: she is a national  of  Brazil
and has knowledge the Portuguese language through her  parents.  It  is  not
suggested that her parents have brought her up  in  ignorance  of  Brazilian
customs and traditions. Her brother is now an adult aged over 20  who  lives
separately. She has no health difficulties. She is of an adaptable age.

9. There is also the fact that her father has been in the UK without  lawful
permission for a lengthy period and he has a conviction  for  use  of  false
documents. Her mother (the second appellant) did have  a  period  of  lawful
residence as a family member of an EEA national but she  has  her  residence
card revoked and she too is an overstayer.  Whilst the first two  appellants
have facility in English they were booked to have a  Portuguese  interpreter
in the event they were needed to give  evidence  before  me  (in  the  event
neither representatives saw  that  as  necessary).  There  are  thus  strong
public interest considerations weighing against the appellants.

10. However, applying the guidance given in MA (Pakistan) and  confirmed  by
the Upper Tribunal in MT and ET, what I have to  be  satisfied  of  is  that
there are "powerful reasons" for expecting the third appellant to leave  the
UK.  I am not persuaded that the  above  reasons  amount  to  such  powerful
reasons.  Mr  Bates  has  submitted  that  the  combination  of  the   first
appellant's poor immigration history (he entered the UK as a visitor with  a
visitor  visa  valid  for  6  months  and  has  a  criminal  conviction  for
possessing forged documents and also  admitted  to  working  as  a  handyman
despite knowing he had no right to do so) constitutes a powerful reason  and
points to the fact that  it  was  this  background  that  properly  led  the
respondent to conclude that he did not meet the suitability requirements  of
the Rules as set out in S-LTR.1.6.  However, the first appellant's  criminal
conviction occurred over 6 years ago; he has not re-offended  and  Mr  Bates
did not seek to dispute Ms Brown's reference to the first  appellant  having
demonstrated remorse. That is salient because the  relevant  requirement  of
the Rules is cast in the present tense ("The presence of  the  applicant  in
the UK is not conducive to the public good because their conduct  (including
convictions  which  do  not  fall  within  paragraphs  S-LTR.1.3  to   1.5),
character, associations, or other reasons,  make  it  undesirable  to  allow
them to remain in the UK.")

11. Whilst I discern from the summary of the first  appellant's  immigration
history in the respondent's  refusal  decision  that  he  has  made  several
attempts to remain in the UK and has engaged  in  litigation  including  two
unsuccessful applications for judicial review (and in that  way  to  attempt
to frustrate the respondent's efforts to take enforcement  action  commenced
on 4 November 2011), I cannot ignore the  fact  that  it  was  open  to  the
respondent to take action to enforce his removal and that of his  family  at
a much earlier stage. The delay in taking enforcement action has meant  that
the third appellant is only a month short of 10 years residence in  the  UK,
when she will have the ability to register as a  British  citizen.  In  that
regard, I very much doubt that the first appellant's  level  of  criminality
would be of sufficient order to place him outwith the  respondent's  current
policy governing parents of British citizen  children.  There  is  something
incongruous about being asked in  late  2018  to  find  a  refusal  decision
proportionate at a time when one of the appellants  is  only  a  month  away
from becoming entitled to register as a  British  citizen  and  when  it  is
clear that there have been  a  number  of  years  during  which  enforcement
action could have been pursued with more vigour.  I  cannot  anticipate  the
fact that in less than a month the third appellant will have an  entitlement
to become a British citizen, but equally I cannot ignore  the  reality  that
if the public interest factors were found to be powerful in the  context  of
the present appeals, there would be a likely  further  cost  to  the  public
pursue in responding to applications for a stay on removal in  view  of  the
imminence of this date.

12. Taking all matters into account, I am persuaded by a narrow margin  that
in respect of the  third  there  are  not  powerful  reasons  to  support  a
decision that would be contrary to the child's best interests.

13. I do not consider that it would be reasonable le  to  expect  the  third
appellant to leave the UJK and live in Brazil.   I  am  satisfied  therefore
that the third appellant meets the requirements of paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv).
There is accordingly no public  interest  in  requiring  her  to  leave.  In
consequence,  I  consider  that  there  are  compelling  circumstances   for
considering that it would breach the Article  8  rights  of  the  first  two
appellants for them to  be  removed  whilst  their  child  was  entitled  to
remain. Whilst the first two appellants have a poor immigration history  and
whilst their immigration status has been and is precarious, I bear  in  mind
the observations of the Court of Appeal in Rhuppiah [2016 EWCA  Civ  803  at
[53] indicating that such generalised normative guidance may  be  overridden
in an exceptional case by particularly strong features of the  private  life
in question, where it is not appropriate in Article 8 terms to  attach  only
limited weight to private life. In this context, the best interests  of  the
third appellant lie (on balance) in remaining in the UK and that means  that
her private life in the UK has particularly strong features.


Notice of Decision

14. For the above reasons:

     The decision of the FtT Judge has already been set aside  for  material
    error of law.

     The decision I re-make is to allow the appellant's appeals.

     No anonymity direction is made in respect of the first appellant.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or  court  directs  otherwise,  the  second  and
third appellants are granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings
shall directly or indirectly identify this appellant or any member of  their
family.   This  direction  applies  both  to  the  appellants  and  to   the
respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date: 15 October 2018
              [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
