
[pic]
IAC-BH-JLS-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/47702/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 1st February 2016                          |On 13th April 2016             |
|                                              |                               |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT

                                   Between

                                     S K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Singh of Counsel instructed by Malik Law
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


 1. Before the Upper Tribunal the Secretary of State becomes the appellant.
     However, for the avoidance and confusion and to be consistent, I shall
    continue to refer to the parties as they  were  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 2. As this appeal involves the interests of a child, I make the  following
    direction.


    DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY -  RULE  14  OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE
    (UPPER TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008


    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269)  I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings
    or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify the original appellant.  This direction  applies  to,  amongst
    others, all parties.  Any failure to comply with this  direction  could
    give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

 3. On 6 November 2015 Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  M  Davies  gave
    permission to the respondent to appeal against the decision of Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal Gurung-Thapa in which she  allowed  the  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules and on human  rights  grounds  against  the
    decision of the respondent to refuse leave to remain  as  a  spouse  in
    accordance with the provisions of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.

 4. In summary, the grounds contend that the Judge was wrong to  allow  the
    appeal under the Immigration Rules, particularly the terms of EX.2.  of
    Appendix FM  on  the  basis  that  the  appellant  had  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with her sponsor and there were  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life with the sponsor continuing  outside  the  UK.
    That was because the Judge was wrong to conclude that appellant met the
    requirements of Section S-LTR (Suitability - leave to  remain)  because
    her failure, without reasonable excuse,  to  attend  an  interview  (S-
    LTR.1.7.(a)) was a  "historic  interview"  having  no  bearing  on  her
    current claim for leave to remain as a spouse.  In the previous Judge's
    decision covering that interview it had been found that  there  was  no
    such reasonable excuse and the present Judge had not given reasons  for
    departing from that finding.  Further, the grounds contended  that  the
    Judge's consideration of Article 8 outside the  Rules  failed  to  take
    into consideration the test set out in Nagre [2013] EWHC 720  and  also
    temporary separation relying upon the decision in R (on the application
    of  Chen)  (Appendix  FM  -  Chikwamba   -   temporary   separation   -
    proportionality)  IJR  [2015]  UKUT  00189  (IAC).   Further,  it   was
    contended that the Judge did not give  adequate  consideration  to  the
    application of Section 117B in  relation  to  the  appellant's  English
    language ability having regard to AM (S117B) Malawi  [2015]  UKUT  0260
    (IAC).

 5. The Judge granting permission thought all the grounds were arguable.

Error on a Point of Law

 6. Mr McVeety confirmed that the respondent relied upon the  grounds.   He
    emphasised that the Judge had not given adequate reasons for concluding
    that she could benefit from the provisions of Section  S-LTR  when  the
    previous Judge  dismissing  her  earlier  appeal  had  found  that  the
    appellant had no reasonable excuse for failing to attend an  interview.
    He also contended that the Judge  had  failed  to  approach  Article  8
    having regard to the more recent decision of the Court of Appeal in  SS
    (Congo) [2015] EWCA  Civ  387  and  in  the  application  of  Chikwamba
    principles.

 7. Mr Singh expressed the view that the Judge was right to  disregard  the
    earlier decision in relation to  the  alleged  failure  to  attend  for
    interview and thus was entitled to apply the provisions of Section EX2.
     In relation to the Judge's consideration  of  Article  8  outside  the
    Rules,  the  Judge  properly  found   that   there   were   exceptional
    circumstances enabling her to do  so  and  had  correctly  adopted  the
    Razgar five stage approach.

 8. I conclude that the Judge was wrong  to  allow  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules by application of Section EX.1.(b).  That is  because
    the Judge was in error in finding that paragraph S-LTR.1.7(a) could not
    apply to the appellant because her failure to attend  an  interview  in
    relation to a past application  was  an  historic  event  that  had  no
    relevance to the present application for leave to remain.   Section  S-
    LTR of Appendix FM contains no suggestion, nor can it be implied,  that
    its requirements only relate to events  immediately  connected  to  the
    application which forms the subject of the appeal.  Indeed each of  the
    sub-paragraphs preceding S-LTR.1.7. clearly relate to conduct which  is
    historic.   For  example,  the  existence  of  a   deportation   order,
    conviction of  criminal  offences  for  persistent  offending  and  bad
    conduct, character and associations.  Further,  my  attention  was  not
    drawn to any policy which might suggest that behaviour referred to in S-
    LTR.1.7  would  not  be  applied  to  a  later,  second,   application.
    Additionally, in this respect, the Judge was unable to depart from  the
    earlier finding of the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the  appellant  had
    failed to attend an interview without reasonable  excuse  unless  there
    were good reasons for  doing  so.   The  Judge  did  not  consider  the
    application of Deveseelan principles in that respect although  that  is
    evidently because she wrongly believed that the past failure  could  be
    ignored.  Thus,  as  the  appellant  could  not  meet  the  suitability
    provisions of the Rules it was not possible to apply the provisions  of
    EX.

 9. The Judge's alternative consideration of Article 8 issues  outside  the
    Immigration Rules also shows a  material  error  on  a  point  of  law.
    Although the Judge considered that there were exceptional circumstances
    enabling her to consider Article 8 issues on a free standing  basis  it
    is  not  entirely  evident   what   she   thought   those   exceptional
    circumstances were, save for reliance upon the factors which the  Judge
    referred to in her erroneous consideration of  Section  EX.1.  and  the
    insurmountable obstacles test  defined  in  EX.2..   Clarification  was
    required particularly when the  Judge  had  noted  that  the  sponsor's
    sixteen year old son maintained a close  relationship  with  his  birth
    mother yet was prepared to find (paragraph 49) that the appellant  also
    had a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship  with  that  child.
    The Judge's consideration of Section 117B (vi) of the 2002 Act in  this
    respect suggests  that  she  believed  the  Appellant  could  obtain  a
    positive advantage from the parental  relationship  when  AM  makes  it
    clear that the section cannot bestow such a benefit nor can an  ability
    to  speak  English.   Further,  the  Judge's   consideration   of   the
    appellant's English language ability (paragraph 48)  suffers  from  the
    same error and, additionally, the Judge gives  inadequate  reasons  for
    concluding that the appellant could speak and understand  English  when
    she needed to use a Punjabi interpreter at the hearing.

10. Finally, in  relation  to  the  Judge's  consideration  of  Article  8,
    consideration is given  to  the  possibility  of  temporary  separation
    whilst the appellant applies for leave from abroad.  In Chen the  Upper
    Tribunal made it clear that it is misconceived to suggest, in  reliance
    upon Chikwamba, that is only rarely that it would be  proportionate  to
    expect a claimant to make  an  application  for  entry  clearance  from
    abroad irrespective of his or her individual circumstances.  The  issue
    was not considered by the judge on that basis or at all.

11. The errors to which I have referred above mean that the appeals  should
    be heard afresh involving the hearing of oral evidence.  Having  regard
    to the Practice Statement of the Senior President of  Tribunal's  dated
    25 September 2012 at paragraph 7.2 it is appropriate that  this  appeal
    should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard again.

Directions

12. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh.

13. The hearing will take place at the Nottingham or Stoke Hearing  Centres
    on a date to be specified by the Resident Judge.

14. A Punjabi interpreter will be required for the hearing.

15. The hearing should not be  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Gurung-Thapa.

16. The time estimate for the hearing is 2 hours.





Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt
