
[pic]
IAC-AH-LEM/KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/47355/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25th January 2016                          |On 31st March 2016            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                            MR BIJON RAMOND GOMES
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr H Shamsuzzoha
For the Respondent:    Ms S Sreeramen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appealed with permission against the determination of the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge dismissing his appeal against  a  refusal  to
    vary his leave to remain in the UK and to remove him under  Section  47
    of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 2.  The  application  for  permission  to  appeal  maintained   that   the
    Immigration Judge in his decision to dismiss the appeal failed to  take
    into account that on 5th June 2015 the Tribunal provided a direction to
    the  appellant  to  submit  his   statement   along   with   supporting
    documentation of 3rd July 2015.  The judge made a material error of law
    by not  taking  into  account  material  facts  available  before  him.



 3. The appellant's claim was that he  was  just  four  modules  away  from
    completing his  course  and  when  his  college  licence  was  revoked,
    although he was given 60 days to find another institution, despite  his
    best efforts he was unable to obtain another college to  assign  him  a
    further CAS which is a requirement in order to study as a student.   As
    a result the appellant's application  was  considered  under  Paragraph
    276ADE and rejected.

 4. At  paragraph  8  and  11  of  the  decision  the  judge  drew  adverse
    conclusions because the appellant did not file a witness  statement  or
    other documents despite the fact that the appellant had  submitted  his
    academic documents to the Tribunal and also to the Secretary  of  State
    on 29th June 2015 by next day delivery.

 5. At the hearing before me, Ms Sreeramen submitted that the appellant had
    leave to remain as a Tier 4 Student and his leave had been curtailed to
    expire on 25th August 2014 having been offered 60  days  to  locate  an
    alternative college after his college was removed  from  the  sponsors'
    register.  She submitted that he made his application 22nd August 2014,
    outside the Rules but within time prior to his leave expiring.

 6. I find that it does appear that documentation was sent to the  Tribunal
    and received and stamped at  Hatton  Cross  on  30th  June  2015.   The
    judge's decision was determined and promulgated on the papers  on  10th
    July 2015 but did not refer to the further bundle from the appellant.

 7. At the hearing before me Mr Shamsuzzoha attempted to  submit  that  the
    Secretary of State had considered the  matter  under  paragraph  276ADE
    when this did not apply and there were no significant obstacles to  the
    appellant returning under paragraph 276ADE(6) and  that  the  appellant
    had not applied for settlement, he merely wished more time to  complete
    his course.  He needed another six months having completed eight out of
    twelve modules. Mr Shamsuzzoha submitted that  the  judge  should  have
    considered the matter outside the Rules under Article 8 and he referred
    me to CDS Brazil [2010] UKUT 00305. This is authority for the principle
    that a person who is admitted to follow a course that has not yet ended
    may build up a private  life  that  deserves  respect  and  the  public
    interest in removal before the end of the course may be  reduced  where
    there are ample financial resources available.

 8. I am not persuaded that this is the case in  this  instance  and  agree
    with  Ms  Sreeramen  that  the  grounds  are  premised  on   procedural
    irregularity, not the failure of the Secretary of State in  considering
    Paragraph 276 of the Immigration Rules.

 9. In this instance the failure to consider the documentation has  had  no
    material effect on the decision. On consideration of  the  contents  of
    the bundle they add nothing further to that which the judge had already
    considered and as the judge states at paragraph 11, Article 8  was  not
    engaged in the appeal.  The appellant had made an  application  outside
    the Immigration Rules, the Secretary of State had given the appellant a
    further 60 days to find a college which he had not done.

10. At the hearing  before  me  it  was  the  appellant's  contention  that
    paragraph 276ADE did not apply and this is the Immigration  Rule  which
    does address the issue of private life.  As pointed out CDS  is  not  a
    general dispensing power and  although  one  may  sympathise  with  the
    appellant's predicament, the Secretary of State in  this  instance  did
    consider his private life under the application of paragraph 276ADE and
    had  she  followed  the  course  that  Mr  Shamsuzzoha  advocated,  the
    application would have merely been dismissed as an application  outside
    the Immigration Rules.

11. There was nothing in the bundle of papers not referred to by the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge and nothing which was presented to  me  by  way  of
    evidence to show that a protected Article 8  right  had  been  engaged.
    The appellant had already been granted a 60 day extension and there was
    nothing in  the  appellant's  bundle  as  to  what  had  prevented  the
    appellant finding a further college.

12. Even if the evidence which was supplied had  been  taken  into  account
    this cannot counter the Supreme Court authority of Patel [2013] UKSC 72
    to the effect that the right to complete an educational course is not a
    protected right under Article 8 without more.  There needs to  be  some
    family or other right to enshrine and protect the  appellant's  rights.
    There was none presented in this case. I therefore  find  there  is  no
    material error of law and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    shall stand.




Signed                                  Date 10th March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

