
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/47223/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 25 November 2014                           |On 31 December 2014          |
|Oral judgment                                 |                             |


                                   Before

                             THE HON. LORD BURNS
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

                             MARGARITA BILLONES
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Applicant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Burrett, Counsel, instructed by Saracens
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against  the  determination
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Kanagaratnam promulgated on  11  September
    2014 following a  hearing  at  Hatton  Cross  on  15  July  2014.   The
    Appellant, a Philippino  national  born  on  26  April  1984,  appealed
    against the decision of the Secretary of State dated 23 October 2013 to
    refuse to grant her leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  an
    overseas domestic worker under the provisions of paragraph 159D of  the
    Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended).

2.   This Tribunal is grateful to the advocates for the way  in  which  they
    have engaged with this matter which has enabled the Tribunal  to  focus
    upon what is a narrow but important issue. It is not disputed that  the
    Appellant's (Ms Billones') immigration history is as  set  out  in  the
    determination and it is not disputed that she submitted an  application
    from outside the United Kingdom which resulted in the  grant  of  entry
    clearance valid from 2 January 2013 until 23 July 2013.

3.   The limited issue upon which  this  Tribunal  is  required  to  make  a
    finding  is  whether  the  application  made  prior  to   the   refused
    application  was  a  fresh  application,  which  therefore  meant   the
    Appellant entered the United Kingdom under the provisions of the  Rules
    in force after 6 April 2012, or whether  it  was  an  extension  of  an
    earlier grant in which case the Appellant is  able  to  rely  upon  the
    provisions in force prior to 6 April 2012, which are less stringent.

4.   The starting point has therefore to be the application  that  was  made
    to the UK Border Agency appearing at page 84 of the Appellant's  bundle
    provided for the purpose of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.
     That is an application for  United  Kingdom  Entry  Clearance  and  is
    described as such because it is an application that  was  made  by  the
    Appellant from her home state having returned there for a visit  or  in
    accordance with the terms of her employment and status. The purpose  of
    the application is described as employment on a non-points based system
    basis and the type of visa a  work  visa.   The  type  of  application:
    overseas domestic worker in a private household.

5.   This Tribunal have been referred to the reply given  by  the  Appellant
    to question 90 of the application form in which she was asked  to  give
    details of any job offers including salary and the type of job that she
    hopes to takes in the United Kingdom.

6.   The response from the Appellant was that she is  already  working  with
    the family in the UK, has obtained a visa to do so, and that this is an
    extension.  It is clear that  what the Appellant intended to  make  was
    an application for an extension to her pre-existing visa to  allow  her
    to return to the United Kingdom to continue  working  within  the  same
    family unit. We have not been referred to any material suggesting there
    was a separate application form for an extension  and  so  one  assumes
    that the  application  form  completed  was  the  only  form  that  was
    available to an applicant at that time.

7.   It does, however, appear from the purpose of the application  and  type
    of application that what was being sought was in fact not an  extension
    but a fresh grant of leave to enable the Appellant  to  return  to  the
    United Kingdom as an overseas domestic worker.

8.   We have been referred by Mr Burrett to the Domestic Workers in  Private
    Household Guidance based on the Immigration Rules, version  v11  valid,
    from 6 Novembver  2014.   It  has  not  been  suggested  this  contains
    material that was not applicable at the time the decision was made.

9.   At the bottom of  page  5  of  that  guidance  is  a  heading  in  bold
    "Extension  requirements for applicants  who  apply  to  enter  the  UK
    before 6 April 2012".   It  is  submitted  this  fits  the  Appellant's
    circumstances.

10.  In page 6, within the text, the requirements are set  out.   The  first
    of these is that the applicant must have  entered  the  UK  with  valid
    entry clearance as a domestic worker in a private household  under  the
    Rules in place before 6 April 2012, have continued to be  employed  for
    the duration of leave granted as  a  full-time  domestic  worker  in  a
    private household, continues to be needed for employment for the period
    of extension sought as a domestic worker in a private  household  under
    the same roof as their employer or in the same household  the  employer
    has lived in, and where evidence of this in the form of  written  terms
    and conditions of employment in the UK as set out in  Appendix  7  with
    evidence that the employer resides in the UK  and  that  the  applicant
    reached the requirements of paragraph 159A(i)(vii).

11.  There are two prohibitions which do not apply to  this  the  Appellant.
    During  the  course  of  our  discussions  following  the  closure   of
    submissions, this Tribunal has considered the importance  of  the  term
    that an applicant must have entered the United Kingdom.   The  question
    we have asked ourselves is whether that  indicative  of  a  requirement
    that not only must the applicant have entered the  United  Kingdom  but
    clearly be making an application for an extension within the period  of
    time that she remains in the United Kingdom or not.   If  that  is  the
    case the Judge has materially erred and  this  application  must  fail,
    because the Appellant had returned home and make the  application  from
    overseas.

12.   Having  considered  that  factor  together  with  the  nature  of  the
    application form, the change to the  Immigration  Rules  reflected  and
    accepted by both parties and  the  failure  of  Judge  Kanagaratnam  to
    engage fully with the difference between the application  as  submitted
    and as alleged, we do find that the Judge has  made  a  material  legal
    error such that the determination must be set aside.

12.  We feel we are able to go on and remake the decision  as  it  turns  on
    this narrow point in relation to which  the  parties  have  made  their
    submissions and it is conceded before us that if our  finding  is  that
    the leave granted and valid from 2 January 2013  was  a  new  grant  of
    leave rather  than  extension,  that  the  Appellant  cannot  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 159D of the  Rules  and  on  that  basis  the
    appeal must be dismissed.

13.  It is our finding on this primary point that the application for  entry
    clearance that led to the period of leave valid from 2 January 2013 was
    a fresh application, in law and in form, notwithstanding the Appellants
    stated intentions, and that a decision was made to grant a fresh period
    of entry clearance to allow her to enter the United  Kingdom.  Whatever
    the Appellant thought, there is insufficient evidence to enable  us  to
    find as we have been invited to do by Mr Burrett on the facts that this
    was an extension.

14.   The  Appellant  therefore  entered  the  United  Kingdom   under   the
    provisions of the post-April 2012 Rules. In respect of the  application
    she made for further leave, which was  the  application  that  was  the
    subject of the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal, it was necessary  for
    her to prove she could meet the requirements of paragraph 159D.  It  is
    conceded on facts as accepted that she is unable to do  so  and  so  we
    have no option other than to dismiss the appeal.

Decision

15.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. We set aside
    the decision of the original Judge. We remake the decision as follows.
    This appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity


16.  The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule
    45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.
    We make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed        Date 31st December 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

