
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/47471/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                       |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 3 September 2015                  |On 9 September 2015                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             JOYCE ABLAVI GLIGAH
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A McVeety - Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramall instructed by Permits 2 Work.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against  a  determination
       of PJM Hollingworth promulgated on the 23 April  2015  on  which  the
       Judge allowed the appeal under EX1(a) and EX1(b) of  the  Immigration
       Rules.

Discussion

    2. Mrs Gligah was born on the 3 May 1977 in Ghana. On  20  January  2014
       she applied for further leave to remain as a Partner  under  Appendix
       FM which was refused on the 20 August 2014. The basis of the  refusal
       was an inability to satisfy the income  threshold  specified  in  the
       Rules as required by E-LTRP.3.1 of Appendix FM. EX.1. was  considered
       by the decision maker but it found Mrs Gligah had failed  to  produce
       any evidence that she is the parent of a British Citizen child  or  a
       child who has lived in the United Kingdom for 7 years  preceding  the
       date of the application and although it was accepted Mrs Gligah has a
       settled relationship  with  a  partner  in  the  United  kingdom,  no
       insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing with  the  partner
       outside the United Kingdom had been shown to exist.

    3. Before the Judge it was stated the issues were those relating to  EX1
       and EX 2 and Article 8, as it was accepted that Mrs Gligah was unable
       to satisfy the requirements of the Rules.

    4. The statement of changes HC 354 brought in EX 2 from 10 July 2014. At
       the date of decision this part of the Rules specified:

           EX.1. This paragraph applies if

           (a)

                (i) the applicant has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                relationship with a child who -

                    (aa) is under the age of 18 years, or was under the  age
                    of 18 years when the applicant was first  granted  leave
                    on the basis that this paragraph applied;

                    (bb) is in the UK;

                    (cc) is a  British  Citizen  or  has  lived  in  the  UK
                    continuously  for  at  least  the  7  years  immediately
                    preceding the date of application; and

                (ii) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
                the UK; or

           (b) the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with
           a partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen, settled  in
           the  UK  or  in  the  UK  with  refugee  leave  or  humanitarian
           protection, and there are  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family
           life with that partner continuing outside the UK.

           EX.2. For the purposes  of  paragraph  EX.1.(b)  "insurmountable
           obstacles" means the very significant difficulties  which  would
           be faced by the applicant or their partner in  continuing  their
           family life together outside the  UK  and  which  could  not  be
           overcome or would entail very serious hardship for the applicant
           or their partner.

    5.  EX.1  contains  the  exceptions  to  certain  of   the   eligibility
       requirements contained in the Rules.

    6. The finding of the Judge that Mrs  Gligah  and  her  husband  have  a
       genuine parental relationship with a child who is under the age of 18
       and who is a British citizen is not disputed. The first issue  before
       the Judge was whether it was reasonable to expect the child to  leave
       the United Kingdom,  EX.1.(a)(ii)  and  if  not  whether  there  were
       insurmountable obstacles to family life with her  partner  continuing
       in Ghana, EX.1.(b) as that term is defined in EX.2.

    7. The child in question was 1 year of age at the date  of  the  hearing
       and therefore dependent upon his parents for all his needs.

    8. The Judge found it not reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  for
       the reasons given at paragraph 23 to 26 of the determination.

    9. An important theme in the evidence to the judge and the findings made
       is the fact Mrs Gligah's husband has invested  in  a  local  shop  in
       Waddington in Lincolnshire that he runs. The Judge refers to the fact
       the business could not afford to  appoint  a  manager  and  that  the
       business is fragile as it has only just been  started  and  has  been
       'unimpressive' and is as yet not firmly established. The income  from
       the business does not at this stage  meet  the  requirements  of  the
       Rules in relation to the minimum income required for leave to remain.

   10. The Judge notes the fact it is in the best interests of the child  to
       have an assured economic future but claims it is unreasonable for the
       business to be disposed of given the resultant loss of capital  which
       were found to be issues of 'substantial importance'.

   11. The Judge accepted the child requires the presence of his mother  and
       that his father could not provide care and run the business.

   12. Whilst the fact the business may  be  a  success  in  the  future  if
       allowed to continue may be so, although this is not necessarily  made
       out in the evidence, to ascertain whether the  'reasonableness'  test
       is satisfied it is necessary for all issues to  be  considered.  This
       must include considering both the situation if  the  child  moves  to
       Ghana with his mother/parents and that in the UK.  It  was  submitted
       that the only evidence submitted to the Judge related to the business
       and the question of the viability of sale and that business and other
       economic opportunities in Ghana were not explored.  If  this  is  the
       case it is arguable the Judge was required to find  that  Mrs  Gligah
       had failed to discharge the burden as to reasonableness.

   13. The fact the adults may wish to remain in  the  UK  and  continue  in
       business may be so but this is not determinative.

   14. Case law makes it clear the best interests of the child are  not  the
       determinative factor and they need to  be  balanced  with  all  other
       relevant facts. It is accepted than for a one year  old  child  their
       best interests are to be with their parents.

   15. The finding relating to the need to access the NHS for this one  year
       old child is inadequately reasoned and there is no examination of the
       availability of medical care in Ghana, or a  specific  need  for  the
       same, or of educational opportunities here and there.  The  fact  the
       child is a British national is not determinative as the amendment  to
       EX.1   clearly   demonstrates   by   introducing   the   element   of
       reasonableness.

   16.  The  finding  in  relation  to  EX1(b)appears   to   be   that   the
       insurmountable  obstacle  is  the  fact  the  husband  is  trying  to
       establish a business in the UK with no examination  of  the  economic
       opportunities available in Ghana, even if there was a capital loss on
       the sale of the business.

   17. It is arguable the Judge has viewed the continued  existence  of  the
       business as the core element and based all other findings around this
       fact which is irrational.

   18. The determination shall  be  set  aside  and  the  matter  considered
       further in greater detail. Mrs Gligah was offered the opportunity for
       a hearing before the Upper Tribunal but through her  barrister  asked
       for the matter to be remitted to Nottingham for if  the  claim  under
       the Rules fails there is the Article 8 ECHR element which  the  Judge
       failed to consider for the reasons set out in paragraph 31.

   19. There are no preserved findings.

Decision

   20. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law.  I  set  aside
       the decision of the original Judge. The appeal shall be  remitted  to
       the First-tier Tribunal Nottingham Hearing Centre to be  heard  by  a
       salaried judge of that Tribunal other than Judge PJM Hollingworth.

   21. Directions for the future management of the appeal shall be given  by
       the First-tier Tribunal.

  Anonymity.

   22. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005. I make no such order.


Signed.......................................................

Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 7 September 2015
