
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/47400/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 2nd October 2015                  |On 8th  October 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                          Mr AKEEM BABATUNDE SHITTU
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Okafor, solicitor, of ADA solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.    This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Phull, promulgated on 28  April  2015,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background

3.    The Appellant was born on 7 April 1968 and is a national of Nigeria.

4.    The appellant entered the UK on 11 November 2004  with  a  visit  visa
valid until 6 February 2005. He has remained in the UK since then.  On  23rd
of April 2009 the appellant married a Czech national.  That  marriage  ended
in divorce. The appellant was encountered working illegally  on  28  October
2010 and served with the removal decision. On 5  April  2011  the  appellant
applied for leave to remain in the UK arguing that removal would breach  his
article 8 ECHR rights. The respondent refused  the  application  (without  a
right of appeal) on 10 May 2011.

5.    On 1 December 2012 the appellant  married  a  British  national  in  a
traditional marriage ceremony, by proxy, in Nigeria. On  the  15th  February
2013 the appellant applied for leave to remain as the  spouse  of  a  person
present and settled in the UK. The respondent refused the application on  28
March 2013. The appellant asked the respondent to reconsider that  decision,
and on 3rd February 2014 the respondent adhered to the decision of 28  March
2013.

6.    The appellant  appealed  that  decision,  and,  before  the  case  was
determined by the First-tier Tribunal, the respondent withdrew the  decision
in  order  to  reconsider  the  question  of  validity  of  the  appellant's
marriage. On 31st October 2014 the respondent  refused  the  application  of
new, but accepted that the appellant was validly married to the sponsor  and
that there was a genuine and subsisting  relationship  between  the  sponsor
and appellant.

The Judge's Decision

7.     The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   First-tier
Tribunal  Judge  Phull  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the
Respondent's decision. The Judge found that the  appellant  did  not  fulfil
the requirements of the immigration rules. The judge considered appendix  FM
and paragraph 276 ADE  of  the  immigration  rules  before  considering  the
appellant article 8 ECHR rights outwith the immigration rules.

8.    Grounds of appeal were lodged and, on 17 July 2015, Judge A K  Simpson
gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

    "It is arguable that the judge has mistakenly proceeded  on  the  basis
    that this is a valid marriage as the decision is entirely silent as  to
    the validity of a proxy marriage. Moreover, even if the judge had found
    this to be an invalid marriage, at the date of  hearing  she  ought  to
    have considered whether the relationship  met  the  requirements  of  a
    "durable relationship", given that the couple had  then  been  together
    for more than two years. There was no consideration whatsoever  of  the
    financial requirements of appendix FM."

The Hearing

9.    Ms Okafor, solicitor for the appellant,  sought  an  adjournment.  She
told me that she had only been instructed on the previous evening, that  the
appellant and his spouse had been  ill  and  that  she  had  only  seen  the
appellant and his spouse the day before the hearing.  She  went  on  to  say
that if the request for an adjournment was refused she was in a position  to
proceed.  Ms  Everett,  for  the  respondent,  opposed  the  application  to
adjourn.

10.   I refused the application  to  adjourn.  I  was  surprised  that  Miss
Okafor said that she had only been instructed the previous day, because  the
appellant has not changed solicitor. It was the appellant's  solicitors  who
lodged the notice and grounds of appeal on 20 May  2015  -  more  than  four
months before the date  of  hearing.  The  documentary  evidence  before  me
indicates that the appellant had not instructed  solicitors  for  the  first
time less than 24 hours before the hearing the appeal. The  same  solicitors
have acted for the appellant since at  least  14  November  2014,  when  the
appellant appealed against  the  respondent's  decision  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal. In refusing the motion to adjourn I take  heed  of  Miss  Okafor's
repeated declarations that she was in a position to proceed today.

11.   Ms Okafor took me to  the  grounds  of  appeal  and  argued  that  the
judge's consideration of appendix FM is fatally flawed because  no  specific
finding has been made that the appellant and sponsor the parties to a  valid
marriage. She was critical of [4] of the decision, suggesting that  what  is
said there amounts to a display of  prejudice  against  the  appellant.  The
thrust of her submissions was that the judge had  failed  to  carry  out  an
inadequate balancing exercise because return to Nigeria  is  impossible  for
the appellant  because  he  and  his  spouse  would  suffer  "insurmountable
hardship" if the appellant were removed. Ms Okafor  argued  that  the  judge
had not considered the sponsors circumstances, and failed  to  take  account
of the fact that the sponsor has lived in the UK for 27 years.

12.   Ms Everett for the respondent told  me  that  there  are  no  material
errors of law contained within the decision, and that the three  grounds  of
appeal are ill-conceived. She emphasised that no challenge is taken  by  the
respondent to the validity of the marriage nor to  the  subsistence  of  the
relationship between the appellant and sponsor, and  drew  my  attention  to
the evidence which was placed before the judge before  submitting  that  the
findings in fact made are the only findings in fact  that  the  judge  could
have made on the basis of the evidence placed before her.

Analysis

13.   There is no merit in a challenge raised to [4]. It  is  clear  from  a
fair reading  of  the  determination  that  the  judge  simply  records  the
procedural truth that the case was determined without the  benefit  of  oral
evidence. There is neither explicit no implicit criticism of  the  appellant
for choosing to proceed on the basis  of  documentary  evidence  alone.  All
that is recorded is that that was the material available  to  the  judge  to
make her findings of fact.

14.   At [14] the judge records "the respondent accepts that  the  appellant
and his wife are in a genuine and subsisting relationship". It is true  that
there is no specific finding  of  fact  that  the  appellants'  marriage  is
recognised in UK law, but that finding  is  not  necessary.  The  respondent
does not challenge the validity of  the  marriage.  The  application  is  an
application for leave to remain in the UK. The finding  at  [14]  identifies
the sponsor as the appellant's wife & recognises their  relationship.  There
is sufficient contained at [14] to make it clear that the  judge  considered
the  appellant's  article  8  ECHR  rights  both  within  and  out-with  the
immigration rules on the basis that the appellant is married  to  a  British
citizen.

15.   The second ground of appeal amounts to  a  challenge  to  the  judge's
approach to appendix FM. It  is  clear  from  an  holistic  reading  of  the
judge's decision  that  the  judge  carefully  considered  appendix  FM  and
paragraph 276ADE of the immigration rules,  and  found  that  the  appellant
could not fulfil either for the reasons  given  by  the  respondent  in  the
reasons for refusal letter dated 31st October 2014. [12] [13]  [14]  &  [15]
of the decision make it clear that the judge made  findings  of  fact  drawn
from the evidence placed before the judge.

16.   Before me, the appellant's solicitor urged me to find that  there  was
a  failure  to  consider  "insurmountable   hardship"   and   insurmountable
obstacles to return. I have considered the  documentary  evidence  which  is
placed before the judge at first instance.  No  evidence  of  insurmountable
obstacles (or hardship) was placed before the judge. The judge  cannot  make
findings of fact on anything  other  than  the  evidential  material  placed
before the judge. The judge cannot be faulted for not making  a  finding  of
fact on a matter which was not placed before her.

17.   The final ground of appeal  argues  that  the  judge  failed  to  take
account of the length of time the sponsor has lived in the  UK.  The  ground
is misconceived. At [2] the sponsor is  identified  is  a  British  citizen.
Between [5] & [11] the judge  rehearses  the  evidence  placed  before  her.
Between  [17]  &  [22]  the  judge  carries  out  a  thorough  and  balanced
assessment of article 8 ECHR proportionality.

18.   A full  and  fair  reading  of  the  decision  demonstrates  that  the
decision is not tainted by material error of law, and that the  findings  of
fact made by the judge are based on the totality of evidence  placed  before
her. The conclusions reached by the judge were conclusions which  were  open
to the judge to reach.

19.   It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration  Judge  to  give
too little weight or too much weight to a factor,  unless  irrationality  is
alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to  deal
with every factual issue under argument. Disagreement with  an  Immigrations
Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of the evidence or assessment  of
credibility, or his evaluation of risk does not give rise  to  an  error  of
law.  Unless  an  Immigration  Judge's  assessment  of  proportionality   is
arguable as being completely wrong, there is no error of law, nor is  it  an
error of law for an Immigration Judge to have taken no account  of  evidence
that was not before him.

20.   Rationality  is  a  very  high  threshold  and  a  conclusion  is  not
irrational just because some alternative explanation has  been  rejected  or
can be said to be possible. Nor is it necessary to consider  every  possible
alternative inference consistent with truthfulness  because  an  Immigration
judge concludes that the story told is untrue. If a  point  of  evidence  of
significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that is a  failure  to  take
into account a material consideration. In Mibanga v  SSHD  [2005]  EWCA  Civ
367 Buxton LJ said this in relation to challenging such findings:

    "Where, as in this case, complaint is  made  of  the  reasoning  of  an
    adjudicator  in  respect  of  a  question  of  fact  (that  is  to  say
    credibility), particular care is necessary to ensure that the criticism
    is as to the fundamental approach of  the  adjudicator,  and  does  not
    merely reflect a feeling on the part of the appellate tribunal that  it
    might itself have taken a different view of the matter from  that  that
    appealed to the adjudicator."

21.   At paragraph 49 of MA (Somalia) [2010]  UKSC  49,  it  was  said  that
"Where a tribunal has referred to considering all the evidence, a  reviewing
body should be very slow to conclude  that  that  tribunal  overlooked  some
factor, simply because the factor is  not  explicitly  referred  to  in  the
determination concerned".

22.   In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside)  [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)
the Tribunal held that (i) Although there is a legal duty to  give  a  brief
explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which  an  appeal  is
determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole
makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted  by  the  judge;  (ii)
Although a decision may contain an error of law where  the  requirements  to
give adequate reasons are not met, the Upper  Tribunal  would  not  normally
set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  where  there  has  been  no
misdirection of law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised  and  the
relevant  Country  Guidance  has  been  taken  into  account,   unless   the
conclusions the judge draws from the primary data were not  reasonably  open
to him or her.

23.   I am therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when  read  as
a whole set out findings that were  sustainable  and  sufficiently  detailed
and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

24.   I therefore found that no errors of  law  have  been  established  and
that the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

25.   The appeal is dismissed.


Signed      Date 7 October 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
