
[pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/47467/2014
     IA/50785/2014
     IA/50786/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 February 2016                           |On 12 April 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           [MS[ (first appellant)
                          [AMR] (second appellant)
                           [AKR] (third appellant)
                        (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms D Revill, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This application for permission to appeal was made by the Secretary  of
    State but nonetheless I shall hereinafter refer to the parties as  they
    were described before the First-tier Tribunal that is Miss RDS and  her
    children  as  the  appellants  and  the  Secretary  of  State  as   the
    respondent.

 2. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against  a  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Boyes dated 27 August 2015 allowing the appeals  of
    the first, second and third appellants to the limited extent  that  the
    application remained outstanding pending its lawful consideration.

 3. The first appellant was born on [ ]  1983  and  the  second  and  third
    appellants, the children of the first appellant, were born on [ ]  2006
    and [ ] 2007.  All the appellants are  nationals  of  Brazil  and  they
    appealed against the respondent's  decision  of  18  November  2014  to
    refuse them residence cards as a confirmation of a right to  reside  in
    the United Kingdom.  That application was submitted  on  the  basis  of
    their claim to be in  a  durable  relationship  with  a  qualified  EEA
    national [JM], a Portuguese national.

 4. As the First-tier Tribunal Judge set out  on  4  June  2003  the  first
    appellant was refused leave to enter the United Kingdom and returned to
    Brazil on the same day and on 27 June  2004  the  first  appellant  was
    refused leave to enter the United Kingdom and returned to Brazil on the
    same day.  She claims to have entered the UK subsequently in  2005  and
    her children were then born.  The father of the two children was [MCR],
    a Brazilian national.  On 25 July 2013 the appellants applied for leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom in  reliance  upon  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights but that application was refused on
    6th September 2013 with no right of appeal.

 5. On 30 September  2013  an  enforcement  visit  was  undertaken  at  the
    appellants' residential address and the first appellant was interviewed
    and cautioned.  She had two counterfeit  Portuguese  national  identity
    cards and  one  counterfeit  Italian  national  identity  card  in  her
    possession and she was issued  with  an  IS96  which  included  monthly
    reporting conditions.

 6.  What  appeared  to  be  an  outstanding  Article  8  application   was
    reconsidered following judicial review proceedings and  refused  on  11
    November 2013 and an appeal was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal on
    7 July 2014.  She became appeal rights exhausted on 22 September 2014.

 7. On 26 October 2014 the appellant applied for the EEA residence card and
    which was the subject of this appeal.

 8. Judge Boyes considered the limited documentary evidence  submitted  and
    found that it was insufficient to demonstrate that the appellant's  EEA
    national partner was exercising treaty rights [33].  Judge  Boyes  also
    found that it was the first appellant's case that the EEA national  was
    not presently residing in the United Kingdom and that she had not shown
    that the EEA national was a qualified person.  At  paragraph  [37]  the
    judges states,

         "Whilst the most recent decision by the respondent relates to  only
         the EEA application, the respondent has previously  made  decisions
         to remove the appellant.   For  that  reason  I  have  gone  on  to
         consider the issues relating to Article 8 (inside and  outside  the
         Immigration Rules) and, in doing  so  whether  the  respondent  has
         complied  with  her  duties  under  Section  55  of  the   Borders,
         Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009."

 9. The judge then proceeded at paragraphs [38] to [43] to note the absence
    of any consideration of Section 55 by the Secretary  of  State  in  her
    Reasons for Refusal Letter.  The judge noted that there was no reliable
    evidence before him [45].

10. At paragraph [46] the judge noted a primary consideration in  the  case
    was the best interests of the second  and  third  appellants  and  this
    could not be assessed without reliable information.   The  judge  found
    that the decision-maker was not properly informed "of all the  relevant
    facts of this case before reaching her decision"  and  particularly  at
    paragraph 48

         "In the circumstances it cannot be said that the decision-maker was
         properly informed of the children's particular circumstances or the
         scrupulous assessment of what is in the children's  best  interests
         has been carried out"

    and at [49]

         "For the above reasons the respondent has failed to comply with her
         statutory duties under Section 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and
         Immigration Act 2009 when making her decision in this case."

11. That application for permission to appeal was made by the Secretary  of
    State which asserted that the appellant  may  only  pursue  grounds  of
    appeal which were related to the underlying  decision  under  challenge
    and that by definition EEA refusals did not taken in isolation  require
    detailed consideration of Article 8 or other  Convention  matters.   It
    followed that the extent to which the Convention matters would properly
    fall for consideration within the confines of an EEA appeal which would
    be limited as there was no requirement at the point it was decided that
    the appellant did not qualify under the EEA Regulations for him or  her
    to leave the UK.

12. It was  further  submitted  that  the  statutory  jurisdiction  of  the
    Tribunal in EEA cases did no permit consideration of  matters  relating
    to the Immigration Rules including  matters  related  to  the  detailed
    provision for Article 8 matters.

13. The residual duty of the Tribunal under Section 6 of the  Human  Rights
    Act 1998 did not extend to  requiring  detailed  consideration  of  the
    Immigration Rules or Article 8 policy of the Secretary of State  within
    the confines of the present appeal based upon the fact that a  One-Stop
    Notice under Section 120 of the 2002 Act had not  been  served  on  the
    appellant.  A consideration of Article 8 was distinct from EEA matters.
     The appellant could not raise Article 8 matters during the  course  of
    her appeal.

14. The judge should have addressed whether the removal  of  the  appellant
    would be likely to follow.  An indication that the Secretary  of  State
    was not presently considering removal directions was indicated  by  the
    refusal letter with an invitation to the appellant to submit an Article
    8 application.  In the absence  of  impending  removal  directions  the
    appellant could make an application from  within  the  United  Kingdom.
    Having found the appellant did not meet the  requirements  of  the  EEA
    Regulations the judge should have dismissed the appellant's  appeal  on
    the basis and restricted the consideration of the Regulations alone.

15. Reliance was placed on  Amirteymour  and  Others  (EEA  appeals;  human
    rights) [2015] UKUT 466 (IAC),

         "Where no notice under Section 120 of the 2002 Act has been  served
         and where no EEA decision to remove has  been  made,  an  appellant
         cannot bring a human rights challenge to removal in an appeal under
         the EEA Regulations.  Neither the factual matrix nor the  reasoning
         in JM (Liberia) [2006] EWCA Civ 1402 has any application to appeals
         of this nature."

16. Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Page.

The Hearing

17. At the hearing before me Ms Willocks-Briscoe submitted that this was  a
    limited issue and that any appeals on human  rights  grounds  were  not
    before the Tribunal.  Section 55 applied to the balancing interests  of
    the children and the state and these were not in issue  here  as  there
    was no indication of a removal.  The  applicant  was  invited  to  make
    submissions regarding Article 8 to which Section 55 would  be  applied.
    Article 8 was excluded in this matter however she agreed that there was
    a lacuna in law.

18. Ms Revill submitted that Amirteymour was not good law in this case  and
    could be distinguished.  There was a failure by the Secretary of  State
    to apply Section 55 and this  was  a  matter  of  public  law.   I  was
    referred to the case of Granovski v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2015] EWHC 1478 which at paragraph 81 confirmed that "There
    is no category of immigration decision-making to which consideration of
    Section 55 ... does not apply".  This was the case notwithstanding that
    the decisions in Granovski did not  require  the  child  applicants  to
    leave the UK.

19. The question of whether the decision was in accordance with the law was
    a ground of appeal to be considered by the judge and  it  was  on  this
    basis that she allowed the appeal to a limited extent only.

Conclusions

20. A specific ground of appeal before the First-tier Tribunal was that the
    Secretary of State's decision was not in accordance with the law and in
    contravention of Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration
    Act 2009.  I questioned at the start of the hearing the nature  of  the
    final decision of the judge whereby she states that she  dismisses  the
    appeals under European  Community  Law  grounds  and  also  allows  the
    appeals of the first, second and third appellants only to  the  limited
    extent that the application  remains  outstanding  pending  its  lawful
    consideration.  Amirteymour and TY (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State for
    the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 1233  which  confirms  Amirteymour.
    make no reference to the consideration of Section 55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and this sets out as follows:

          "55 Duty regarding the welfare of children

         (1)  The Secretary of State must  make  arrangements  for  ensuring
             that -

             (a)  the functions mentioned in subsection (2) are  discharged
                  having regard to the need to  safeguard  and  promote  the
                  welfare of children who are in the United Kingdom, and

             (b)  any services  provided  by  another  person  pursuant  to
                  arrangements which are made by the Secretary of State  and
                  relate  to  the  discharge  of  a  function  mentioned  in
                  subsection (2) are provided having regard to that need.

         (2)  The functions referred to in subsection (1) are -

             (a)  any function of the Secretary of  State  in  relation  to
                  immigration, asylum or nationality;

             (b)  any function conferred by or by virtue of the Immigration
                  Acts on an immigration officer;

             (c)  any general customs function of the Secretary of State;

             (d)  any customs function conferred on  a  designated  customs
                  official.

         (3)  A person exercising any of those functions must, in exercising
             the function, have regard to any guidance given to the  person
             by the Secretary of State for the purpose of subsection (1).

         (4)  The Director of Border  Revenue  must  make  arrangements  for
             ensuring that -

             (a)  the Director's functions are discharged having regard  to
                  the need to safeguard and promote the welfare of  children
                  who are in the United Kingdom, and

             (b)  any services  provided  by  another  person  pursuant  to
                  arrangements made by the Director in the discharge of such
                  a function are provided having regard to that need.

         (5)  A person exercising a  function  of  the  Director  of  Border
             Revenue must, in exercising the function, have regard  to  any
             guidance given to the person by the Secretary of State for the
             purpose of subsection (4).

         (6)  In this section -

                . "children" means persons who are under the age of 18;

                . "customs  function",  "designated  customs  official"  and
                  "general customs function" have the meanings given by Part
                  1.

         (7)  A reference in an enactment  (other  than  this  Act)  to  the
             Immigration Acts includes a reference to this section.

         (8)  Section 21 of the UK  Borders  Act  2007  (c.  30)  (children)
             ceases to have effect."

21. I can accept entirely that the judge was not entitled to  consider  the
    matter in relation to Article 8 grounds because no Section  120  notice
    had been served and there was no removal decisions taken in respect  of
    the appellants.  The argument however  that  Section  55  only  can  be
    deployed in relation to an Article 8 consideration must  be  incorrect.
    Section 55 even though it may be a response to the UN Convention on the
    Rights of the Child and subsequent litigation,  is  nonetheless  now  a
    statutory consideration and the decision  in  Granovski  confirms  that
    there  is  no  category  of  immigration   decision-making   to   which
    consideration of Section 55 does  not  apply.   I  do  not  accept  the
    premise that just because there is no removal decision that the welfare
    of the children would not be affected.  There  is  no  doubt  that  the
    Secretary of State was  aware  that  this  decision  affected  children
    because decisions were issued to both the second and third appellant.

22. The judge was entitled  to  consider  the  matter  as  to  whether  the
    decision was in accordance with the  law  and  that  was  a  legitimate
    ground of appeal to be considered.  I  considered  whether  Section  55
    would apply to the decision of the mother bearing in mind  she  herself
    is not a child but I conclude that the ambit  of  Section  55  is  wide
    enough to include a consideration of the needs to make arrangements for
    ensuring that the functions of the Secretary of State  in  relation  to
    immigration, asylum or nationality are discharged having "regard to the
    need to safeguard and promote the welfare of children who  are  in  the
    United Kingdom".  As I state I note that there is no  removal  decision
    but clearly the effect of a lack of residence card  may  indeed  affect
    the welfare of the children. The uncertainty in relation to immigration
    status in itself would have an affect on the children.  A  decision  in
    relation to the first appellant will have an effect on the children  as
    she is the mother.

23. It would appear that the judge is applying her decision in relation  to
    Section 55 to both the EEA decision which indeed is the only one  under
    real consideration.  As I note at paragraph [44]  she  states  "In  the
    decision of 18 November 2014 only the  Immigration  (European  Economic
    Community)  Regulations  are  considered.    There   was   no   further
    consideration of Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE."

24. Therefore the judge was aware of the confines of the decision and found
    at paragraphs [48] and [49] that the respondent had  failed  to  comply
    with the statutory duties under Section 55.

25. As such I found there is no material error  of  law  and  even  if  the
    decision had to be remade I too would find that the Secretary of  State
    has failed to make any reference to Section 55 in the decision and  she
    is statutorily bound to do so for the reasons I have set out above.

26. I find that the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  contains  no
    material error of law and the decision shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court  proceedings.   This  is
in place because the decision involves minors.


Signed                                  Date 2nd April 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington


