
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/47006/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 23 May 2014                                |On 6th June 2014             |
|Extempore Judgment                            |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                          ms Rhealyn Garcia Lazaro

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss L Appiah, Counsel instructed by Bloomsbury
                    Immigration Specialists
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is the appeal of Ms Lazaro who was granted  permission  to  appeal
    against the decision of the First-tier Judge on the  grounds  that  the
    judge appears to have found it determinative that the parties  had  not
    cohabited for a two year period and accepted the respondent's policy in
    this respect when there is no specific requirement in  the  Regulations
    themselves about a durable relationship necessitating a two year period
    of cohabitation.

2.   The application by Ms Lazaro for a residence card was  refused  by  the
    Secretary of State on 23 October 2013 and in that  refusal  letter  the
    Secretary of State says:

         "To assess whether your relationship is durable we would expect you
         to demonstrate that you have been living  together  with  your  EEA
         national sponsor for at least two years.  Equally it is  reasonable
         to expect that you both intend to live together ...",


    and then goes on to say:


         "This department will not normally accept that there is  a  durable
         relationship where these criteria are not met though each  case  is
         considered on its  merits.   There  will  be  occasions  where  the
         criteria are not met but we accept that Regulation  8(5)  has  been
         met."


    There is then reference to the evidence that has been provided and  the
    Secretary of State then says: "However, as mentioned above this  office
    will not accept that there is a durable relationship when any  previous
    marriage has not broken down."

3.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge in paragraph 10 refers  to  very  limited
    evidence and says that the only conclusion which he can reach  is  that
    the appeal must fail.  He then goes on to say:

         "The respondent has made clear in  the  decision  letter  that  her
         practice  is  not  to  accept  that  parties  are  in   a   durable
         relationship unless and until they can  establish  that  they  have
         been living together for at least two years.  It  is  a  matter  of
         admission  that  the  parties  only  started  living  together   in
         September 2012 and that in itself is sufficient to dispose  of  the
         appeal."


    If he had stopped there it is clear that that would have been an  error
    of law because there is no direct correlation between the criteria  for
    durable relationship as set  out  in  the  Immigration  Rules  and  the
    content of a durable relationship in the Regulations.


4.   The judge went on to say:

         "In the refusal letter the respondent acknowledged that there could
         be cases where a durable relationship could  be  established  by  a
         period of less than two years' cohabitation but the  difficulty  in
         this case is that in the absence  of  detailed  witness  statements
         from the appellant and Mr Gomes I am not in a position to make  any
         findings in fact as to the relationship.  I acknowledge  there  are
         various documents headed 'statement of truth' from individuals  who
         say that they have known the parties  for  some  time  but  what  I
         regard to be of particular concern  is  that  there  is  simply  no
         documentation at all from Mr  Gomes  to  confirm  that  he  regards
         himself as being in a durable relationship with the  appellant  and
         for that reason the only conclusion to which I  can  come  is  that
         this appeal falls to be dismissed."

5.   Miss Appiah submits that permeating that  decision  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge is the respondent's view that  unless  the  couple  have
    been  living  together  for  two  years  then  it  is  not  a   durable
    relationship.  Ms Everett on the other hand says that the documents are
    insufficient to enable either the Secretary of State or  the  judge  to
    have come to any other conclusion and that the summary  in  the  second
    part of paragraph 10 is sufficient to dispose of the appeal  and  there
    is no error of law.  The judge had clearly considered the matters as to
    whether or not it fell within an exception.  The letter submitting  the
    application for the residence  card  states  that  documents  submitted
    included photographs, greeting cards, a joint bank statement, a Premier
    Inn booking, a joint camping booking and a sponsorship undertaking from
    Mr Gomes  for  Ms  Lazaro.   Although  there  is  no  specific  witness
    statement those documents do indicate that they  are  living  together,
    particularly a sponsorship  undertaking  indicates  that  Mr  Gomes  is
    supportive and considers the couple to be living together in a  durable
    relationship.  He had not signed a sponsorship undertaking which covers
    him for a number of years.  He would not do that if he thought that  he
    was not going to be living with her for the foreseeable future.

6.   On the other hand those  listed  documents  are  not  actually  in  the
    bundle of papers.  It was a paper  application  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and the directions that were sent out with that notice stated:

         "Any written evidence and submissions  must  be  received  in  this
         office, i.e. the Tribunal by  2  January  2014.   If  you  have  no
         further evidence or submissions no action from you is required."


7.   But it seems to me that from the letter  of  application  sent  to  the
    Secretary of State listing various documents  which  then  leads  to  a
    refusal which then leads to an appeal it is reasonable for an appellant
    to assume that all the documents  that  had  been  submitted  would  be
    included in the papers that were put forward by the respondent to  that
    appeal.

   8. I am satisfied that the Secretary of State incorrectly  imported  into
      her consideration of a durable  relationship  a  two  year  period  as
      required by the Immigration Rules and  also  failed  to  consider  the
      evidence that was before her in connection with  whether  irrespective
      of the two years the couple were in a durable relationship.  That  was
      then compounded in the appeal by  the  acceptance  by  the  First-tier
      Judge that durable relationship had to be defined through the prism of
      the Immigration Rules. Although he did look at the other evidence that
      was in front of him I am satisfied that the combination of failing  to
      consider the letter that was submitted with the  application  for  the
      residence card  and  the  acceptance  of  the  definition  of  durable
      relationship put forward by the  Secretary  of  State  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge has erred in law such that the decision should  be  set
      aside to be remade.


   9.   I am satisfied that no relevant findings  of  fact  have  been  made
      because of errors in considering documentation that had been submitted
      by the appellant but through no fault  of  his,  was  not  before  the
      judge. In accordance with  the  President's  Practice  Direction  this
      matter should be remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  full
      hearing on the facts with no findings retained, to  be  heard  by  any
      First-tier Judge other than Judge Morrison.

          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

     I set aside the decision and remit it to the First-tier Tribunal to  be
    re-heard, no findings preserved.

Signed                                  Date 5th June 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
