
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
                                                Appeal Number: IA/47668/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                     |Determination           |
|                                        |Promulgated             |
|On 2nd May, 2014                        |On 7th May, 2014        |
|Signed 2nd May, 2014                    |                        |


                                   Before

                   Upper Tribunal Judge Richard Chalkley,

                                   Between

                      DON THISARA IROSHANA PADMAPERUMA

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the appellant:     Mr. A B Frayl of counsel instructed by Mohammed &
CO, Solicitors.
For the respondent:   Mr Dinwycz a Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant is male, a citizen of Sri Lanka and  was  born  on  23rd
      September, 1990.

2.          The appellant appealed against the decision to the Secretary  of
      State for the Home Department in refusing his application as a Tier  4
      (General) Student Migrant to the First Tier Tribunal.  His appeal  was
      heard by First Tier Tribunal Judge Lea, who in a  determination  dated
      23rd January, 2014 dismissed his appeal.

3.    Mr Dinwycz, the Home Office Presenting Officer  advised  me  that  the
      Home Office file was  missing.   I  gave  him  a  copy  of  the  Upper
      Tribunal's papers and counsel kindly gave him a copy of her bundle.  I
      adjourned to enable him to examine them.

5.    On resuming the hearing, the Home Office Presenting  Officer  told  me
      that as a result of evidence he has seen and was content to accept, he
      was minded to allow the appellant's application.

6.    I am satisfied that Mr Dinwycz correct to agree  that  the  respondent
      was entitled to have his appeal allowed given that  he  was  satisfied
      with the evidence.  I  indicated  that  I  would  prepare  this  short
      determination recording the agreement between the parties and allowing
      the respondent's appeal.

6.    Having carefully read the determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      and the grounds of application, I am satisfied that the  determination
      of Immigration Judge Lea does contain an error on a point  of  law  in
      that she wrongly found  herself  constrained  by  Section  19  of  the
      Borders Act 2007 into considering evidence that the appellant's course
      fees has been paid prior  to  the  date  of  his  application  to  the
      Secretary of State for the Home Department. The making of the previous
      decision involved the making of an error on a point  of  law.   I  set
      aside the previous decision.  My  decision  is  that  the  appellant's
      appeal be allowed.

Decision


      This appeal is allowed.
      [pic]

Senior Immigration Judge Chalkley


