
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/47550/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 8 December 2015                   |On 14 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MR HATTAB GMATI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    no appearance by or on behalf of the respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. There  was  no  appearance  by  or  on  behalf  of  the  respondent
         (hereafter the claimant), a citizen of Tunisia,  in relation to  an
         appeal brought by the appellant  (hereafter  the  SSHD)  against  a
         decision of the First tier Tribunal dated 14 May 2015 allowing  his
         appeal on the basis that he was in a durable  relationship  with  a
         Polish citizen. I decided to exercise my discretion to proceed with
         the hearing in the absence of one of the parties.

      2. The grounds of appeal were that the First tier Tribunal  judge  had
         erred in allowing the appeal outright rather than only allowing  it
         insofar as it remained outstanding for the  SSHD  to  exercise  her
         discretion under regulation  17(4)  of  the  Immigration  (European
         Economic Area) Regulations 2006 as to whether to grant a  residence
         card.

      3. I can see no possible  retort  to  this  ground.  In  refusing  the
         claimant a residence card, the respondent had stated  that  it  was
         not accepted that the couple were  in  a  genuine  relationship  as
         husband and wife. It was only at the  hearing  that  it  transpired
         that the couple had not undergone a marriage recognised in  English
         law, the couple having been married in Tunisia by proxy on 20 March
         2014. The judge went on to allow  the  appeal  on  the  alternative
         basis that the couple were  in  a  durable  relationship  and  thus
         satisfied her requirements of  the  EEA  Regulations  as  apply  to
         extended family members. It is settled law that it  is  not  for  a
         judge on an appeal to exercise the regulation 17(4) discretion when
         it has not as yet been exercised by the SSHD.

      4. There is, however, a more fundamental error  on  the  part  of  the
         judge. The claimant had never applied as an extended family member.
         He had  applied  as  a  family  member.  Thus  a  decision  on  any
         application as an extended family member had not yet been made  and
         it went beyond the jurisdiction of the judge to decide this matter.

      5. In light of the above I conclude that the judge materially erred in
         law and his decision is set aside.

      6. In re-making the decision it seems to me that there can only be one
         outcome and that is to dismiss the appeal. The claimant had applied
         as a spouse and he does not dispute the judge's finding that he was
         not in English or Polish law a spouse.

      7. Even if I am wrong about that, it seems to me that it  would  still
         remain that the matter remains  outstanding  before  the  SSHD  and
         that, in light of the fact that she had  no  prior  opportunity  to
         consider the state of the evidence  regarding  whether  the  couple
         were in a durable relationship and so qualified under regulation 8,
         she could not be shut out from examining  that  matter  afresh.  In
         this regard I note that the judge's reasons for finding the  couple
         were in a durable relationship were also, clearly, flawed.  Despite
         noting that relationships  of less than 2 years duration could only
         be considered on an exceptional basis (see [29]), the judge nowhere
         explained why he considered the couple's relationship to constitute
         an exception. Even at the date of hearing in May 2015 it  was  less
         than two years (it was said to have commenced in  August  2013).  I
         note further that despite being duly notified of the  date  of  the
         Upper Tribunal  hearing  neither  the  claimants  nor  his  partner
         attended and gave  no  explanation  for  their  absence.  Had  they
         attended, then, in the context of my re-making of the  decision  (a
         possibility they could not discount), Mr Jarvis would have  had  an
         opportunity to test their evidence. They have  prevented  any  such
         examination by failing to attend. In such circumstances it would be
         contrary to the interests of justice for there to be on my part any
         artificial preservation  of  the  judge's  findings  regarding  the
         couple's relationship. An EEA right of residence must be  based  on
         fulfilment  of  substantive  conditions.  Whether  they  have  been
         fulfilled will be a matter for the SSHD upon any application by the
         claimant.

      8. For the above reasons:

    The First tier Tribunal erred in law and its decision is set aside;

    The decision I re-make is that the claimant's appeal is dismissed.




                               Signed   Date:


                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
