
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/47197/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 15 April 2014                                |On 17 April 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               MAJLINDA TOSHA


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr F Shibli, instructed by F J S Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The respondent, Majlinda Tosha, was born on 5 July 1982 and is a female
    citizen of Albania.  I shall hereafter refer to the respondent as  "the
    appellant" and to the Secretary of State as "the respondent"  (as  they
    were before the First-tier Tribunal).

 2. The appellant had appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge M A  Khan)
    against a decision of the Secretary of State dated 23 October  2013  to
    refuse to vary her leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  (she  had
    entered  as  a  visitor)  and  remove  her  under  Section  47  of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  There is agreement  that
    the appellant was unable to meet the requirements of  paragraph  276ADE
    of the Immigration Rules.

 3. The grounds assert that the judge makes no reference  to  and  did  not
    apply MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192; Gulshan [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC);
    Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin).

 4. I find that the determination of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is to be
    set aside. I have reached that conclusion for  the  following  reasons.
    First, I find that the judge did err by failing to address  the  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules as  part  of  a  two-stage  process  before
    proceeding to consider Article 8 ECHR.  Even if (as in this  case)  the
    appellant had no prospect of succeeding under  the  Immigration  Rules,
    the fact that she could  not  satisfy  any  of  the  various  scenarios
    envisaged under the Immigration Rules should have led the judge, in the
    first instance, to consider whether the circumstances of her case  were
    so exceptional as to engage Article 8 ECHR at all (see Gulshan  above).



 5. At the very least, the judge would  have  needed  to  identify  unusual
    circumstances in the facts of this case given that  the  appellant  had
    failed under the Immigration Rules. I agree with Mr  Shibili  that  the
    failure of the judge to refer to particular items of jurisprudence does
    not, in itself, constitute an error of  law.   However,  the  generally
    disorganised nature  of  much  of  the  prose  and  reasoning  in  this
    determination does not persuade me that the judge did have in mind  the
    relevant jurisprudence when  he  came  to  consider  the  appeal  under
    Article 8; he did not apply the principles of any of the cases referred
    to at [3] above.

 6. Secondly, I agree with Mr Avery that the judge has failed to carry  out
    a proper proportionality assessment in this case.  At [28], the   judge
    wrote:

         There is no doubt in my mind that it would be  reasonable  for  the
         appellant to return to Albania and make an application to return to
         the UK in the proper way? This is because the appellant entered the
         UK as a visitor but one has to carefully consider the impact of all
         this on the two children and especially in light of the  fact  that
         the husband is about to undergo  a  serious  open-heart  operation.
         [sic]

 7. In common with the representatives, I struggle  to  understand  exactly
    what that paragraph means.  What is clear is that the use of the words,
    "one has to carefully  consider"  indicate  that  the  judge  was  here
    identifying one of the issues  in  the  appeal  rather  than  making  a
    finding that it would be reasonable to expect the  appellant  (with  or
    without her children) to return to Albania to make another  application
    for settlement as a spouse.  The judge then set out a familiar passages
    from ZH (Tanzania) 2011 UKSC 4  and Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27  and  also
    Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74 before then  proceeding  at  [36]  to  make  the
    following  finding:

         I find that the appellant entered the UK as a  visitor  and  should
         return to Albania to make her application for entry clearance as  a
         spouse for settlement. In the light of the history  of  this  case,
         there has been a considerable delay in the past when the  appellant
         did make her settlement application, it has had undesired effect on
         the two children, which is not in their  best  interests.   I  find
         that the respondent would be in breach of the appellant's Article 8
         right  to  family  life  rights  and  therefore  the  decision   is
         disproportionate [sic].

 8. Quite apart from the tortured prose,  that  paragraph  raises  as  many
    issues as it purports to settle.  The "considerable delay in the  past"
    is not explained nor is the "undesired effect" upon the children  which
    was apparently caused by the  appellant's  absence  in  Albania  whilst
    making her unsuccessful settlement application.  Mr Shibli explained to
    me that the judge was here referring to letters from Bonneville Primary
    School dated respectively 17 May 2011 and 26 June 2012 which appear  in
    the appellant's bundle of documents.  The first letter, written  by  Mr
    Connelly, the inclusion manager of the school, describes the effect  of
    the appellant's absence upon the children, then  aged  9  years  and  5
    years.  The second letter (written by Miss  J  Hillman,  head  teacher)
    refers to the poor behaviour of  the  children  during  their  mother's
    "indefinite absence from the family home".

 9. The judge has made no attempt to refer to  or  assess  and  weigh  this
    evidence.  He has made no attempt  to  assess  any  "undesired  effect"
    which a further separation from their mother might have.  He has failed
    to specify the best interests of the children or to weigh against those
    best interests countervailing  factors  such  as  the  public  interest
    concerned with the removal of an individual who, having  failed  in  an
    out of country application for settlement, has abused  the  immigration
    system by entering the United Kingdom as a  visitor,  only  to  make  a
    further application for settlement.  It could be argued that the public
    interest concerned at the removal of such an individual is a strong one
    but the judge has made no attempt to assess that public interest or  to
    consider it as part of a proportionality exercise.  In my opinion,  the
    judge's analysis is wholly deficient. The British  citizenship  of  the
    children is obviously an important feature in this case but it needs to
    be considered properly and in the  context  of  all  the  factors  both
    supporting the appellant's appeal and those favouring her removal.

10. There is a further problem in the determination which may have been not
    brought to the judge's attention.  At [25] the judge  (wrongly)  states
    that the two children are British citizens  because  their  father  had
    been naturalised himself as a British citizen;  the  two  children  are
    British citizens because their father had indefinite leave to remain at
    the time they were born in this country. Mr  Avery  produced  a  letter
    dated 17 October 2013 from the Home Office to the appellant's  husband,
    Artan Tosha, which clearly indicates  that,  on  19  February  2013,  a
    decision  was  taken  to  treat  Mr  Tosha's  acquisition  of   British
    citizenship as null and void on the basis that he had adopted  a  false
    identity (he claimed to be Kosovan rather than Albanian).  Mr Tosha has
    not challenged that decision by way of judicial review.  The letter  of
    17 October 2013 states the Secretary of State's intention to cancel  Mr
    Tosha's refugee status; Mr Avery told me that no decision had yet  been
    taken on that matter became the Secretary of State was still awaiting a
    response from the UNHCR. The First-tier Tribunal judge was,  therefore,
    working under a misapprehension when he described Mr Tosha at  [27]  as
    "still a British citizen".  I agree with Mr Shibli that the citizenship
    of the children would not appear to be affected by their father's  loss
    of his citizenship but the judge was plainly not in possession  of  the
    full and accurate facts. It is to be hoped that Mr  Tosha's  status  in
    this country will have been determined by  the  time  the  decision  is
    remade in the First-tier Tribunal.

11. I have decided to remit this matter to the First-tier Tribunal  because
    I am not satisfied that full and proper determination of the issues  in
    the appeal has been carried out. Further, I understand  that  at  least
    two witnesses will need to give evidence at a new fact-finding hearing;
    for the avoidance of doubt, none of the findings of fact of the  First-
    tier Tribunal shall stand.  It  may  also  be  the  case  that  further
    evidence regarding the behaviour of the  children  and  their  academic
    progress may be relevant in enabling  the  new  Tribunal  to  ascertain
    exactly what effects the appellant's absence had upon the children  and
    how they may now react to a further separation.

Decision

12. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on
    13 February 2014 is set aside.  The appeal is remitted  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (not Judge M A Khan) to remake the decision.





Signed                              Date 16 April 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

