
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal IA/47047/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8th March 2016                     |On 13th April 2016                   |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before


                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                                 VIJAY KUMAR

                         (anonymity order not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             SECRETARY OF STATE

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Bellara, instructed by Louis Kennedy,
Solictiors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of India born on 11 March 1982. He  appeals
      the decision of the respondent on 18 November 2014 to refuse to  grant
      him further leave to remain as a Tier 4 Student.

   2. The appellant did not appear and was not represented before the First-
      tier Tribunal. The judge dismissed his appeal in a determination  sent
      out on 1 July 2015.

   3. The judge noted that the appellant said he had  had  leave  to  remain
      until 30 April 2014 as a  student  and  had  submitted  all  mandatory
      documents  with  his  application  and  did  not  understand  why  his
      application had been refused.  No  reasons  had  been  given  for  the
      refusal.

   4. The judge dismissed the appeal finding that the refusal notice clearly
      set out the basis for refusing the application, a  valid  Confirmation
      of Acceptance for Studies (CAS) not having been provided. A letter had
      been sent out by the respondent on 18 September 2014 in  discharge  of
      her duty to act fairly, giving the applicant 60 days to submit  a  new
      CAS.

   5. The appellant appealed and submitted that the respondent  appeared  to
      have served different decisions on the appellant and the Tribunal  and
      the appellant had not received any written reasons for refusal.

   6. Designated First-tier Judge Zucker granted permission. He  noted  that
      it was concerning that the respondent's explanatory  letter  dated  18
      November 2014 appeared to have been sent to the Tribunal  by  fax  and
      was not within the respondent's  bundle.  He  commented:  "This  would
      appear to lend credence to the appellant's submissions in the  grounds
      which should be read together with his statement and skeleton argument
      placed before the [First-tier] Tribunal."

   7. He found it arguable that there was procedural unfairness.

   8. Mr Bellara submitted that the key document  missing  was  the  missing
      explanatory statement which had not  reached  the  appellant  and  the
      appeal should be  remitted  for  a  fresh  hearing  in  the  light  of
      procedural unfairness.

   9.  I  have  carefully  considered  the  respondent's  response  and  the
      observations of Mr Avery.

  10. It does appear clear from the court file that the  Tribunal  contacted
      the respondent on 4 June 2015  as  although  it  was  said  that  full
      details of the decision were provided "in the  attached  letter",  the
      letter was not enclosed. The details were required for the hearing  on
      17 June 2015.

  11. It may be said that the appellant did not help himself by deciding not
      to attend the hearing but it is the primary duty of the respondent  to
      furnish the appellant and the Tribunal with the material relied upon.

  12. I agree with the point identified by Judge Zucker and in the  premises
      it  is  not  established  that  the  appellant  was  served  with  the
      respondent's explanatory statement  as  he  contends  and  accordingly
      there was procedural unfairness.

  13. I am satisfied there was a material error of law in the determination.

  14. In the premises I set aside the decision of the First-tier  Judge  and
      direct that the appeal be remitted for hearing afresh on all issues.

  15. The appeal is allowed to the extent indicated.





Signed
                               G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               6 April 2016






Fee Award

I am not satisfied that it would be appropriate to make a fee award at this
juncture in the particular circumstances of this case.

