
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/48156/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 October 2016                   |On 31st October 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                  Ganiu [L]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Ojukotola, Counsel, instructed by SLA
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria and  his  date  of  birth  is  20
    September 1970.  He made an application for leave to remain  which  was
    refused by the respondent on 10 November  2014.   He  appealed  against
    that decision and his appeal was dismissed by Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Maxwell following a hearing on 28 April 2016.

2.   The appellant and his partner have two  children  and  their  dates  of
    birth are 27 June 2007 and 21 January  2011.   It  is  clear  from  the
    Record of Proceedings that at the start of the  hearing  the  appellant
    amended his evidence. His evidence was not as contained in his  witness
    statement, in which it  was  stated  that  the  relationship  with  his
    partner had broken down. His evidence  at  the  hearing  was  that  the
    relationship with his partner was continuing and subsisting.  The judge
    did not engage with this evidence and proceeded on the  basis  that  he
    was not living with his partner or their children.

3.   I have taken on board Mr Jarvis'  submissions,  particularly  those  in
    respect of materiality, but I conclude that it is clear that the  judge
    did not engage with the evidence and if he had done  so  it  cannot  be
    said with  certainty  that  he  would  have  rejected  the  appellant's
    evidence  (although  I  accept  that  there  are  clear   and   obvious
    shortcomings in it. I note that there was no witness statement from the
    appellant's wife and she did not give oral evidence).

4.   I wholly reject the assertion of bias which is  made  in  the  grounds.
    However, for the reasons that I have given the judge  materially  erred
    and I set aside the decision. The error infects  the  assessment  under
    Article 8  and  the  assessment  under  section  117B  (6)  (which  was
    considered on the basis that the appellant did  not  have  family  life
    with his partner or their children).   I  set  aside  the  decision  to
    dismiss the appeal.

5.   The judge recorded that the appellant made a concession in relation  to
    paragraph 276ADE.  Mr Ojukotola,  Counsel  representing  the  appellant
    before me, now wishes to withdraw from that  concession  on  the  basis
    that 276ADE applies to the eldest child. At the hearing before  me  the
    parties were unable to agree the date of the application.  Mr Ojukotola
    argued that the application was made in July  2014.   I  note  that  an
    application was made sometime in 2013 and  a  series  of  requests  for
    reconsideration have been made.

6.   The First-tier  Tribunal  will  need  to  determine  the  date  of  the
    application to decide whether 276ADE applies. Both parties are expected
    to make their respective positions clear at  the  hearing.   The  judge
    will need to consider the date of the application and whether or not to
    go behind a concession which was made by the appellant's Counsel at the
    hearing before Judge Maxwell.  The First-tier  Tribunal  will  need  to
    make a full assessment of Article 8 including Section  117(6)  (b)  and
    depending on the date of the application and the  judge's  decision  in
    relation to the concession, para 276ADE of the Rules.

Notice of Decision

The judge materially erred. I set aside the decision to dismiss the  appeal.
The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a rehearing.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam                        Date 26 October 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
