







UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/48752/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On  20 January 2015                  |On 19 February 2015                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER


                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Miss Caroline Moretsele
                         no anonymity direction made

                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Font, counsel (instructed by RP Curtain LLP)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. For the sake of convenience I shall refer  to  the  appellant  as  "the
    secretary of state" and to the respondent as "the claimant."

 2. The secretary of state appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Flynn,  promulgated  on  27  October  2013,
    allowing the claimant's appeal  against  the  secretary's  decision  to
    remove her from the UK, having refused her  application  for  leave  to
    remain.  The claimant is a national of South Africa, born on  29  April
    1963.

 3. Judge Flynn  found  that  the  short  gaps  in  the  claimant's  lawful
    residence should be disregarded in accordance  with  the  secretary  of
    state's guidance - v10.0 - relating to long residence and private life.
    The claimant had demonstrated a period of ten years' continuous  lawful
    residence and met  all  the  requirements  under  paragraph  276B.  She
    accordingly allowed the appeal under the immigration rules.

 4. The secretary of state had contended that the claimant's leave  expired
    on 4 January 2006. There was thus a gap in continuous lawful  residence
    from 4 January 2006 until leave was  granted  on  3  March  2006.  This
    application was made out of time. She was thus not  entitled  to  leave
    pursuant to s. 3C(1) of the Immigration Act 1971.

 5. The secretary of sate contends that the Tribunal identified three  gaps
    in continuous lawful  residence  in  2012.  Her  leave  expired  on  28
    February 2012 and the claimant failed to submit a valid application for
    further leave until 20 November 2012. As such, she did not  have  leave
    to remain since her leave expired on 27 February 2012.

 6. It was also contended that the Judge erred by failing to  consider  the
    requirements under paragraph 276B (ii) to (v).

 7. Mr Duffy submitted that the "2006 point" referred to by the Judge was a
    red herring. That is  because  the  appellant's  leave  expired  on  27
    February 2012. She came into the UK on 21 April  2004.  Since  February
    2012, however, she never had leave to remain.

 8. Mr Duffy referred to the long residence and private life guidance. That
    provides  for  breaks  in  lawful  residence.   This   sets   out   the
    circumstances where there is a gap in lawful residence. The application
    may be granted if an applicant  has  short  gaps  in  lawful  residence
    through making previous applications out of time by  no  more  than  28
    calendar  days  and  meets  all  the  other  requirements  for   lawful
    residence.

 9. The decision maker can "use judgement and exercise discretion" in cases
    where there may be exceptional reasons why  a  single  application  was
    made more than 28 days out of time. That would include  for  example  a
    hospital strike, hospitalisation or an administrative error made by the
    home office.

10. The guidance also refers to s.3C of the Immigration Act  1971.  Section
    3C extends leave when a person with leave to enter or remain  makes  an
    in time application, that is, one made before their leave  expires  but
    one in which their leave expires before a decision on that  application
    is reached. If a  person  has  s.3C  leave  and  their  application  is
    refused, s.3C leave continues until their appeal rights are  exhausted.
    Mr Duffy emphasised that s.3C only applies to in time applications.

11. If a person submits an out of time application they will have a gap  in
    continuous lawful residence, from the date their  leave  expired  until
    the date they are next granted leave, regardless of how long  it  takes
    for the decision to be made.

12. A person cannot make a fresh application for leave while they  have  3C
    or 3D leave pending the outcome of  a  decision  on  their  outstanding
    application. Accordingly, someone who reaches the  ten  year  threshold
    during  this  leave  cannot  apply  for  indefinite  leave.   Mr  Duffy
    submitted that the First-tier Judge considered that her  making  of  an
    out of time application extended s.3C leave.

13. Mr Duffy did however accept that the Judge had failed to  consider  the
    claimant's appeal under Article 8. It is clear from  the  determination
    itself that counsel made an application to amend the grounds of  appeal
    to make it clear that the claimant wished to rely on Article 3 as  well
    as Article 8. [9] Permission was given to amend the grounds to  include
    Articles 3 and 8 [11]. Mr Font had made submissions before  the  First-
    tier tribunal that the appeal should be allowed on  Article  3  grounds
    [27]. The claimant had also built up family and private life here.  She
    was a dependent relative of her sister.

14. In reply, Mr  Font  submitted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    findings should be upheld. She was entitled to arrive at  the  decision
    she made. The policy is clear. The examples she  cited  were  relevant.
    There was no miscalculation.

15. He agreed that in the event that the Secretary's appeal is allowed, the
    matter should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a decision  to
    be made under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.

    Assessment

16. Section 3C of the 1971 Act extends leave when a person who has leave to
    remain makes an in time application. If their leave expires before  the
    decision on that application is  made,  when  the  applicant  has  s.3C
    leave,  that  leave  continues  until  the  appeal  rights  have   been
    exhausted.

17. It is evident that s.3C only applies to in time applications - page  24
    of the guidance. An applicant cannot make a fresh application for leave
    at the time they have s.3C  or  3D  leave  pending  the  outcome  of  a
    decision on  the  outstanding  application.  Accordingly,  someone  who
    reaches the ten year threshold during this  leave  cannot  successfully
    apply for indefinite leave.

18. The appellant's leave to remain expired on 28 February 2012.  When  she
    made her application on 20 November 2012, she did  not  have  leave  to
    remain.

19. The appellant was issued a one stop warning in the decision  to  remove
    her under s.10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

20. As noted, the claimant successfully amended the grounds  of  appeal  to
    make it clear that she wished to rely on Articles 3 and 8. However, the
    Judge did not address the human rights claim at all.

21.  The  appellant's  leave  to  remain  expired  on  27  February   2012.
    Accordingly, she did not have leave to remain since her  leave  expired
    on that date. She was not assisted by s.3C or 3D of the 1971 Act.

22. I accordingly find that the decision of the First-tier  Judge  involved
    the making of material errors of law. That decision is accordingly  set
    aside and re-made. As the claimant had not shown that she had at  least
    ten years' continuous  lawful  residence  in  the  UK,  her  appeal  is
    dismissed.  To that extent the Secretary of State's appeal is allowed.

23. However, as agreed by both representatives, the  First-tier  Judge  did
    not consider either the Article 3 or Article 8 claim  at  all,  despite
    the fact that Mr Font made detailed submissions relating to her  family
    and private life built up in the UK.

24.  In  the  circumstances,  both  parties  agreed  that  the  appellant's
    outstanding human rights claim should be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a fresh determination.

25. Applying the Senior President's guidelines in this  respect,  I  accept
    that this is an appropriate case for this appeal to  be  remitted.  Not
    only will there be substantial fact finding involved, but it is evident
    that the appellant's claims under Articles 3 and 8 were not  considered
    at all.

    Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Judge involved the  making  of  material
    errors of law and is substituted for a decision allowing the  Secretary
    of State's appeal under the Immigration Rules.

    The appeal of the claimant under the immigration rules is dismissed.

    The claimant's human  rights  appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Taylor House) for it to be determined.

    No anonymity direction is made.






    Signed        Date 12/2/2015


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer
