

                                    [pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: IA/48776/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On March 18, 2015                    |On March 20, 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                         mr EDISON DELA CRUZ OVEJERA
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Beach, Counsel, instructed by Selvarajah & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of  the  Philippines.  The  appellant  first
    entered the United Kingdom as a student on October 18, 2008 with  leave
    to remain until December 31, 2009. He  applied  for  further  leave  to
    remain and this was granted until September 30, 2013 and  on  September
    26, 2013 he made a further application to vary his leave to remain  but
    this was refused by the respondent on November 7, 2013 and at the  same
    time a decision was taken  to  remove  him  under  section  47  of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality  Act  2006.  His  application  was
    refused  because  the  respondent  was  not  satisfied   he   met   the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE or  Appendix  FM  and  there  were  no
    exceptional circumstances that warranted consideration outside  of  the
    Rules.

 2.  The  appellant  appealed  under  section  82(1)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  on  November  7,  2013  arguing  the
    respondent had erred in law in finding he did not qualify  as  a  carer
    and should have allowed his appeal under article 8 ECHR.

 3. The matter  came  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Hussain
    (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ") on September 5, 2014 and  in  a
    decision promulgated on  September  24,  2014  he  refused  the  appeal
    finding the decision was in accordance with the law (in relation to the
    carer issue) and there was no breach  of  family/private  life  because
    there was no breach of article 8 ECHR.

 4. The appellant lodged grounds of  appeal  on  October  6,  2014  and  on
    December  10,  2014  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  White   gave
    permission to appeal finding there were arguable grounds that the  FtTJ
    had erred for the reasons raised in the grounds of appeal.  The  matter
    came before me on January 30, 2015 and at that hearing I found:

     a. There was no error of law in respect of the Immigration Rules.

          b. The FtTJ correctly found the respondent was entitled to refuse
             to apply the discretionary policy on carers.

          c. The FtTJ wrongly found there was no family  life  between  the
             appellant and his cousin  (referred  to  as  an  aunt  in  the
             papers)  and  consequently  erred  by  not   considering   the
             appellant's family life claim under article 8 ECHR.

          d. The article 8 family life claim would have to be reconsidered.



 5. I admitted into evidence an updated statement from the appellant  dated
    January 19, 2015 and directed that any additional  evidence  should  be
    served within a timetable I provided.

 6. The matter came back before me as a resumed hearing on the date set out
    above. Medical notes and a  consultant's  report  had  been  served  as
    additional evidence and I admitted the same into evidence.

 7. The appellant gave brief oral evidence in which he adopted  his  recent
    statement and confirmed that he was related to Ms Mariano  because  his
    grandmother and her mother were sisters. He confirmed  that  the  other
    cousin, Ms Ovejera, was  seventy  years  old  and  had  back  and  knee
    problems and was unable to care for his other cousin. The  ladies  were
    related to each other. Under cross-examination he stated that there had
    been no contact from social  services  since  2013  although  they  had
    provided some practical equipment such as  chairs  and  a  commode.  He
    agreed that the GP had informed her that she did  not  need  to  see  a
    consultant. He concluded his evidence by confirming  that  he  was  the
    only person who could provide the level  of  care  necessary  and  that
    neither he nor his cousin claimed any form of benefits and his cousin's
    only income was her pension.

    SUBMISSIONS

 8. Mr Tarlow relied on the refusal letter and submitted there  was  family
    life and the  issue  for  me  to  consider  was  whether  removing  the
    appellant was proportionate. He accepted that  the  appellant  provided
    daily care for his cousin  and  he  also  accepted  the  cousin  needed
    medical and social care. However, he had come  as  a  student  with  no
    expectation of extending his stay and as a British citizen  the  cousin
    would be entitled to care within  the  community  and  assistance  from
    appropriate bodies if there was no one to  look  after  her.  Both  may
    prefer the person providing this care  to  be  the  appellant  but  the
    Tribunal should not overlook the fact there would be people to  provide
    the necessary care and her  own  GP  had  not  found  it  necessary  to
    recommend her to see a consultant about her condition. He said  removal
    was not disproportionate as the appellant failed to meet the  terms  of
    the policy or the Immigration Rules.

 9. Ms Beach adopted her skeleton argument that she handed  to  me  on  the
    morning of the hearing. She reminded me there was no specific Rule that
    this appellant could benefit from and the Tribunal had previously ruled
    that he did not come within the respondent's  carer's  policy  for  the
    reasons set out in my previous decision. She invited me to consider the
    consultant's report and in particular paragraphs  [10]-[11]  and  [18]-
    [19]. She submitted that if the appellant were removed then the  cousin
    would suffer as  she  would  lose  that  personal  contact  and  social
    services would then have to provide, at  a  cost,  the  level  of  care
    necessary. She submitted there was no public interest  in  removal  and
    his appeal should be allowed under article 8 ECHR.

10. I reserved my decision.

    ASSESSMENT OF CLAIM

11. The appellant is 28 years of age and came  to  the  United  Kingdom  to
    study. Whilst studying he stayed at his cousin's address and during the
    last three years he has had to care for  her  as  there  was  no  other
    family that could provide the level of care necessary.

12. The appellant made an application for leave to remain on September  26,
    2013 and this application was not to extend his stay as a  student  but
    to care for his cousin. The FtTJ refused this application  because  the
    appellant failed to satisfy the requirements of the respondent's policy
    and I upheld that finding at an earlier hearing.

13.  Both  representatives  agree  that  this  appeal  should  be  properly
    considered under article 8 ECHR and it is common ground that the  issue
    is whether removal is proportionate. The other  questions  set  out  in
    Razgar [2004] UKHL 00027 were answered in the affirmative.

14. I accept the appellant does look after his cousin who according to  the
    recent consultant's report has severe mobility issues and  requires  24
    hour care. This report is undermined to the extent  that  the  cousin's
    own GP has ruled out sending her to see a consultant at this time.  The
    appellant himself has stated in paragraph [6]  of  his  recent  witness
    statement that social services are not providing any current assistance
    because he is present and looking after his cousin. I also accept  that
    if the appellant was not present then his cousin would not receive  the
    same attention she currently receives.

15. I have noted there is limited evidence from the other occupant  of  the
    house. She has not provided a statement and medical evidence is limited
    to appointment cards.

16. I have had regard to Section 117B of the 2002 Act so far  as  it  is  a
    relevant to a family life claim. The claim presented  is  on  a  family
    life  basis  as  against  private  life  and  section  117B  has   less
    application in those circumstances.

17.  However,  Mr  Tarlow's  submission  that  maintenance   of   effective
    immigration control is in the public interest is something that I  must
    take into account and I also have to consider how he would be  able  to
    maintain himself if he is unable to work. Section 117B(3)  makes  clear
    that it is in the public interest that persons who seek  to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom are financially independent and I  question  how  he
    will be if he is unable to work due to him providing 24  hour  care  to
    his cousin. The evidence before me is that his cousin only  receives  a
    pension so this is a factor I should have regard to. On the other  hand
    I have had regard to the fact the appellant speaks English and would be
    less of a burden  on  taxpayers  and  better  able  to  integrate  into
    society.

18. This is not a case where there are no facilities or support  available.
    If the appellant was not living here then the cousin would receive  the
    appropriate care and assistance from the  local  authority  and  social
    services. She is not receiving any disablement  payments  and  her  own
    doctor has not said she needs to see a consultant at this time although
    this is probably due to the fact she saw  one  in  2013  and  he  ruled
    surgery out because of her obesity and the risks surgery would bring to
    her. It therefore follows that unless the patient lost  weight  surgery
    would never be recommended by any doctor or consultant.

19. I have considered all of the evidence and whilst I recognise  the  good
    the appellant is doing I remind myself that the respondent has a policy
    in place for situations such as this. The appellant did not satisfy the
    requirements of the policy and that is not  something  I  can  overlook
    when considering his application outside of the Rules. Article 8 is not
    meant to be a short cut or  a  quick  fix.  Whilst  clearly  there  are
    positive reasons for the appellant being allowed to remain there are  a
    number of factors that counterbalance that argument. These include:

          a. Failure to meet the requirements  of  the  respondent  carer's
             policy.

          b. The availability of care within  the  community  and  hospital
             services.

          c. The appellant would have no source of income if he  does  what
             he claims he has to do and would therefore not be  financially
             independent.

20. I therefore find that refusing entry would not breach this  appellant's
    article 8 rights. If he feels he is now able to meet  the  respondent's
    policy on carers then that is the path he should be following.

    DECISION

21. There was a material error in the way the  FtTJ  approached  article  8
    ECHR. I have remade that decision and I dismiss the appeal on article 8
    grounds.

22. I have previously found the FtTJ did not err in  his  consideration  of
    the how the respondent applied her carer's policy.

23. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction pursuant to
    Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and I see
    no reason to alter that order.


Signed:     Dated: March 19, 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is made.


Signed:     Dated: March 19, 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
