
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/48993/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 22 August 2014                               |On 1 September 2014        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER

                                   Between

                    MR OMAR EL MOKHTAR TAHA ABBAS SHALABY
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr S Saeed of Aman Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The Appellant is a citizen of Egypt whose date of birth is recorded as
      4 May 1987.  On 16 July 2013 he made application for indefinite  leave
      to remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of ten  years  continuous
      lawful residence but on 6 November 2013 a decision was made to  refuse
      the application on the basis that in 2011 the Appellant could not meet
      the requirement of 276B(v) of HC395 (as amended) which provides that:

           "The applicant must not be in the UK in  breach  of  immigration
           laws except that any period of overstaying for a  period  of  28
           days or  less  will  be  disregarded,  as  will  any  period  of
           overstaying between periods of entry clearance, leave  to  enter
           or leave to remain of up  to  28  days  and  to  any  period  of
           overstaying pending the determination  of  an  application  made
           within that 28 day period."

      The Appellant had made applications rejected by the Secretary of State
      in 2011 resulting in a period in excess of 28 days when it was said he
      did not have leave and it was on that basis that it was said that  the
      Appellant did not meet the general requirement of  paragraph  276B  of
      ten years continuous lawful residence.

   2. The Appellant appealed and his appeal was heard on  5  March  2014  by
      Judge Nightingale in the First-tier  Tribunal.   It  was  argued  that
      although the applications had been rejected by the Secretary of  State
      that did not mean on the  particular  facts  of  this  case  that  the
      Appellant was not entitled to take  advantage  of  the  provisions  of
      Section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971 which would allow leave  to  be
      extended whilst there was an application pending.  The issue therefore
      was whether the applications which had been rejected by the  Secretary
      of State were indeed applications at  all.   Judge  Nightingale  found
      that Section 3C did not assist the Appellant.  He went on to  consider
      the Appellant's private life having regard  to  paragraph  276ADE  but
      found that the Appellant did not  satisfy  its  requirements  and  the
      appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

   3. Not content with the determination, by Notice dated 14 March 2014  the
      Appellant made application for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal.  That application was initially refused  but  on  a  renewed
      application dated 20 March 2014, Upper Tribunal  Judge  Grubb  granted
      permission.

   4. Mr Saeed on behalf of the Appellant submitted  in  rather  bold  terms
      that an application was valid if it was made in writing using a  form.
      Mr Saeed did not specify what kind of form.

   5. It is helpful in considering the submissions made to  have  regard  to
      Section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971.  It provides:-

           "This section applies if -

           a) The person who has limited leave to enter or  remain  in  the
              United   Kingdom  applies  to  the  Secretary  of  State  for
              variation of leave,

           b) The application for variation is made  before  leave  expires
              and,

           c) The leave  expires  without  the  application  for  variation
              having been  decided.

           (2)    The leave is extended by virtue of  this  section  during
           any period when:

              a) The  application  for  variation  is  neither  decided  nor
                 withdrawn,

              b) An appeal under Section 82(1) of  the  Nationality,  Asylum
                 and Immigration  Act  2002  could  be  brought  [while  the
                 Appellant is in the United Kingdom] against the decision on
                 the application for variation (ignoring any possibility  of
                 an appeal out of time with permission), or

              c) An appeal under that  section  against  that  decision  [or
                 brought while the Appellant is in the  United  Kingdom]  is
                 pending (within the meaning of Section 104 of that Act).

           (3)    Leave extended by virtue of this section shall  lapse  if
              the Appellant leaves the United Kingdom.

           (4)    A person may not make an application for variation of his
              leave to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  while  that
              leave is extended by virtue of this section.

           (5)    Sub-section (4) does not prevent  the  variation  of  the
              application mentioned in Sub-Section (1)(a).

           (6)    The Secretary of State may make  regulations  determining
              when an application is  decided  for  the  purposes  of  this
              section; and the regulations-

              a) May make provision by reference to receipt of a notice,

              b) May provide for a notice  to  be  treated  as  having  been
                 received in specified circumstances,

              c) May make different provisions  for  different  purposes  or
                 circumstances,

              d) Shall be made by statutory instrument and

              e) Shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a  resolution
                 of either House of Parliament."

   6. Mr Saeed submitted  that  when  Section  3C  was  first  enacted,  any
      application would have sufficed; there was  no  concept  of  valid  or
      invalid application.  It followed in Mr Saeed's  submission  that  the
      Appellant had a vested right which applied  to  any  application  made
      prior to the expiry  of  leave.   The  argument  seems  to  me  rather
      circular because what  needs  to  be  determined  is  the  meaning  of
      "application."  Mr Saeed's  essential  submission  is  that  the  term
      "application" means both valid and invalid applications.   That  would
      mean however that an invalid application is a valid application.

   7. In support of his submission that the long residence  rule  is  to  be
      interpreted generously, he observes  that  whereas  paragraph  276B(v)
      provides:-

           "The applicant must not be in the UK in  breach  of  immigration
           laws except that any period of overstaying for a  period  of  28
           days or  less  will  be  disregarded,  as  will  any  period  of
           overstaying between periods of entry clearance, leave  to  enter
           or leave to remain up to 28 days and any period  of  overstaying
           pending the determination of an application made within that  28
           day period. Other provisions are less generous.  As  an  example
           he refers to  Paragraph  134  of  the  Immigration  Rules  which
           relates to indefinite leave to remain for  work  permit  holders
           which provides at 134(viii) that the applicant must  not  be  in
           the UK in breach of immigration laws except that any  period  of
           overstaying  for  a  period  of  28  days  or   less   will   be
           disregarded."

      Rule 134 did not point to any periods of overstaying  between  periods
      of entry clearance or leave to enter or leave to remain.

   8. I did not find it necessary to call on Mr Walker.  The notion that  an
      application which is not capable in law of being accepted as valid  is
      still to be treated as valid until the Secretary of State  rejects  it
      simply cannot be right.  It may be  different  if  an  application  is
      capable of being accepted but it was common ground between  Mr  Walker
      and Mr  Saeed  that  the  statutory  provisions  were  such  that  the
      requirements attaching to the application were mandatory.  Put simply,
      in my judgment, an application to be an application must  be  a  valid
      application and the submission of Mr Saeed that it would be sufficient
      if  the  application  were  made  on  a  form  in  writing  leads   to
      uncertainty.  The submission could lead  to  ludicrous  "applications"
      being sufficient.  I am bound to ask what kind of form would  suffice?
      There is, I find no merit in this part of the appeal.

   9. Permission was granted on a very  limited  basis  but  Mr  Walker  was
      content to allow the grounds be amended in order that paragraph 276ADE
      (which deals with private life applications) might be revisited.  I am
      bound to observe that Mr Walker for the Secretary of State dealt  with
      this matter in any extremely fair and proper way given the sequence of
      events as he saw them.  The  chronology  of  events  set  out  in  the
      skeleton argument of Mr Saeed on behalf of the Appellant was  accepted
      by Mr Walker.  The Appellant had made "application" on 19 April  2011.
      That was met with a letter from the Secretary of  State  dated  7  May
      2011 which was received on the 9 May 2011.   The  Appellant  was  told
      that the application was being refused because the appropriate new fee
      had not been received.  He was told that without the  appropriate  fee
      the application was being returned with all supporting documents.  The
      Appellant was also advised to use the  current  version  of  the  form
      although he was not told that the form that he had  used  was  a  form
      that had been valid but was now only being  accepted  because  it  was
      submitted during a 28 day period of grace allowed in the case  of  the
      now out of date form being submitted.  The focus on that letter was on
      the fee.

  10. On the Respondent's case provided a valid application had submitted by
      19 May 2011 the Appellant would have been able to benefit from the  28
      day period of grace (for the avoidance of doubt not in respect of  the
      correct form but within the meaning of paragraph 276B(v).  On  12  May
      2011, a week prior to that  28  day  period  of  grace  expiring,  the
      Appellant reapplied, though on this  occasion  using  the  wrong  form
      because though he had used precisely the same form that he had used on
      the previous occasion he was not aware that the form that he had  used
      was incorrect and it is of note that a letter dated 16 May 2011  again
      prior to 19 May when the 28 day period of grace  would  have  expired,
      the Appellant was thanked for his recent application.  He was not told
      at that time that he had used the wrong form.  He  was  told  for  the
      first time that he had used the wrong form after the 28 day period had
      elapsed on 14 June 2011.

  11. I rose for a short period in order that Mr Walker could  consider  his
      position in the light of his  own  observation  that  there  had  been
      inherent unfairness in not informing the  Appellant  when  he  applied
      with the wrong fee that he had also applied on the wrong  form  rather
      than simply inviting him to ensure that he used the correct form given
      the letter was capable of being read to imply that the only  objection
      being made was to the fee.  This was all the more so  given  that  the
      application had been made by the Appellant on a form after the date of
      change of form which was capable of reinforcing the  Appellant's  view
      that there was no reason for him to doubt that he had used the correct
      form.

  12. Although the Appellant could not succeed, in my judgment in  his  "3C"
      point, that did not mean that consideration should  not  be  given  to
      Paragraph 276ADE or the wider application of art. 8 ECHR.   Mr  Walker
      agreed.

  13. Paragraph 276ADE provides for the relief sought by the  Appellant  but
      only after 20 years.  However Mr Walker agreed that given the peculiar
      facts of this case it was appropriate to look beyond paragraph  276ADE
      to the wider application of Article 8 and he further agreed that given
      the  unfairness,  which  he  conceded,  it  was  right  to  allow  the
      Appellant's appeal on private life grounds  against  the  decision  to
      remove him.  Whilst I told  Mr  Walker  that  I  would  not  make  any
      direction it seemed to me and Mr Walker did  not  disagree,  that  the
      only way to put right this unfairness was in  fact  to  grant  to  the
      Appellant the very relief that he  had  sought  in  the  first  place,
      namely indefinite leave to remain and I told Mr Walker  that  I  would
      make such a recommendation and indeed I do so.

  14. I conclude this determination by observing  that  it  does  Mr  Walker
      great credit that he approached this  appeal  in  the  very  pragmatic
      manner in which he did.

Decision

There was an error of law in the determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal.
The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.   The  appeal  is
allowed on the limited basis  that  it  succeeds  on  human  rights  grounds
(Article 8).





Signed                              Date

Designated First Tier Tribunal Judge
(Sitting as a Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal)
