
[pic]
IAC-fH-nl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/48645/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 3 March 2016                          |On 6 April 2016                   |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                 MOHSIN ALI
                       (anonymity direction NOt made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. M. Solaiman, J. Stifford Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. I. Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Atreya, promulgated on 19 August 2015, in which she
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse to grant leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General)  Student  and  to
    remove him from the United Kingdom.
 2. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that an arguable error of
    law had arisen in relation to the scope and application of  the  policy
    governing the dispatch of a 60 day letter by the Respondent.


 3. The Appellant did not attend the hearing.   I  heard  submissions  from
    both representatives following which I reserved my decision.


Submissions


 4. Mr. Solaiman submitted that the Respondent issued a 60  day  letter  to
    students whose visa was curtailed when the  Tier  4  sponsor  lost  its
    licence, or when their visa application was pending  when  the  Tier  4
    sponsor lost its licence.  However, there was no remedy when the Tier 4
    sponsor withdrew the CAS.  This was an issue of common law fairness.  I
    was referred to paragraphs 44 to 52 of EK (Ivory Coast) [2014] EWCA Civ
    1517.


 5. Mr. Jarvis submitted that the grounds attacked the approach to  the  60
    day  letter  policy.   He  noted  that  the  judge  had  accepted   the
    Appellant's evidence regarding the dispute  with  his  sponsor  college
    (paragraph [27]).  He submitted that the 60 day letter  policy  applied
    to certain kinds of students where the Secretary of State had withdrawn
    the CAS.  The policy had later been extended to all students regardless
    of the amount of leave they had left.  However, it did not apply  to  a
    situation where the CAS had been withdrawn by the sponsor college.


 6. I was referred to the Respondent's guidance  entitled  "Patel  Guidance
    Step-by-Step Guide", and paragraphs [38]  and  [39]  of  EK  where  the
    policy was set out.  He submitted that EK held that  a  60  day  letter
    should be issued where the Respondent had done something  which  caused
    unfairness to the Appellant and therefore put him at a disadvantage  as
    could not have known about it.  All students  had  protection  if  they
    were not personally involved with the problems that caused the  CAS  to
    be withdrawn.  The policy did not apply to someone in  the  Appellant's
    situation.


 7. In relation to the submission regarding the common law duty  which  was
    on  the  Respondent,  this  could  not  succeed.   He  submitted   that
    paragraphs [44] to [52] of EK on which the Appellant was  relying  were
    the minority decision of Lord Justice Floyd.  The majority verdict  was
    that of Lord Justice Sales and Lord Justice Briggs.


 8. I was referred to the ratio of the decision in EK, paragraphs  [33]  to
    [37], [40] and [59].  He submitted that where the withdrawal of the CAS
    was due to an issue between the applicant and the sponsor college,  and
    not due to the Secretary of State creating the situation where the  CAS
    was withdrawn, an applicant was not entitled to a 60  day  letter.   He
    submitted that the Appellant could not succeed either under the  policy
    or regarding a freestanding  common  law  duty  of  fairness.   In  the
    Appellant's case the Secretary of State had done nothing to  cause  the
    withdrawal of the  CAS.   The  judge  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  at
    paragraph [32] was correct and had followed the ratio of the  Court  of
    Appeal.


 9. In response Mr. Solaiman submitted that there  was  no  remedy  when  a
    student made an application and the sponsor college withdrew  the  CAS.
    There was no fault on the part of  the  Appellant  and  he  should  not
    suffer.  He referred  me  to  paragraphs  [34]  and  [49]  of  EK.   In
    paragraph [34] it was suggested that the student  take  action  against
    the college, but he questioned what would happen to the student's  visa
    in the meantime,  and  submitted  that  this  was  not  practical.   He
    submitted that the appeal should be allowed and the Respondent directed
    to issue a 60 day letter in order that the Appellant could find  a  new
    Tier 4 sponsor.


Error of Law


10. In paragraph [32] of the decision the judge states:


    "The appellant cannot in my view argue that there has been  conspicuous
    unfairness caused to him by the Secretary of State's  failure  to  give
    him 60 days grace to allow him to obtain a new CAS because there was no
    surrender or revocation of his sponsor's licence.  The  opportunity  to
    have the 60 day grace period to submit a new CAS is only  triggered  in
    situations where the college an applicant was signed up to study at has
    had their licence surrendered or revoked.  It does not apply  to  money
    disputes between educational institutions and individuals."


11. I have carefully considered the case of EK,  in  particular  paragraphs
    [38], [39] and [59].   Paragraph  [38],  insofar  as  it  is  relevant,
    states:


    "But that requirement was found to arise where there had been a  change
    of position of which the Secretary of State was aware, and indeed which
    she had brought about, in circumstances in which the students were  not
    themselves at fault in any way, but had been caught out by action taken
    by the Secretary of  State  in  relation  to  which  they  had  had  no
    opportunity to protect themselves.  In the present case,  by  contrast,
    the Secretary had no means of knowing why the  Appellant's  CAS  letter
    had been withdrawn and was not responsible for its withdrawal, and  the
    fair balance between the public interest in the due  operation  of  the
    PBS regime and the individual interest of the Appellant was  in  favour
    of simple operation of the regime without further ado."


12. Paragraph [59] states:


    "Secondly, like Sales LJ, I consider that a  fairness  principle  which
    would lead to success for the applicant in the present case would  make
    too great an inroad into the simplicity,  predictability  and  relative
    speed of the PBS process, contrary to the thrust of the PBS  regime  as
    laid down by the Immigration Rules, particularly in a situation such as
    the present, where the Secretary of State bears  no  responsibility  at
    all for the mistake or the lack of communication of it,  which  led  to
    the unfair outcome for the Appellant."


13. In paragraph [27] of the decision the judge finds  that  the  Appellant
    has had a dispute with his sponsor college following which the  college
    withdrew the CAS.  It is not the Respondent who is responsible  in  any
    way for the fact that the Appellant's CAS has been withdrawn.


14. I find that the Appellant does not fall into the category of  the  kind
    of applicant to whom a 60 day letter is issued by the Respondent.  This
    is because, for the reasons set out in the case of EK, the  requirement
    to issue a 60 day letter arises where the reason that the CAS has  been
    withdrawn is due to action taken by the Secretary of  State.   It  does
    not apply to situations where the action has been taken by the college.


15. In paragraph [34] of EK Lord Justice  Sales  stated  that  there  is  a
    remedy for an applicant when a college withdraws a CAS letter, which is
    that he may have a contractual right of recourse against  the  college.
    In the present case the Appellant had  a  financial  dispute  with  the
    college which led to the withdrawal of his CAS.  The Secretary of State
    did nothing at all to influence the college withdrawing the  CAS.   The
    college is one of the Respondent's licensed Tier 4  sponsors,  and  the
    Respondent has not revoked her licence.  The Appellant  had  a  dispute
    with the college  which  was  not  due  to  any  action  taken  by  the
    Respondent.  I find that EK  is  clear  as  to  when  the  Respondent's
    obligation to issue a 60 day letter arises.  It is equally  clear  from
    the Respondent's guidance.  I find that the  judge  in  paragraph  [32]
    sets out the law correctly.  She states that the policy does not  apply
    as it is only triggered in situations where  the  sponsor  licence  has
    been surrendered or revoked, which does  not  apply  inthe  Appellant's
    case.


16. I find there is no error of law in the judge's analysis of  the  policy
    in paragraph [32].


17. In relation to the argument put forward by Mr. Solaiman at the hearing,
    that it was a breach of the common law duty  of  fairness,  it  is  not
    clear that this was put as a freestanding argument at the appeal before
    the First-tier Tribunal, but  rather  that  it  followed  on  from  the
    Respondent's failure to adhere to her policy.  However, the  Respondent
    acted in accordance with her policy, as was found by  the  judge.   The
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal judge correctly  followed  EK  when
    finding that the policy did not apply to the Appellant.


18. Further, the judge found in paragraph [32] that the Appellant could not
    argue that there had been conspicuous unfairness caused to him  by  the
    Secretary of State, so it is difficult to see how this  submission  can
    be made out.  For reasons set out in EK, it is  clear  why  the  policy
    applies in that way that it does.  It is only  when  the  Secretary  of
    State is at fault that any unfairness arises.


19. There is no indication that it was submitted at the  hearing  that  the
    decision was unfair by reference anything other  than  the  failure  to
    apply the policy.  I find that there is no error of law in the  judge's
    decision to dismiss the appeal.



Notice of Decision

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not involve the making  of
    an error of law and I do not set it aside.


21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 29 March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

