
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/48286/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 10 June 2014                               |On 25th July 2014            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                               LORD  MATTHEWS
                   SITTING AS JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                           KEHINDE ABISOLA ADENUGA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Dr V Onipede of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against  a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Beach promulgated on 15 April 2014.  The only  issue  for  us  concerns
    whether or not the judge made an error of law in refusing to categorise
    the relationship between the appellant and her family  as  constituting
    family life, in the sense that the caring duties  which  she  undertook
    undoubtedly in respect of her parents, were over and above  the  normal
    emotional ties between adult children and their parents.  If  an  error
    of law was made in refusing so  to  categorise  that  relationship  the
    question comes to be whether that error was material, it  being  argued
    on behalf of the appellant that the assessment of proportionality under
    Article 8 would have been different  if  their  relationship  had  been
    categorised as family life rather than private life, as was done by the
    judge in paragraph 33 of the determination.

2.   At the  hearing  today,  Dr  Onipede  submitted  a  social  care  needs
    assessment in respect of each of the parents.  These documents were not
    before the First-tier Tribunal, but we have  considered  the  terms  of
    them insofar as we were asked to do so.  They  do  not,  with  respect,
    appear to us to add anything of significance to the  facts  which  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal Judge and which  were  set  out  in  the
    determination and taken account of by the judge.  It is plain that  the
    appellant's parents suffer a variety of difficulties, each of which, as
    we have said, are set out in the  determination.   It  is  plain  that,
    whether or not the appellant is categorised as  a  qualified  carer  or
    not, she does undertake caring duties, which again are plainly set  out
    in the determination.   It  is  said  by  the  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer, Mr Melvin, that there is no  error  of  law  evidence  in  the
    determination in that the judge was entitled to take the view that  the
    caring duties did not elevate the relationship between the  parties  to
    one of family life for the purposes of Article 8,  and  in  any  event,
    that any error was not of materiality.

3.   In our opinion no error of law can be detected.  It might well be  that
    another judge might take the view that these duties undertaken,  and  I
    use the word "duties" in a broad sense, by the appellant  did  in  fact
    elevate the relationship between them to family life for  the  purposes
    of Article 8, such was a question of fact.   It  was  submitted  by  Mr
    Melvin that all relevant facts were taken account of by the judge.  The
    decision was one which was open to  him  to  make  and  we  should  not
    interfere with it.

4.   That having been said we consider whether or not,  even  if  the  judge
    was wrong in regarding the  relationship  between  the  parties  as  an
    aspect of a private life, that error, if it was an error,  was  one  of
    materiality.   In  our  opinion  the  assessment   of   proportionality
    undertaken by the judge was precisely the same as it would have been if
    the relationship between the parties had  been  categorised  as  family
    life.  We can detect no error in that assessment.  The relevant factors
    are all taken account of.  They are set out in the earlier part of  the
    determination and referred to appropriately in paragraphs 35 to 41.

5.   It is plain that the appellant cannot fulfil the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  The only issue therefore being  whether  Article  8
    could assist her case.  In considering Article 8 the judge took account
    of the determination in  Gulshan,  took  account  of  Razgar  and  took
    account of all the submissions and circumstances which it was her  duty
    to do.  We cannot detect any irrationality in the judge's approach  and
    in the circumstances the appeal before the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.
     The  original  decision  should  stand,  namely  that  the  appeal  is
    dismissed under the Immigration Rules and under human rights.

Signed                                  Date

Lord Matthews
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal
