
[pic]
IAC-PE-AW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/48825/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24th November 2015                |On 17th February 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           mr Ahsanul Kabir rashed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss N Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer
For the Claimant: Mr Hosein of SEB Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department.   To
    avoid confusion I have designated the Appellant in  the  First-tier  as
    the Claimant in the present proceedings.  I shall continue to refer  to
    the Secretary of State as the SSHD throughout.

 2. This is an appeal by  the  SSHD  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Robinson promulgated on 9th July 2015 whereby the  judge
    allowed the Claimant's appeal against the decision of  the  SSHD.   The
    decision by the SSHD made on 23rd  November  2014  was  to  refuse  the
    Claimant leave to enter the United Kingdom.

 3. By decision taken on 29th September 2015 the SSHD was  given  leave  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal against the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Thus the matter appears before me to determine in the  first
    instance whether or not there is  an  error  of  law  in  the  original
    decision.

 4. The Claimant is a national of Bangladesh.  He first entered the  United
    Kingdom on 15th November 2009 with entry clearance valid as  a  student
    until 13th January 2013.  It appears that the college at which  he  was
    studying had its license revoked in January 2012 and the  Claimant  had
    to find an alternative college.  The Claimant began to study at  London
    Churchill College.  In order to  study  at  the  various  colleges  the
    Claimant on several occasions, 3 at least according  to  the  Claimant,
    had to take IELTS tests and on each occasion  appears  to  have  scored
    5.5.

 5. Ultimately having completed the course of  study  at  London  Churchill
    College it appears that the Claimant gained admission to the University
    of Sunderland for the purposes of doing  a  BA  (Honours)  in  business
    management.   The  Claimant  appears  to  have  completed  the   course
    successfully, a course which would have been taught and examined in the
    English Language.

 6. In April 2012  the  Claimant  met  Tahira  Akter.   Their  relationship
    developed.  They appear to have  started  living  together  after  they
    married  and  sometime  after  12th  July  2013.   Their  marriage  was
    registered according to British law.

 7. The Claimant appears to have made an application for further  leave  to
    remain as the husband of Mrs Tahira Akter.  He  was  granted  leave  in
    November 2013 and that leave was due to expire on 25th May 2016.

 8. On 13th July 2014 the Claimant had to  travel  urgently  to  Bangladesh
    because his mother had become sick and he had to go and  see  her.   On
    6th August 2014 the Claimant was returning to the United  Kingdom.   He
    was stopped by an Immigration Officer and interviewed.  At  that  stage
    the Immigration Officer kept the Claimant's passport and biometric card
    and refused the Claimant leave to enter.

 9. In essence the decision was taken to refuse the Claimant leave to enter
    on the grounds that the IELTS certificate used by the Claimant in   the
    past had been obtained by fraud or deception in that a proxy test taker
    had taken the test on behalf of the Claimant.

10. Before the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  evidence  from  ETS  by  way  of
    statements from Peter Millington and Rebecca Collins had been submitted
    for consideration.  The conclusion with regard to the  Claimant's  test
    certificates were that they had been obtained by the  use  of  a  proxy
    test taker.  Because of the correlation between the Claimant's test and
    other tests it was alleged that the person taking the test had taken  a
    number of tests. The conclusion by ETS  was  to  the  effect  that  the
    English language test previously submitted by the Claimant  in  support
    of his application were invalid. It is  unclear  whether  consideration
    was given to the fact that the Claimant himself admits  taking  several
    tests.

11. By comparison the Claimant claims that he has studied for a BA(Honours)
    at the University of  Sunderland  and  has  been  awarded  the  degree.
    Further he claims to have taken the IELTS test on several occasions and
    consistently scored 5.5.  Further to that there appears to have been an
    interview before the Borders Officer.  Parts  of  that  interview  have
    been submitted as evidence to the Tribunal.

12. Material in a sense is the judge's approach to the evidence and whether
    in concluding that it had not been proved that  the  Claimant  obtained
    the relevant certificate by fraud or dishonesty, the judge had assessed
    the evidence in accordance with  case  law.   In  that  regard  I  draw
    attention to the cases of:-

         Mehmood [2015] EWCA Civ 744

         Sood v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 833

         Gazi [2015] UKUT 327

         Jakhu [2015] UKUT 693

13. The case of Gazi had the advantage of having the expert report  from  a
    Dr Harrison.  Dr Harrison's report was considered with care and he  had
    raised certain reservations with regard to the approach taken by ETS in
    assessing tests and the justification for the conclusions reached.  One
    only has to consider paragraph 20 of the decision in Gazi in  which  Dr
    Harrison sets out a number of issues that have to be considered.

14. The conclusions from the cases however are to the effect that  one  has
    to make a case by case assessment of the Claimant's  position.   Whilst
    in principle the evidence from ETS in the form of the  statements  from
    Mr Millington and Miss Collins would be sufficient without more to come
    to a conclusion that an  applicant  had  obtained  an  IELTS  or  TOEIC
    certificate by an improper means, there was always the  possibility  of
    false positives and there was certainly an assessment of  the  evidence
    to be made by those in the First-tier Tribunal as  to  the  surrounding
    facts.

15. It is clear from paragraph 40 of Gazi that these must be considered  on
    a case by case basis assessing  an  individual  Claimant's  ability  in
    language, the  circumstances  surrounding  his  taking  the  test,  his
    academic history and his previous life events in assessing  whether  or
    not the case that they have not obtained a certificate by fraud is made
    out.  However care  has  to  be  taken  as  well  to  ensure  that  the
    responsibility of proving fraud is  still  the  responsibility  of  the
    Respondent under the case of AA (Nigeria) v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 773.

16. It is in the light of the  case  law  that  one  has  to  consider  the
    approach of the judge to the facts in the present case.

17. The judge clearly at paragraph 22 has assessed the evidence by ETS  and
    found that that was sufficient reason  for  the  SSHD  to  make  proper
    enquiries about the Claimant.  However the judge has gone  on  to  note
    the  interview  with  the  Claimant.   The  judge  has  considered  the
    interview and in paragraph 23 of the judgment clearly  finds  that  the
    answers given by the Claimant at the interview  were  relevant  to  the
    questions that were being put to him.  The Claimant also gave  evidence
    in English before the judge.  The  judge  having  carefully  considered
    those factors and having taken  account  also  of  the  fact  that  the
    Claimant  had  managed  to  obtain  a  degree  course  from  Sunderland
    University  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  Respondent  had   not
    adequately dealt with  the  Claimant's  answers  in  interview  or  the
    Claimant's ability in English.   There  was  no  statement  or  reasons
    indicating that the Claimant's answers in interview were rejected.  The
    judge has therefore properly assessed all of the facts and was entitled
    on the basis of the evidence and  the  case  law  outlined  to  make  a
    specific finding that the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    had not made  out  that  the  Claimant  had  exercised  deception  when
    applying for leave to remain in the past.  The judge  was  entitled  to
    conclude that on the basis of the evidence it had not been  shown  that
    the Claimant had obtained  the  IELTS  certificates  by  deception  and
    therefore the decision to refuse the Claimant leave to  enter  was  not
    justified.

18. The judge has properly  considered  the  issues  before  him.   He  has
    properly approached the evidence by ETS, Mr Millington and Miss Collins
    and has given valid  reasons  that  that  of  itself  would  have  been
    sufficient.  However taking account of  the  other  evidence  that  was
    before him he was entitled to conclude that he was not  satisfied  that
    the Claimant had indeed obtained the IELTS certificates by deception or
    fraud.  In the light of that the judge was entitled  to  conclude  that
    the appeal should be allowed.

19. There is no material error of law in the decision made  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.  The  decision  to  allow  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules stands.

Decision

There is no material error of law.

The decision to allow the appeal stands.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure

