
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                               Appeal
Number: IA/48885/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |                Decision & Reasons   |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 12 February 2016                   |                On 22 February 2016  |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                           MISS ELNARA KARAMATOVA
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:        Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting
                    Officer
For the Respondent:     Ms J Norman, counsel instructed by Sterling & Law
                    Associates LLP


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Traynor (hereinafter referred to as the FTTJ), promulgated on 25 August
    2015, in which he allowed an appeal against the respondent's  decision,
    dated 11 November 2014, to refuse to vary  the  respondent's  leave  to
    remain and to remove her from the United Kingdom under  section  47  of
    the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge McDade on
    18 December 2015.

Anonymity

 3. No direction has been made previously, and I see no reason for one now.

Background

 4. The respondent arrived in the United Kingdom on 4 September  2004  with
    leave to enter as a student. Further periods of leave  to  remain  were
    granted, following timely applications, in the same capacity  until  31
    July 2009. An in time application  made  on  21  July  2009  which  was
    rejected on 4 August 2009.

 5. On 7 August 2009 the respondent applied, out  of  time,  for  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 4 (General) student.  That  application  was  refused,
    with no right of appeal. On 24 October 2009 the respondent applied, out
    of time, for leave under Tier 4, which was  granted  from  15  December
    2009 until 23 December 2010. Further successful, in time,  applications
    were made under Tier 4 and Tier 1 (post-study work) with the respondent
    granted leave to remain until 30 August 2014.  On 12 August  2014,  she
    applied, in  time,  for  indefinite  leave  to  remain  based  on  long
    residence (10 years)

 6. The said application for indefinite leave to remain was refused  on  11
    November 2014. According to the reasons for refusal letter of the  same
    date, it was not accepted that the  appellant  had  acquired  10  years
    continuous lawful leave and her application under the Rules was refused
    under paragraph 276B(i)(a). Reference was made to her position  between
    5 August 2009 and 14 December 2009 when it was considered that she  was
    without  lawful  leave.  The  Secretary   of   State   considered   the
    respondent's private life under paragraph 276ADE but concluded that she
    met none of the residence or age requirements.

 7. The Secretary of State further commented that the  respondent  retained
    ties to Turkmenistan as she had travelled home during her stay  in  the
    United Kingdom and that there were "no known reasons  why  (she)  could
    not be expected to return home. Finally,  there  were  said  to  be  no
    sufficiently compassionate or compelling issues, which  would  make  it
    appropriate for the respondent to be allowed to remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom exceptionally.

 8. In the concise grounds of appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  it  was
    argued that  the  Secretary  of  State  ought  to  have  exercised  her
    discretion differently; that the decision breached Article 8 ECHR owing
    to the respondent's close links to the United Kingdom and lack of links
    to Turkmenistan; there were said  to  be  mitigating  circumstances  in
    relation to her  applications  made  in  2009;  the  respondent  feared
    persecution in Turkmenistan owing to converting to Christianity and she
    was undergoing treatment in the United Kingdom which was not  available
    in Turkmenistan.

The hearing before the FTTJ

 9. The FTTJ heard the appeal in the absence of  a  representative  of  the
    Secretary of State.  He allowed the appeal under  paragraphs  276B  and
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules. In relation to paragraph  276ADE,  the
    FTTJ accepted that the appellant's  religious  conversion  as  well  as
    being a Russian speaker would prevent her from  gaining  employment  or
    carrying  out  her  private  life  in  a  meaningful  way.  The   FTTJ,
    ultimately, rejected the  respondent's  claim  that  she  would  suffer
    inhuman  and  degrading  treatment  in  Turkmenistan  because  of   her
    religious beliefs or owing to her medical problems.

The grounds of appeal

10. In essence, the grounds argued; (1), that the  FTTJ  had  entered  into
    procedural unfairness in hearing the  appeal  in  the  absence  of  the
    Secretary  of  State's  representative  in  circumstances   where   the
    respondent's evidence was not produced until the  day  of  the  hearing
    and; (2), that the  FTTJ  had  materially  misdirected  himself  and/or
    failed to give  reasons  with  regard  to  his  reliance  on  Rodriguez
    (Flexibility  policy)  [2013]  UKUT  0042  and  Basnet   (validity   of
    application - respondent) [2012] UKUT 00113(IAC).

11. The FTTJ granting permission did so on the  basis  that  there  was  an
    arguable  error  in  relation  to  an  "allegation  of  legal  ambush."
    Permission was not explicitly refused in relation to ground 2.

12. In her response of 8 January 2016, the respondent opposed  the  appeal,
    stating with regard to Ground 1, the Secretary of State had been put on
    notice as to the appellant's religious conversion as documents relating
    to this had been included with her application for settlement.  It  was
    said that the FTTJ had not allowed the appeal on Article 3 grounds  but
    under Article 8, within the Rules.

13. In respect of ground 2, it was contended that permission had  not  been
    granted. Alternatively, it was argued that the  FTTJ  was  entitled  to
    find  that  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision-making  process   was
    procedurally unfair  given  the  "unreasoned  rejection"  of  the  2009
    application.

The hearing

14. At the hearing before me, Ms Fijiwala  promptly  advised  me  that  the
    Secretary of State wished to  withdraw  the  appeal,  with  a  view  to
    granting the respondent  indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom on the basis that her appeal had been allowed  under  paragraph
    276B of the Rules as well as paragraph 276ADE.

  15. I accordingly considered the  following  provisions  of  the  Tribunal
      Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008;

      17.-(1) Subject to paragraph (2), a party may give notice of the
withdrawal of its case, or   any  part of it-
      (a) [ ] by sending or delivering to the Upper Tribunal a written
notice of withdrawal; or
      (b) orally at a hearing.
      (2) Notice of withdrawal will not take effect unless the Upper
Tribunal consents to the     withdrawal except in relation to an
application for permission to appeal.

  16. In view of the fact that the respondent  had  been  granted  leave  to
      remain in the  United  Kingdom,  I  was  prepared  to  consent  to  Ms
      Fijiwala's oral notice of withdrawal. I therefore had no need to  hear
      from Ms Norman.


Decision

I consent to the Secretary of State's application to withdraw the appeal.


Signed                                       Date: 14 February 2016



T Kamara
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal













