
[pic]

|Upper Tribunal                       |                                     |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)     |Appeal Number: IA/48608/2013         |
|                                     |                                     |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Centre City Tower                | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 12 November 2015                       | On 16 February 2016              |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             NADINE ROSE GARRETT
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I see no need for, and do not make, an order restricting reporting about
    this case.

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of the  Respondent,  hereinafter
    "the Claimant", against a decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  on  1
    November 2013 refusing to  vary  her  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

 3. It was her case that she was entitled to leave because she  had  accrued
    ten  years'  continuous  lawful  residence.   The  difficulty  is   that
    examination of her record showed that she had not completed  ten  years'
    lawful residence because her right to  be  in  the  United  Kingdom  had
    lapsed for a period of about three months beginning in March  2010.   As
    is made clear, the Secretary of State has some discretion and will treat
    a break in lawful residence  as  excusable  if  particularly  compelling
    circumstances arise.  Examples  given  include  an  applicant  being  in
    hospital and too ill to attend to her affairs or the delay being  caused
    by deficiencies on the part of the Secretary of State.

 4. Mr Mills said that the policy has now been explained  a  little  further
    and an example is given of the Secretary of State frustrating a person's
    application  by  wrongly  retaining  a   person's   passport.   However,
    discretion will only be exercised in an applicant's favour  where  there
    is something very compelling about the person's individual circumstances
    or where the Secretary of State has acted badly.

 5. Significantly in this case the claimant had not made such a claim  until
    she gave oral evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal  and  it  is  not
    plain what she said in her oral evidence  that  prompted  the  judge  to
    conclude that there were circumstances that required  discretion  to  be
    exercised in her favour here.

 6. The point is dealt with most fully at paragraph  12  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's determination. The claimant  accepted  that  the  application
    that was made on 23 July 2010 successfully was out of time  by  some  97
    days. The claimant said that the gap had been caused by her  application
    being submitted incompletely or being perceived to  be  incomplete.  The
    Home Office returned it to her because a page was missing.  She believed
    that she attended to  the  papers  promptly  and  returned  the  missing
    document which related to the college that she was attending.

 7. It has never been suggested that the claimant was an untruthful  witness
    and I note that she conducted herself before  me  in  a  respectful  and
    straightforward manner.  However  I  do  not  see  how  the  explanation
    advanced by the claimant can possibly be right.   This  is  because  the
    explanation that she offered was to do with proving the college that she
    was attending but the application  that  succeeded  did  not  relate  to
    study. Rather, the application that succeeded was an  application  as  a
    Tier 2 worker, in fact a care worker.  She had changed the  whole  basis
    on which her application  was  to  be  brought.   It  follows  that  the
    explanation given cannot be a proper explanation for the delay  although
    it is not clear that it is an explanation that ought to have led to  the
    application being allowed in any event.

 8. I make it plain that I am not saying that the claimant was untruthful at
    any stage. She said she could not really remember. She had been  looking
    at her papers and was doing her best to reconstruct what  had  happened.
    That may very well be right.  People who are  seeking  to  extend  their
    stay in the United Kingdom do not necessarily understand the nuances  of
    Immigration Rules. Indeed people whose business it is to apply them  are
    puzzled sometimes.

 9. I can  see  nothing  in  the  papers  that  would  justify  the  judge's
    conclusion for the reason given or at all.

10. Certainly the fact that the claimant was given permission to stay  as  a
    Tier 2 Migrant is not indicative that the application was made in  time.
    As Mr Mills has reminded me  it  is  not  a  requirement  of  a  Tier  2
    application that the person present in the United Kingdom has leave when
    the application is made so the fact that she was given  leave  does  not
    indicate that she had leave when the application was made.

11. One of the few things that is absolutely clear in the case is  that  the
    application that was successful was made 97 days late.

12. There is nothing before me that gives me any reason  to  understand  how
    the First-tier Tribunal could have reached the decision that it did  and
    I must therefore decide  that  it  was  wrong  in  law  because  it  was
    unsupported by the evidence.  I must set aside the decision.  I  set  it
    aside and I have to substitute  a  decision  dismissing  the  claimant's
    appeal against the Secretary of State's decision.

13. I add as a rider to this simply for the benefit  of  anyone  considering
    any kind of enforcement action that  the  claimant  says  that  she  has
    subsequently married and prefers to be known by her married name and her
    husband is an EEA national and an application has been made for  an  EEA
    residence card.  Clearly I am in no position to make any  comment  about
    the prospects of success of that application but it is right  to  record
    it on the face of this decision.

Decision

    The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed.

    The First-tier Tribunal's decision is set aside.

    I substitute a decision dismissing the claimant's appeal.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 11 February 2016               |








