
[pic]

Upper Tribunal         Appeal Number
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)        IA/48395/2013
            IA/48396/2013
            IA/48397/2013
            IA/48398/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard                   at                    Field                    House
                                             Determination promulgated
On 14 May 2014         On 9 June 2014


                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                              Appellant
                                     and

                              1) Shameem Begum
                        2) Abdul Kadar Shahul Hameed
                           3) Iqra Tanzeal Shahul
                          4) Arshad Muhammad Shahul
                         (Anonymity directions not made)
                                                   Respondents

Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr. S. Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Ms. D.  Qureshi  of  Counsel  instructed  by  Bukhari
                       Chambers Solicitors.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. These are linked appeals against the decisions of First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Napthine promulgated on 18 March 2014, allowing the  appeals  of
      Ms Shameem Begum, his husband and children against  the  Secretary  of
      State's decisions dated 29 October 2013 to refuse leave to remain  and
      to remove them from the UK.


   2. Although in the proceedings before me the Secretary of  State  is  the
      appellant, and Ms Begum and her family are the  respondents,  for  the
      sake  of  consistency  with  the  proceedings  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal I shall hereafter refer to Ms Begum and  her  family  as  the
      Appellants and the Secretary of State as the Respondent.


Background

   3. The Appellants are a family:  the  First  and  Second  Appellants  are
      married; the Third and Fourth Appellants are their daughter  and  son,
      born on 16 February 2004 and 27 November 2011 respectively.  They  are
      citizens of India.


   4. The First and Second Appellants entered the UK on 9 November 2002 with
      visit visas valid until 12 December 2002. They overstayed.  They  made
      no  attempt  to  regularise  their  immigration  position   until   an
      application was made on 5 August 2011 for  leave  to  remain  pleading
      Article 8 of the ECHR. The Third and Fourth Appellants  were  born  in
      the UK.


   5. The application of 5 August 2011 (which pre-dated  the  birth  of  the
      Fourth Appellant) was refused. A  further  application  was  made  and
      refused on 15 May 2013. Judicial review  proceedings  followed,  which
      were  settled  upon  the  Respondent  undertaking  to  reconsider  the
      application in light of section 55 of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
      Immigration Act 2009 and the changes to the Immigration Rules made  on
      9 July 2012. This culminated in the decisions set out  in  a  'reasons
      for refusal' letter ('RFRL') dated 29 October 2013,  and  the  removal
      decisions that are the subject of the proceedings herein.


   6. The Appellants appealed to the IAC.


   7. The First-tier Tribunal Judge allowed the appeals for reasons set  out
      in his determination. Essentially, he found that the  Third  Appellant
      met the requirements of paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules
      (paragraphs  24-32),  and  that  it  would   be   a   disproportionate
      interference with the Article 8  rights  of  the  First,  Second,  and
      Fourth  Appellants  if  they  were  to  be  removed  from  the  UK  in
      consequence of the Respondent's decisions (paragraphs 33-42).


   8. The Respondent sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal which
      was granted on 7 April 2014 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson.


Change of Circumstance

   9. It was a feature of the Third Appellants case that at the date of  the
      hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  she  had  an   outstanding
      application for British citizenship, pursuant to section 1(4)  of  the
      British Nationality Act 1981. The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  referred
      to this at paragraph 32 of the determination. Although the  Respondent
      did not seek to make any issue  in  this  regard  in  the  grounds  in
      support of the application for permission to appeal,  Judge  Robertson
      in granting permission  observed  "as  A3's  application  for  British
      citizenship is not in  fact  confirmation  that  citizenship  will  be
      granted, it is arguable that the Judge has not specifically stated why
      it would be unreasonable for A3 to relocate to India with  her  family
      unit....".


  10. The Appellants' solicitors have written to the Upper Tribunal  (letter
      dated 22 April 2014) confirming that the Third Appellant has now  been
      granted  British  citizenship   and   enclosing   a   Certificate   of
      Registration dated 18 March 2014 (the  date  of  promulgation  of  the
      determination).


  11. In recognition of this circumstance Mr Whitwell indicated that he  had
      sought instructions as to the possibility  of  reaching  "a  pragmatic
      solution" to the appeal. However, he was unable  to  obtain  any  such
      instructions and in the circumstances  indicated  that  he  wished  to
      proceed with the challenge to the First-tier Tribunal's decisions.


  12. For the avoidance of any doubt, in considering the issue of  error  of
      law I have proceeded on the basis that the Third Appellant had not  at
      the date of  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  received
      confirmation of her citizenship. I discuss this matter in more  detail
      below.


Consideration of the Issues

  13. The principal basis of the Respondent's challenge in  respect  of  the
      Third Appellant is that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  misdirected
      himself by failing to have regard to the 'reasonableness  test'  under
      paragraph 276ADE(iv). Further in this context it was pleaded that  the
      Judge had "not  given  any  consideration  to  the  Third  Appellant's
      position if she were relocated to India  with  the  remainder  of  the
      family unit".


  14. The substance of the challenge to the decision in respect of the Third
      Appellant was repeated by way of challenge to  the  decisions  of  the
      other Appellants, it being pleaded that inadequate  reasons  had  been
      given as to why the family unit could not relocate to India.


  15. Mr Whitwell relied upon, and amplified, these Grounds.


  16. The Judge considered the position of the Third Appellant  first.  This
      was appropriate given that  the  best  interests  of  children  are  a
      primary consideration.


  17. The Judge appropriately identified that the Respondent had  not  given
      consideration to the Third Appellant's case under paragraph 276ADE(iv)
      as a minor who had lived continuously in the UK for at least 7  years.
      However, at paragraph 25 the Judge sets out an incomplete  version  of
      paragraph 276ADE(iv) leaving out the wording added to the Rule  by  an
      amendment  made  on  13  December  2012.   The   Judge   omitted   the
      'reasonableness test': "and it would not be reasonable to  expect  the
      applicant to leave the UK".


  18. On the face of it this appears to be a misdirection in law.


  19. Ms Qureshi argues, however, that the Judge nonetheless must  have  had
      regard to reasonableness because otherwise  the  matters  set  out  at
      paragraphs 28-32 are otiose. In the alternative, by reference  to  the
      matters set out at paragraphs 28-32, Ms Qureshi submits that the Judge
      would have in any event reached the same conclusion, and so any  error
      is immaterial.


  20. I note the following:

(i) If the Judge was confining himself to  an  interpretation  of  paragraph
      276ADE(iv) that only relied upon fulfilling the  specified  period  of
      residence, he could have concluded his considerations at  the  end  of
      paragraph 26.

(ii) Instead the Judge concludes at paragraph 27,  not  that  the  Appellant
      met the requirements of the Rule, but that the  Respondent's  decision
      was wrong in law  because  of  the  failure  "to  consider  the  Third
      Appellant's rights under paragraph 276ADE".

(iii) In such circumstances, contextually paragraphs 24-27 may  be  read  as
      addressing  the  first  limb  of  paragraph  276ADE(iv),  which  is  a
      necessary premise, before going on to  consider  the  second  limb  of
      reasonableness.

(iv) The considerations at paragraphs 28, 29, 30, and 32  are  not  directly
      relevant to the first limb, but are relevant  matters  in  considering
      reasonableness.

(v) The Judge directed himself to  the  case  of  Azimi-Moayed  [2013]  UKUT
      00197 (IAC) (see paragraph 29). Azimi-Moayed is exactly concerned with
      the reasonableness test - as indeed is indicated by  Judge  Napthine's
      use of the word "undesirable". If there was  no  reasonableness  test,
      and the ambit of paragraph 276ADE(iv) was limited to  a  consideration
      of the period of time spent in the UK,  there  would  be  no  need  to
      consider issues of desirability/undesirability.


  21. It is unfortunate that the Judge was not more careful and  clearer  in
      properly identifying the full terms of paragraph 276ADE(iv),  and  was
      not  more  precise  in  identifying  that  he  was   considering   the
      reasonableness test. Nonetheless, in my judgement, I am persuaded that
      that is, in substance, what he did.


  22. As regards the specifics of paragraph 32, and with the observations of
      Judge Robertson in mind, I note that there is no discretionary element
      to section 1(4) of the British Nationality Act 1981. A person born  in
      the UK who does not otherwise become a British citizen  by  virtue  of
      that birth "shall be entitled" on application  for  registration  made
      after attaining the age of 10, to be registered as a British  citizen,
      providing they meet  the  residential  requirements  set  out  in  the
      subsection. Judge Napthine found as a fact that the Appellant did meet
      those requirements, and I do not understand that to have ever been  in
      issue. Whilst Judge Robertson may have been accurate in  stating  that
      an application was not confirmation, on the facts as  found  by  Judge
      Napthine  the  Appellant   was   nonetheless   entitled   to   British
      citizenship.


  23. In my judgement  this  is  significant  because  it  is  in  effect  a
      particularly significant element in answering the reasonableness test.
      Save in very  exceptional  circumstances  it  cannot  be  said  to  be
      reasonable  to  remove  an  individual  who  is  entitled  to  British
      citizenship and is merely awaiting the formal  confirmation  of  such,
      given that a British citizen is not subject to immigration control and
      cannot be removed.


  24. This is particularly significant in  the  context  of  a  child  whose
      parents have a  poor  immigration  history  -  as  here.  I  make  the
      following observations:

(i) As is evident from its heading and  its  opening  sentence  -  paragraph
      276ADE is concerned with private  life,  not  family  life  (which  is
      covered by Appendix FM). In this context it is not apparent  that  the
      concept of  reasonableness  is  any  different  from  the  concept  of
      proportionality.

(ii) The first limb of 276ADE(iv), and in particular the  qualifying  period
      of seven years, is a continuation of earlier policies (eg DP5/96), and
      reflects jurisprudence pursuant to those policies  -  and  again  most
      recently   reflected   in   Azimi-Moayed.   Indeed    the    different
      considerations that apply to children are expressly recognised in that
      the Rules preserve a distinction by requiring an  adult  generally  to
      show longer periods of living in the UK. The first limb of  276ADE(iv)
      gives effect to the widely recognised and  understood  principle  that
      generally a child who has been continuously living in  the  UK  for  a
      period of seven years will have established ties; the  second  limb  -
      the reasonableness test - is essentially a recognition  that  as  with
      any Article 8 assessment - a proportionality analysis is required i.e.
      there may be countervailing features.

(iii) In my judgement the fact that a child applicant  may  be  returned  to
      the country of their parents' origin or nationality in the company  of
      their parents is not such a countervailing feature in itself. The fact
      of return in the company of parents does not diminish  the  extent  of
      the interference with the child's own private life (as  distinct  from
      family life): the level of disruption to the ties that the  child  has
      developed in the UK over the preceding seven years or more will be the
      same irrespective of the child being in the company of a parent. It is
      those ties outside the family -  the  ties  of  private  life  -  that
      paragraph  276ADE(iv)  seeks  to  protect  pursuant  to  the   State's
      obligation under Article 8.

(iv) However, that is not to say that the conduct of  a  parent  or  parents
      may not be a relevant feature. It has always been the  case  that  the
      policies that preceded 276ADE(iv) sought to strike a  balance  between
      safeguarding the interests of  children  who  have  established  close
      connections with the UK over a significant period  of  time,  and  the
      need to ensure that no incentive is provided to  parents  to  seek  to
      circumvent and abuse the system of immigration control. As such whilst
      significant weight was to be accorded to  a  period  of  residence  of
      seven years - to an extent that such a period of residence would  mean
      that enforcement action would not normally proceed - it was  a  common
      theme that the presence  of  countervailing  factors  meant  that  the
      'normal' or 'usual' expectation would not be followed. Thus,  where  a
      parent had an appalling immigration history  it  might  be  said  that
      enforcement action should be taken against a  parent,  notwithstanding
      that this would involve the removal of a child with 7 years  residence
      and the disruption of the child's ties to the UK.

(v)  Necessarily  a  stronger  countervailing  factor  or  factors  will  be
      requisite where a child has been resident for 10 years rather  than  7
      years.

(vi) On  the  particular  facts  of  this  case  the  Judge  recognised  the
      countervailing factor of the  parents'  poor  immigration  history  at
      paragraph 41. However, he also noted that there were no aggravating or
      egregious circumstances.


  25. This in effect means that even if Judge  Napthine  had  not  expressly
      turned his mind to  the  reasonableness  test,  his  observations  and
      conclusions at paragraphs 32 and 41 indicate that he would  only  have
      come to a favourable decision in respect of the Third Appellant  under
      paragraph 276ADE(iv).


  26. As regards the challenge to the decisions  in  respect  of  the  other
      Appellants under Article 8 of the ECHR, this is essentially pleaded as
      a 'reasons' challenge, and relies upon the challenge in respect of the
      Third Appellant - which I have rejected.


  27. Although not formulated this way by the Respondent, for my own part  I
      found the approach adopted by the Judge as indicated by paragraphs  40
      and 42 troubling. The Judge appears to have  approached  the  parents'
      cases on the basis that if they were not allowed to remain in the  UK,
      there would be a family  separation.  This  is  a  wholly  unrealistic
      hypothesis and not founded on evidence. Plainly, in the absence of any
      evidence to the contrary, the likelihood would be that if the  parents
      were not permitted to stay in the UK  the  whole  family  would  leave
      together  notwithstanding  that  one  of  the  children  was  able  to
      establish a basis to remain (whether through 276ADE or  her  impending
      grant of citizenship). The parents' case to remain is not grounded  on
      avoiding  splitting  the  family,  but  on  the  basis  that  if  they
      themselves are not allowed to remain the Third Appellant would have to
      leave the UK with them, and  that  would  involve  a  disproportionate
      interference with  her  private  life  established  in  the  UK  -  as
      recognised by the finding that she met the requirements of 276ADE(iv).


  28. The removal of the parents with the concomitant  constructive  removal
      of the Third Appellant would be an interference with the private  life
      of the Third Appellant. It is clear - pursuant to paragraph 41 -  that
      the  Judge  did  not   consider   there   existed   such   significant
      countervailing factors to make this  justifiable.  On  this  basis  it
      seems to me that had the Judge posed himself the right question it  is
      inevitable that he would have concluded that removal  of  the  parents
      would have involved a disproportionate interference with the Article 8
      rights of the Third Appellant. Pursuant to  the  principle  in  Beoku-
      Betts this renders any decision to remove the parents to  be  contrary
      to the UK's obligations under the ECHR. The  position  of  the  Fourth
      Appellant - still very much an infant -  inevitably  in  turn  follows
      that of his parents.


  29. Accordingly, in as much as I consider there may have been an error  of
      approach in this regard, it seems to me that it was immaterial because
      the outcome would have been the same in any event.


  30. In all of the circumstances I reject the Respondent's challenge to the
      decisions of the First-tier Tribunal. There was no material  error  of
      law and  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Napthine
      stands.


Decisions

  31. The First-tier Tribunal Judge made no material error of law,  and  his
      decisions stand. The appeals remain allowed.





Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis      6 June 2013



