
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
IA/48840/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House               |           Decision & Reasons        |
|                                   |Promulgated                          |
|On 5th October 2016                |           On 19th October 2016      |
|                                   |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD

                                   Between

                            miss salimatou jallow
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Eluwa, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of Gambia who applied for a residence  card
    as confirmation of a right to reside here as an unmarried partner of  a
    Netherlands national.  The application was rejected and her  subsequent
    appeal  to  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Bart-Stewart  dismissed  in  a
    decision promulgated on 11th April 2016.   The  judge  found  that  the
    issue focused on whether the marriage was one  of  convenience  as  the
    Respondent had asserted.  Having considered the evidence  presented  to
    her the judge found that the Appellant had  failed  to  show  that  her
    marriage to the EEA national was not one of convenience before going on
    to dismiss the appeal.

 2. Grounds of application were lodged indicating that the judge  erred  in
    relation to the burden of proof per Papajorgji (EEA spouse  -  marriage
    of convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT 00038.  The judge had also erred  in
    finding that the marriage was  one  of  convenience  and  there  was  a
    mistaken  basis  for  an  adverse  credibility  finding   against   the
    Appellant. Permission to appeal was granted.

 3. A Rule 24 Notice was lodged by the Secretary of State  submitting  that
    the Tribunal had directed itself appropriately and had properly applied
    the correct burden of proof and found that  the  marriage  was  one  of
    convenience for reasons given at paragraphs 26 to 28 of the decision.

 4. Thus the matter came before me on the above date.

 5.  For the Appellant Mr Eluwa appeared and said it was important to  note
    that the Home Office bundle had not been made available to  the  judge.
    Had it been so then much of the Appellant's and  Sponsor's  case  would
    have been confirmed.  The Respondent  had  been  relying  on  suspicion
    about the marriage and there was  no  other  evidence  to  support  the
    conclusion that the marriage was a sham one.  As such the appeal should
    be allowed and then sent back to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  fresh
    hearing.  In response to submissions by Mr Jarvis,  Mr  Eluwa  told  me
    that both the Sponsor and Appellant were in court today.

 6. For the Home Office it  was  said  the  application  was  misconceived.
    There had been an extensive refusal letter challenging the  failure  of
    the Appellant to attend an interview but that issue was not in dispute.
     Having raised the issue of a sham marriage it was to be expected  that
    the Appellant and Sponsor would attempt to rebut that  by  giving  oral
    evidence but what had happened in this case was that  the  Sponsor  had
    not appeared at the hearing.  As such the judge had  been  entitled  to
    regard this as a negative credibility factor to weigh in  the  balance.
    The judge had properly reasoned the decision and there was no error  in
    law.

 7. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

 8. Before me the  parties  agreed  that  Papajorgji  was  good  law.   The
    European Commission has produced a handbook with the expressed  aim  of
    helping national  authorities  tackle  the  abuse  which  marriages  of
    convenience represent without compromising  the  free  movement  of  EU
    citizens and the family members who are acting bona fide.   The  latest
    edition of that handbook (26th September 2014) defines  a  marriage  of
    convenience as a marriage contracted for  the  predominant  purpose  of
    conferring a right of free movement and residence under  EU  law  to  a
    person who would otherwise not have such a right.  The key  is  whether
    there is abuse; the abuse of  conduct  is  linked  to  the  absence  of
    intention of the married couple to create a family as a married  couple
    and to lead  a  "genuine  marital  life".   The  abuse  of  conduct  is
    represented by bad faith of the spouses or one of them.

 9. In this case the issue was clearly raised by the Secretary of State  in
    the refusal letter.  The question for the judge was, in  the  light  of
    the totality of  information  before  her  to  state  whether  she  was
    satisfied that it was more probable than not that this was  a  marriage
    of convenience.  The judge had to consider all  the  factors  and  make
    clear findings before coming to a decision.

10. The curious element in this case is that the  Sponsor  elected  not  to
    attend the hearing to give  evidence.   We  know  this  because  having
    refused an adjournment request the judge was told by  Mr  Karim  acting
    for the Appellant that, having  taken  instructions  "the  Sponsor  had
    failed to attend the hearing".  It has to be noted that this was in the
    context that the Secretary of State did not accept that  the  Appellant
    and Sponsor were in a durable relationship for the purpose of  the  EEA
    Regulations.

11. Whatever the  merits  of  the  explanation  for  the  Appellant's  non-
    attendance at interview the burden of proof was  on  the  Appellant  to
    show, as at the date of  the  hearing,  that  she  was  entitled  to  a
    residence card.  In  that  connection  the  judge  made  clear  factual
    findings at paragraph 26 to 28 inclusive.  In particular she noted  the
    Appellant's claim that her husband had encouraged her to  get  pregnant
    and then changed his mind was not credible.  On the face it and in  the
    absence of the Sponsor this  was  a  conclusion  which  the  judge  was
    entitled to make.  Indeed it can be said that absent  the  evidence  of
    the Sponsor it is very difficult indeed to see how the judge could have
    decided otherwise than to go on, as she did, and dismiss the appeal.

12. As such there is no error of law in the  judge's  decision  which  must
    stand.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald        19th October 2016
