

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/48398/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 14 November 2016                       |On 25 November 2016              |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                  KAREN [S]

                          (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Murria (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
name)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.  This is the appellant's appeal,  brought  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  with
   permission which was granted by a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal,  from
   a decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Parkes)  dismissing  her
   appeal against the Secretary of State's  decision  of  13  November  2014
   refusing to grant leave to enter or remain on human  rights  grounds  and
   deciding to remove her from the United Kingdom.

2. By way of brief background, the appellant is a national of  Jamaica.  She
   was born on 6 April 1970.  She entered the  UK  in  July  of  1999  as  a
   visitor and was given leave to enter on that basis until 31 January 2000.
   She subsequently obtained further leave as  a  student  until  30  August
   2000. She then made a series of other unsuccessful applications for leave
   including the most recent one which led to the  refusal  of  13  November
   2014 and, ultimately, to this appeal. That  application  had  been  based
   upon a claimed relationship with a British citizen but that  relationship
   is now at an end. Indeed, the appeal before Judge Parkes was pursued  not
   on the basis of a relationship at all, but on the basis  of  family  life
   with other UK based family members. As to that,  the  appellant  has  two
   adult children in  the  UK.   The  first  of  those,  her  daughter  [K],
   currently has limited leave to remain though it is  said  on  her  behalf
   that it is likely that she will ultimately be granted indefinite leave to
   remain. The  basis  for  thinking  so  is  that  she  has  a  child  (the
   appellant's grandchild) who was born on 5 April 2015 and who is a British
   citizen. The second adult child, a son [P], also  has  limited  leave  to
   remain in the UK. He too has a British citizen child  (therefore  another
   grandchild of the appellant) who was born on 14 January 2014. As  to  the
   living arrangements as I understand them,  [P],  his  partner  and  their
   child live together in a single family  unit.  [K],  her  child  and  the
   appellant live together in a different family unit.  There  is,  however,
   interaction between the two units.

3.  The appellant's application was considered by  the  Secretary  of  State
   under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights  (ECHR).   The
   Secretary of State did not think that the appellant could  bring  herself
   within any of what might be termed  the  Article  8  related  immigration
   rules nor that she should succeed under  Article  8  outside  the  rules.
   Before Judge Parkes it seems to have been  argued,  primarily  at  least,
   that either the appellant should succeed under paragraph  276ADE  of  the
   Immigration Rules (and in particular that there would be very significant
   obstacles to her reintegration into Jamaica) or that she  should  succeed
   under Article 8 outside the rules given the above family connections.

4. As to the first argument, Judge Parkes  decided,  amongst  other  things,
   that the appellant had been born and had grown up in  Jamaica,  that  she
   was familiar with the culture there, that there was no evidence she would
   face any difficulties from former partners in Jamaica, that  it  had  not
   been demonstrated that she would not receive financial support  from  her
   UK based family in order to aid resettlement in Jamaica and that although
   there was evidence that she had been suffering from depression she was no
   longer taking medication. The Judge concluded that  "it  cannot  be  said
   that there would be very significant obstacles to her reintegration".  He
   then turned his mind to the arguments which  had  been  put  outside  the
   rules and which related to family life. In dealing with  that  aspect  of
   the appeal he said this;

           "18. The issue remains whether the circumstances are  such  that
           the Appellant should be allowed to remain in the UK outside  the
           Immigration Rules. This includes an evaluation of the life  that
           she has established in the UK and  the  best  interests  of  her
           children who would be affected by her removal.

           19. As noted above the Appellant has, for most of  her  time  in
           the UK, not had leave  to  remain  and  her  presence  has  been
           largely illegal and intermittently precarious. She had never had
           any expectations that she would be permitted to remain  and  has
           previously indicated her intention to  return  to  Jamaica.  Her
           situation is entirely of her own making and it is not  that  she
           is in a position that the rules do not contemplate,  she  cannot
           meet the requirements of the rules.

           20. So far as her adult children are concerned they too  are  in
           the UK precariously. It may be that she has lived with them  and
           is doing so at the moment but  this  application,  and  previous
           applications she has made, have been based on her  relationships
           with other adults and not on any ties that she has with her  own
           relatives. It is only since the ending of her relationship  with
           * that the relationship with her children and grandchildren have
           assumed the importance they now have in this appeal.

           21. Given her current domestic circumstances I would accept that
           there is, as matters stand, evidence of dependency  between  her
           and her children which is more than would  usually  be  expected
           and so article 8 is engaged. It is a dependency by choice on her
           part as she could have returned to Jamaica many  years  ago  and
           does not need to be in this situation and the importance is also
           reduced by their immigration status. Even if they were  to  gain
           permanent  status  in  due  course  that  does  not  alter   the
           Appellant's own situation and her role in creating it  with  the
           decisions she has made.

           22. In  living  with  her  child  and  providing  care  for  her
           grandchild she obviously  contributes  to  the  running  of  the
           household and reduces expenditure that they would otherwise have
           to make. I  would  acce0t  that  the  family  benefit  from  her
           contribution and that she has a relationship with her grandchild
           which is far closer than it would be if she were to be living in
           Jamaica. There is no  specific  evidence  that  shows  that  the
           Appellant's continued presence in the UK is  necessary  for  the
           development of her grandchild or that  the  child  would  suffer
           unduly if the Appellant were to  leave  the  UK.  The  Appellant
           could move within the  UK  with  the  same  effect  and  if  her
           relationship with her former partner had continued, or were  she
           to start another relationship, her involvement would accordingly
           reduce and the Appellant could not  be  compelled  to  undertake
           family duties.

           23. As article 8 is to be  observed  through  the  lens  of  the
           Immigration  Rules  I  take  into  account  that  although   the
           Appellant is dependent on her children  the  evidence  of  their
           ability to maintain her is limited. Apart  from  the  fact  that
           they do not have the required leave, there  is  no  evidence  to
           show that either earns more than �18,600 a year which  would  be
           required for a spouse/ partner application. I  do  not  see  why
           someone seeking to remain outside  the  rules  should  be  in  a
           better position than someone within the rules.

           24. I take into account the provisions of section  117B  of  the
           2002. The enforcement of immigration control is  in  the  public
           interest. All of the ties that  the  Appellant  has  established
           have been against the background of her being here precariously.
           Her relationships have changed over the years and that with  her
           children  and  grandchild  have  only   recently   assumed   the
           significance they now have and that is against the background of
           leave that they have. The evidence does not  show  that  she  is
           financially independent and it is not clear why she should be in
           a better position than  a  spouse/  partner  joining  a  British
           Citizen. Her relationship with her grandchildren cannot be  said
           to be parental but even if it were there is no expectation  that
           the child would be expected to leave the UK.

           25. There is nothing in the Appellant's circumstances that would
           justify considering the grant of leave outside  the  Immigration
           Rules. If I am wrong about that the circumstances are such  that
           there would be no justification for finding that the Appellant's
           removal would be disproportionate having regard to the situation
           of her family members or her previous health."

5.    An application for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was
   lodged. To some extent those grounds simply contain  factual  assertions.
   To some extend they seem to attempt to criticise what the author  regards
   as findings at paragraphs 4, 5, 6 and 7 of the  determination  but  which
   really consists of a summary of seemingly uncontentious background and  a
   short summary of the grounds of appeal. It is suggested  that  the  Judge
   was wrong to have  concluded  that  the  appellant's  children  only  had
   limited leave to remain although, in fact, as Mr Murria confirmed to  me,
   that was indeed the position notwithstanding that there  may  well  be  a
   strong prospect that, with respect to each of them, indefinite  leave  to
   remain will be granted in due course. There is then what seems to  be  an
   attempt to re-argue matters of fact  regarding  any  risk  the  appellant
   might face from former partners in Jamaica and any difficulty  she  might
   have from a medical perspective. There then follows  what  amounts  to  a
   contention that the Judge has erred in failing to  consider  whether  the
   appellant has a "parental relationship" with  one  of  her  grandchildren
   (the child of [K])  or  in  failing  to  decide  that  there  is  such  a
   relationship such that removing the appellant would be disproportionate.

6.    Permission was granted by a Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  albeit
   that he was clearly unimpressed with certain of  the  grounds  which  had
   been advanced. He said this;

           "3.  The  grounds  are  poorly   drafted.   They   commence   by
           misrepresenting the content of the decision. Paragraphs 4 and  5
           and 6 and 7 do not set out findings of fact, they  are  part  of
           the summary of the respondent's case.

           4. The grounds then proceed to offer a series  of  disagreements
           with the Judge's decision but in general amount to no more  than
           an inappropriate attempt to re-argue the appeal.  Whilst neither
           the appellant nor her adult children have any immigration status
           in the UK and there is no obvious reason  why  any/all  of  them
           could not be  removed  to  Jamaica  in  safety,  it  is  however
           arguable that the Judge failed to engage with the assertion that
           the appellant's grandchildren were British  citizens,  and  that
           she had day to day parental care for them, and that as such  no-
           one within the extended family group could be removed  from  the
           UK. There are obvious difficulties with the presentation of  the
           appellant's case in that way, which the appellant will  need  to
           grapple with before the Upper Tribunal, but it is arguable  that
           the Judge failed to make it clear in his decision  that  he  was
           viewing the article 8 appeal through the correct lens."

7.    Pausing there, and as Mr Murria pointed out to me, the granting  Judge
   does seem to have incorrectly thought that [K] and [P] did not  have  any
   form of leave  to  remain  at  all  (he  said  they  did  not  "have  any
   immigration status in the UK") whereas, in fact, they have limited  leave
   and are on the road to what may become indefinite leave and that has been
   so at all material times.

8.    Permission having been granted, a  hearing  was  convened  before  the
   Upper Tribunal (before me) so that consideration could be  given  to  the
   question of whether or not the Judge had erred in law and,  if  so,  what
   should flow from that. Representation at that hearing  was  as  indicated
   above and I am grateful to both representatives.

9.    Mr Murria suggested that both  the  appellant's  adult  children  were
   likely to be granted indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  due  course.  Two
   British  citizen  children  (the  appellant's  two  grandchildren)   were
   involved. It would be wrong to split up the family. The judgment in R (on
   the application of RK) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
   (s.117B(6;"Parental   relationship")   IJR   (2006)   UKUT   0031   (IAC)
   demonstrated that grandparents could have a "parental relationship"  with
   a grandchild within the meaning of the  term  as  it  is  used  in  those
   immigration rules which seek to give effect to article 8 of the ECHR.  In
   this case there had been evidence before the Judge suggesting that  there
   was such a parental  relationship  but  that  had  been  disregarded.  In
   particular, in that context, Mr Murria took me  to  some  photocopies  of
   photographs of the various family members and to the appellant's  witness
   statement and that of [K]. Mr Mills, for his part, submitted  that  there
   was no merit in the grounds. In RK it had been  said  that  it  was  "not
   impossible" for there to be a parental relationship between a grandparent
   and a grandchild but the benchmark had been set at a very high level.  He
   then contrasted the facts in this  appeal  with  those  obtaining  in  RK
   stressing, in particular, that the appellant had been in the UK illegally
   for a lengthy period of time and that there was nothing to  suggest  that
   her adult daughter was not properly fulfilling the parental role herself.
    Accordingly, the argument could not possibly have been made out  on  the
   facts. It would be irrational to think anything else.  Either  the  Judge
   had not erred at  all  or  if  he  had  erred  through  not  specifically
   addressing the question as to whether the appellant had such  a  parental
   relationship with the child of [K], such  error  could  not  possibly  be
   material.

10.   I have decided that the Judge did not err in law. Further,  if  I  had
   decided that the Judge had erred in law in failing to take  the  approach
   set out in RK I would also have decided that any  such  error  could  not
   possibly have been material. I set out my reasoning below.

11.   First of all, RK was not cited to the Judge. I am not  sure  when  the
   judgment became available but it was heard only some eleven  days  before
   the appellant's own appeal was heard. In these circumstances it  was,  of
   course, wholly understandable that it was not referred to  by  the  Judge
   nor relied upon by either of the representatives before  him.  The  point
   is, though, it can be taken as stating the law  as  it  always  was  such
   that, potentially, failure to adopt the approach in RK might  demonstrate
   that an  error  of  law  has  been  made  even  in  the  absence  of  the
   availability of that judgment.

12.    The  second  point  to  make  is  that  the  question   of   parental
   relationship is of significance because of the content of section 117B(6)
   of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.  It  is  stated
   therein;

            "In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,  the
public interest        does not require the persons removal when -

             a.  the  person  has  a   genuine   and   subsisting   parental
relationship with a               qualifying child, and

            b. it would not be reasonable to expect the child to  leave  the
United                 Kingdom."

13.   There are some quite similar provisions in what I have referred to  as
   the article 8 related Immigration Rules. There is no doubt that  the  two
   grandchildren of the appellant are to be regarded as qualifying  children
   in this context.

14. Mr Murria, as noted, took me to some material which  he  said  supported
   the proposition that evidence before the Judge had suggested  that  there
   was a parental relationship between the appellant and the  child  of  her
   adult daughter.  It is right to say that in the appellant's  own  witness
   statement of 27 April 2015 she said that she is "playing the  role  of  a
   parent" to the child of [K].  She added she was  providing  "a  home  and
   food" to for both of them.  There is then [K]'s witness statement of  the
   same date in which she says that if the appellant had to leave the UK "my
   child would lose out on the parental love  and  support  that  my  mother
   provides". The photographs which Mr  Murria  took  me  to  did  show  the
   appellant with various family members including the grandchildren but  it
   cannot realistically be said that those photographs, of themselves, point
   to  a  parent-child  relationship  as  opposed  to  a   grandparent-child
   relationship.

15. The Judge did not refer to those parts of  the  witness  statements,  in
   terms, when explaining his reasoning in his determination. However, he is
   not required to refer to each and every item  of  evidence  or  each  and
   every aspect contained within any particular item of  evidence.   He  did
   consider the nature of the relationship between the appellant  and  [K]'s
   child commenting on it specifically at paragraph 22 of his determination.
   He accepted that the appellant was contributing towards  the  running  of
   the household, that she lived in the same household as her grandchild and
   that she provide care  for  the  grandchild.  The  evidence  before  him,
   though, was clearly to the effect that the appellant's daughter,  as  the
   child's mother, was fulfilling a parental role herself and  was  not,  as
   for example had been the case in  RK,  unable  to  fulfil  some  parental
   functions because of illness.  I accept Mr Mills' submission that RK does
   set the bar very high when one is contemplating the  possibility  that  a
   grandparent, where there is a parent fulfilling  a  parental  role,  will
   also be fulfilling a parental role. Further, I would observe that  it  is
   not clear from the material before me that the argument was  put  to  the
   Judge in the form it is being put now.

16. In the above circumstances I am satisfied the Judge did not err  because
   it was open  to  him  to  conclude,  as  he  seemingly  did,  that  as  a
   grandmother the appellant was fulfilling a grandmother's role rather than
   a parental one. The pertinent parts of the grounds of appeal appear to me
   to be an attempt to re-characterise the arguments which were advanced  to
   the Judge.  Additionally and in  any  event,  I  would  conclude  in  the
   alternative that since the bar is set very high by RK, it was obvious  on
   the facts and on the evidence before the Judge that that bar could not be
   surmounted in this particular case bearing in mind, as I  say,  that  the
   appellant's daughter was herself fulfilling a parental  role,  as  indeed
   one would expect.  So, my primary conclusion as to this  ground  is  that
   the Judge did not err in law but, alternatively, I  would  conclude  that
   even if he did, that error could not possibly have been a material one in
   that it could not possibly have impacted upon the outcome.

17. I do not think I need to say  very  much  regarding  the  various  other
   grounds.  It  is  right  to  characterise  them,  in  large  measure,  as
   representing attempts to simply re-argue  matters  of  fact.  As  to  any
   contention, and such was hinted at, that the  grandchild  might  have  to
   leave the UK if the appellant did, there is simply no  basis  upon  which
   the Judge could have concluded that would be  so.  That  is  because  the
   mother of the particular child with which we are primarily concerned  has
   limited leave to remain such that her child would be able  to  remain  in
   the UK with her whatever the position of the appellant.

18.   In these circumstances the appellant's appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
   fails.



Decision

19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of
   an error of law. That decision shall stand.



Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make any anonymity order. I do not do so.



                                                                      Signed

                               M                 R                 Hemingway
                                   Judge    of    the     Upper     Tribunal
                                                 Dated



To the Respondent

Fee award

I make no fee award.



                                                                      Signed

                                M                R                 Hemingway
                                    Judge    of    the    Upper     Tribunal
                                                   Dated

