
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/48614/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 December 2015                  |On 15 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Manna Begum
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Sreeraman, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. I. Khan of Counsel, instructed by PGA Solicitors
LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge K. Lester in which she allowed Miss.  Begum's
    appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of  State  to  refuse  to
    grant indefinite leave to remain as the child of  parents  present  and
    settled in the United Kingdom.

 2. For the purposes of this appeal I refer to the Secretary  of  State  as
    the Respondent and to Miss. Begum as the  Appellant,  reflecting  their
    positions as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:

         "The decision records that the Respondent was  not  represented  at
         the hearing.  It appears to have been a skeleton  argument  by  the
         Appellant's counsel that misled the judge into believing  that  the
         Appellant's mother had been  granted  indefinite  leave  to  remain
         when, in fact, she had only been  granted  limited  leave.   It  is
         arguable that if the judge had received the correct information her
         decision would have been different."

 4. At the hearing I heard submissions from both representatives  following
    which I reserved my decision.  The Appellant attended the hearing along
    with members of her family.

Submissions

 5. At the outset of the hearing Mr. Khan accepted that there had  been  an
    error of fact regarding  the  Appellant's  mother's  leave  to  remain.
    However he submitted that counsel had not  misled  the  judge.   I  was
    referred to the skeleton argument (5A of the Appellant's  bundle).   On
    page 5B this states that  the  Appellant's  mother's  appeal  had  been
    remitted back to the Respondent for a review and lawful decision.

 6. Ms Sreeraman submitted that the error of fact was  material.   Had  the
    judge applied the correct facts the Appellant could not  have  met  the
    requirements for indefinite leave to remain under  paragraph  298(i)(a)
    to (d).

 7. Mr. Khan submitted that the error was not material.  Paragraph  301  of
    the immigration rules  should  have  been  considered,  which  was  the
    original immigration rule considered by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    when the Appellant was granted leave to enter the United  Kingdom.   He
    submitted that the original assessment by the Entry  Clearance  Officer
    was that she met the requirements of paragraph 301 and  that  therefore
    she was given leave to enter the United Kingdom  under  paragraph  302.
    He  submitted  that  therefore  limited  leave  should  continue  under
    paragraph 301.  I was referred to the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Miles promulgated on 19 January 2012  in  which  the  Appellant's
    appeal against the Entry Clearance Officer's decision to  refuse  leave
    to enter was allowed under paragraph 297.

 8. Ms Sreeraman submitted that the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Miles was not wrong.  He had looked at the applicable rule,  which  was
    paragraph 297 not paragraph 301.  In paragraph [10]  of  this  decision
    the judge found that the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  had  assessed  the
    application incorrectly against paragraph 301 when, given the fact that
    the Appellant's father was a British citizen, the appropriate rule  was
    paragraph 297.  She submitted that under the transitional  arrangements
    correct leave  had  been  granted  under  paragraph  297,  so  now  the
    Appellant needed to show that she met  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    298, but she could not do.

 9. She submitted that paragraph 298(i)(d) was a high threshold and, in any
    event, meeting that in isolation would not lead to paragraph 298  being
    satisfied.  On the facts, as her mother was not settled in  the  United
    Kingdom, she could not satisfy the requirements of paragraph 298.

10. In relation to paragraph 301, the Appellant was not under 18.  In order
    to avail herself of paragraph 302 she needed to have been granted leave
    under paragraph 301 when she entered the United Kingdom and she had not
    been.  She could meet the requirements of paragraphs 301 or 302.

11. Mr. Khan submitted that whether it was paragraph 297 or 301 it did  not
    make  a  difference.   He  submitted  that  paragraph  302  applies  if
    paragraph 301(i)(v) is met.  He submitted  that  limited  leave  should
    continue under paragraph 301.

Error of law decision

12. The Respondent was not represented at the First-tier Tribunal.  I  have
    considered Mr. Khan's submission that he did not mislead the First-tier
    Tribunal judge.  The skeleton argument does not  contain  a  submission
    that the Appellant's  mother  had  been  granted  indefinite  leave  to
    remain.  However paragraph [19] of the  decision  clearly  states  "Mr.
    Khan argues that the fact that the Appellant's mother has been  granted
    indefinite leave should be an end of the matter".  It therefore appears
    that the skeleton  argument  is  rather  different  to  the  record  of
    submissions contained in the decision.

13. This appeal has been somewhat muddied  by  the  fact  that  it  is  now
    submitted on behalf of the Appellant that she should have been  granted
    leave to enter under a different paragraph of  the  immigration  rules.
    However no challenge was made to the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Miles who allowed her appeal  on  the  basis  that  she  met  the
    requirements of paragraph 297.  Neither  the  grounds  of  appeal,  the
    skeleton argument before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  nor  the  Rule  24
    response before me make any reference to the fact  that  there  was  an
    error when the Appellant's appeal against refusal  of  entry  clearance
    was allowed on the basis that she met  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    297.  The Respondent refused this application on  the  basis  that  the
    Appellant did not satisfy the requirements of  paragraph  298(i)(a)  to
    (d).  The Rule  24  response  submits  that  the  Appellant  meets  the
    requirements of paragraph 298 of the immigration rules, as  was  argued
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  This is the rule which the  Respondent
    considered, and it was not submitted at the hearing in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that the Appellant's application should have  been  considered
    under any other paragraph.

14. I find, given this, that the Appellant was granted entry  clearance  on
    the basis that she met the requirements of paragraph 297, as  found  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Miles.  There is no  evidence  before  me  to
    show that the Appellant was granted entry clearance on the  basis  that
    she met the requirements of paragraph 301.

15. I find that there is no merit in  the  submission  that  the  Appellant
    should be granted continuing leave under paragraph  301.   As  set  out
    above, she was not granted leave to enter the  United  Kingdom  on  the
    basis that she met the requirements of paragraph 301.  She is over  the
    age of 18 and was when she made her application for  leave  to  remain.
    In order to avail herself of paragraph 302, she  needed  to  have  been
    granted leave to enter on the basis that she met  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 301, which she was not.

16. It is submitted that the Appellant should have been  granted  leave  to
    remain under paragraph 298.  Paragraph 298(i)(a) to (d) provides:

         "The requirements to be met by a person seeking indefinite leave to
         remain in the United Kingdom as the child of a parent, parents or a
         relative present and settled in the United Kingdom are that he:

             (i)  is seeking to remain with a parent, parents or a relative
             in one of the following circumstances:

                  (a)  both parents are present and settled  in  the  United
                  Kingdom; or

                  (b)  one parent is  present  and  settled  in  the  United
                  Kingdom and the other parent is dead; or

                  (c)  one parent is  present  and  settled  in  the  United
                  Kingdom and has had sole responsibility  for  the  child's
                  upbringing or the child normally lives  with  this  parent
                  and not their other parent; or

                  (d)  one parent or a relative is present  and  settled  in
                  the United Kingdom and there are  serious  and  compelling
                  family or other considerations which make exclusion of the
                  child undesirable and suitable arrangements have been made
                  for the child's care;"

17. I find that the Appellant's appeal should not have been allowed on  the
    basis that she met the requirements of paragraph 298(i)(a) as  both  of
    her parents were not present and settled in the United  Kingdom.   This
    is accepted by Mr. Khan.  I find that this error of fact has led to the
    making of an error of law.  However in order to  establish  whether  or
    not it is material, I need to consider whether the Appellant would have
    met  the  requirements  of  paragraph  298(i)(b)  to  (d),  which   are
    alternatives to paragraph 298(i)(a).

18. I was referred by Mr. Khan to  the  Respondent's  guidance  dated  July
    2012, paragraph 2.3.  This states:

         "Where a child who is given leave to enter or remain with a view to
         settlement under paragraph 302  and  paragraph  319XA  applies  for
         settlement (or further leave to remain with a view  to  settlement)
         on the basis of his parents or  sponsor's  application/status,  the
         fact that he has reached the age of 18 since been  granted  limited
         leave with a view to settlement is not a  basis  for  refusing  the
         application."

19. It was submitted that on this basis the application  should  have  been
    allowed.  However, the Appellant made her application on  21  May  2014
    when she was 21 years old,  and  the  Respondent  did  not  refuse  the
    application on the basis that she was over  18.   The  application  was
    refused because the Respondent considered that the  Appellant  did  not
    meet the requirements of paragraph 298(i)(a).

20. I find that the Appellant cannot meet paragraphs 298(i)(b) or (c).   In
    order to meet the requirements of paragraph 298(i)(d) she would need to
    show  that  there  were  "serious  and  compelling  family   or   other
    considerations" which made her exclusion undesirable, and that suitable
    arrangements had been made  for  her  care.   The  Respondent  did  not
    specifically consider whether the Appellant  met  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 298(i)(d).  She states "as  both  of  your  parents  are  not
    present and settled in the  United  Kingdom  you  do  not  satisfy  the
    requirements of paragraph 298(i)(a) to  (d)."   However  it  is  not  a
    requirement of paragraph 298(i)(d) that both  parents  be  present  and
    settled in the United Kingdom but, given that the Appellant's  mother's
    application was refused at the same time, it is reasonable to  consider
    that the Respondent envisaged the  Appellant  returning  to  Bangladesh
    with her mother.

21. It was submitted at the hearing that the Appellant met the requirements
    of  sub-paragraph  298(i)(d)  as  she  would  be  returning  alone   to
    Bangladesh where there would be nobody there to look after her.  It was
    submitted that her mother, father and siblings were all in  the  United
    Kingdom, except for two siblings who live in Bangladesh.   However,  as
    stated above, at the date of the  decision,  the  Respondent  had  also
    refused the Appellant's mother's application, so the Appellant would be
    returning to Bangladesh with her mother.  At the date  of  the  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal the  Appellant's  mother  had  not  been
    granted any leave.  I therefore find that at the date of  the  decision
    and hearing, although the Appellant's mother was in the United Kingdom,
    she did not have leave to remain here.  Additionally, the Appellant has
    two siblings living in Bangladesh, and  no  evidence  was  provided  to
    suggest that there had been any family rift or  disagreement,  or  that
    their circumstances were such that they would not support the Appellant
    on her return there.

22. At the time of the Respondent's decision, the  Appellant's  mother  did
    not have leave to remain.  At the time of the hearing it  would  appear
    that the Appellant's mother's application had been remitted for  lawful
    consideration by the Respondent.  This was not made clear to the  judge
    who was under the impression  that  the  Appellant's  mother  had  been
    granted indefinite leave to remain as reflected in the submissions made
    by Mr. Khan (paragraph [19] of the decision).  The family  had  already
    been split up, with some siblings living in the United Kingdom and some
    remaining in Bangladesh.  Neither  at  the  date  of  the  Respondent's
    decision, the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, nor  at  the  hearing
    before  me,  has  the  Appellant  shown  that  there  are  serious  and
    compelling family or other considerations which make her exclusion from
    the United Kingdom undesirable.

23. I find that the Appellant does not meet the alternative requirements of
    paragraph 298(i), and therefore the error of law in the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal was material.  I set the decision aside.

24. As the judge allowed  the  Appellant's  appeal  under  the  immigration
    rules, she did not proceed to consider it under Article 8.  The grounds
    of appeal before the First-tier Tribunal submitted  that  the  decision
    was a breach of the Appellant's rights under Article 8.

Notice of Decision

The decision involved the making of an error of law  and  I  set  it  aside.
The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for consideration  of  the
Appellant's rights under Article 8.

25. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 14 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

