
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
IA/48940/2013
                                                               IA/48950/2013
                                                               IA/48957/2013
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|Heard at Field House                      |Determination Promulgated   |
|On 15 October 2014                        |On 22 October 2014          |
|                                          |                            |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between

          SHALINI PRIRANWADA KUMARI ABAYAKOON HERATH MUDIYANSELAGE
              KIRITHI BANDARA ABAYAKOON ABAYAKOON MUDIYANSELAGE
               DULEN NETHMIKA BANDARA ABAYAKOON MUDIYANSELAGE

                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr S Hossein of Bright Star Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr Nath Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not deem it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor promulgated on 24 July  2014  which  allowed
   the appeal to the extent that the decision was not in accordance with the
   law and was remained outstanding for a lawful decision to be made by  the
   Respondent.

Background

3. The Appellants are all Sri Lankan nationals.  On  24  February  2011  the
   first Appellant arrived in the United  Kingdom  as  a  student  with  the
   second Appellant her husband and the  third  Appellant  her  son  as  her
   dependents. On 27 June 2013 the Appellants made applications for  further
   leave to remain. The Appellant applied as  a  Tier  2  Migrant  with  her
   sponsors/employers a Mr and Mrs Coppen. Her employment was  to  be  as  a
   Personnel manager.

4. On 6 November  2013  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
   application. The refusal letter was based on two issues: the absence of a
   valid Certificate of  Sponsorship  which  resulted  in  no  points  being
   awarded under Appendix A or C and the absence  of  the  required  English
   Language Evidence.


The Judge's Decision

5.  The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor (hereinafter called "the Judge") allowed the
   appeal against the Respondent's decision. The Judge found on the basis of
   the evidence in the Respondent's bundle of what had been  submitted  with
   the application that the Appellant had been awarded a Degree  by  Cardiff
   University and the language of instruction and assessment was English; in
   relation to the Certificate pof Sponsorship he found that at  some  point
   between the date of  application  and  the  Respondent's  decision  on  6
   November 2013 the sponsor withdrew the sponsorship without the  Appellant
   being told and without the Respondent knowing until they  accessed  their
   database; he found that the Respondent was under a duty to act fairly  in
   relation to the Appellant's decision and given that she  could  not  have
   known of the sponsorship being withdrawn they should, in  fairness,  have
   allowed her the opportunity to find a new sponsor and the failure  to  do
   so was materially unfair.

6. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 28 August 2014  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Simpson gave permission to appeal.

7. At the hearing I heard  submissions  from  Mr  Nath  who  relied  on  the
   grounds of appeal.

8. On behalf of the Respondent  Mr Hossein submitted that the findings  were
   open to the Judge and this was merely a disagreement with his findings

Finding on Material Error

9. Having  heard  those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made no material errors of law.

10. Dealing firstly with the submission that the Judge had materially  erred
   in finding that the Appellant had provided the evidence  to  satisfy  the
   language requirements. The refusal letter suggested  that  the  Appellant
   had submitted an 'academic reference and  a  transcript'  which  did  not
   include the date the certificate  was  issued.  This  was  not  the  only
   document however that the Appellant submitted with her  application  that
   the Judge had before him. The Judge made a finding in paragraph  18  that
   the Appellant met the language requirement in Appendix B at the time  she
   applied based on a document that was clearly  part  of  the  Respondent's
   bundle of documents submitted with the application indeed it was the next
   document in the bundle after the academic  transcript  referred  to.  The
   document  was  marked  E1  and  headed  Cardiff  Metropolitan  University
   'Official Confirmation of Award'; the date of the award was stated to  be
   20 March  2013  and  the  language  of  assessment  and  instruction  was
   confirmed to be English. The positive finding was manifestly correct  and
   open to him.

11. The Respondent challenged in the grounds of appeal that the  Judge  fell
   into error in finding that the principle of procedural  fairness  applied
   to Tier 2 cases. This was an argument that Mr Nath properly did not  seek
   to pursue with any enthusiasm. I am satisfied that the common law duty of
   the decision making authority to make decisions in a manner which is fair
   is not, as the Respondent suggests, confined only to Tier 4 student cases
   but applies as the Judge decided to all such decision making .

12. The Judge then made a careful, well reasoned and  detailed  analysis  of
   the Appellant's circumstances between paragraphs 25 to 34 explaining  why
   the procedure that was applied in the Appellant's case  was  procedurally
   unfair. I am satisfied that this was a conclusion that was  open  to  him
   for the reasons he gave.

13. I am therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read  as  a
   whole set out findings that were sustainable  and  sufficiently  detailed
   and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

14. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established  and  that
   the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

15. The appeal is dismissed.



Signed                                                              Date
21.10.2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

