
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/48272/2014
                                                               IA/48273/2014
                                                               IA/48322/2014
                                                               IA/48323/2014
                                                               IA/48324/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11th December 2015                |On 9th March 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MR. ALEEM UDDIN  (1)
                         MR. SYED IMRAN HUSSAIN  (2)
                                  [S I] (3)
                                  [A H] (4)
                                 [A S H] (5)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. M Iqbal of Counsel instructed by Denning
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal against a decision  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Traynor promulgated on 25th  June  2015,  in  which  he  allowed  the
       appeals against the decisions of the Secretary of State for the  Home
       Department of 13th November 2014, to refuse the  applications  of  Mr
       Aleem Uddin and Mr. Syed Imran Hussain for leave to remain in the  UK
       as Tier 1 (Entrepreneurs) under the Points  Based  System.   In  line
       with his decision to allow the appeals of two principal  applicants',
       First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Traynor  allowed  the  appeals  of  the
       remaining three appellants before him, who are dependants of Mr  Syed
       Imran Hussain.

    2. The appellant before me, is the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
       Department. However for ease of reference,  in  the  course  of  this
       decision I shall adopt the parties' status as it was before the First-
       tier Tribunal.  I shall in this decision, refer to the  Secretary  of
       State as the respondent.

    3. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Brunnen
       on 18th September 2015.  The  matter  comes  before  me  to  consider
       whether or not the determination by First-tier Tribunal Judge Traynor
       involved the making of a material error of law, and if so, to  remake
       the decision.

    Background

    4. Much of the background to the appeal is  uncontroversial.  The  first
       appellant, Mr Allem Uddin first arrived in the UK in 2010 with  leave
       to enter the UK as a Tier 4 student.  On 24th  August  2012,  he  was
       granted leave to remain in the UK as  a  Tier  1  Post-Study  migrant
       until 24th August 2014.  The second appellant, Mr Syed Hussain  first
       arrived in the UK in 2008 with leave to enter the UK  as  a  student.
       On 1st September 2012, he was granted leave to remain in the UK as  a
       Tier 1 Post-Study  migrant  until  1st  September  2014.   The  third
       appellant is the wife of the second  appellant  and  the  second  and
       third appellants, are the parents of the fourth and fifth appellants.
        The applications and appeals of the third to fifth appellants, stand
       and fall with that of the second appellant.  Each of  the  appellants
       is a Pakistani national.

    5. The first and second appellants had applied on 23rd August  2014  for
       leave to remain as Tier 1  (Entrepreneurs)  in  accordance  with  the
       Points-Based System of the Immigration Rules.  The applications  were
       refused for the reasons  set  out  in  decision  letters  dated  13th
       November 2013.  Neither the first appellant nor the second  appellant
       was awarded any points for attributes under Appendix A of the  rules.
       In broad terms the respondent considered that the evidence  submitted
       by the first  and  second  appellants  of  advertising  material  was
       unacceptable because it did not cover a continuous period  commencing
       before 11th July 2014, up to no earlier than three months before  the
       date of their application.  The respondent considered that the  first
       and second  appellants  had  not  demonstrated  that  they  meet  the
       requirements of the Rules to be awarded points under provision (d) in
       the first row of  Table  4  of  Appendix  A.   The  decision  of  the
       respondent went on to state:

             "The immigration rules for evidential flexibility  only  cover
             missing documents from a sequence of documents that have  been
             provided with the application,  such  as  one  bank  statement
             missing from a series, or missing information  from  documents
             which have been provided. Therefore  in  line  with  paragraph
             245AA(b), as the  missing  specified  documents  do  not  fall
             within a series  of  documents  that  you  provided,  we  have
             reached a decision based  on  the  evidence  provided  in  the
             application...."

    6. The appellants  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the
       respondent's decisions of 13th November 2014 in which the  appellants
       were notified of the intention to remove them from the United Kingdom
       by way of Directions under Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum  and
       Nationality Act 2006, following the refusal of their applications for
       leave to remain.

The appeal before the First-tier Tribunal

    7. On 16th June  2015,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Traynor  heard  the
       appeals and allowed the appeals for the reasons set out in a decision
       promulgated on 25th  June   2015.   Paragraphs  [2]  to  [9]  of  his
       decision sets out the background to  the  respondent's  decisions  of
       13th November 2014.  At paragraphs [10] and [11], the  Judge  records
       the evidence before him.   He  notes  at  paragraph  [11(3)]  of  his
       decision, that he had before him:

             "The Appellants' bundle of documents comprising of 203  pages.
             This includes the witness statements of the First  and  Second
             Appellants,  evidence  of   their   academic   qualifications;
             evidence of company registration and business  activity;  Bank
             statements and financial documents; advertising  materials  at
             pages 80-98; evidence of invoices, business plan and  business
             agreements; Accountant's letters, Statutory  Declarations  and
             Appellants' CV's; payment receipts for Go  Daddy.com  for  web
             launching etc.;  miscellaneous  documents  pertaining  to  the
             Respondent's decision-making process."

    8. The Judge records at paragraphs [23] to  [32]  of  his  decision  the
       submissions that were made to him.  It  had  been  submitted  by  the
       respondent that pursuant to the provisions  of  s19  UK  Borders  Act
       2007, the respondent, in points based applications, was  not  obliged
       to  accept  any  evidence  that  had  not  been  submitted  with  the
       application.   It followed that any evidence that the appellants  had
       submitted after the application, could not  be  taken  into  account.
       Counsel for the appellants drew the Judge's attention to the decision
       of the President of the Upper Tribunal in  Nwaigwe  -v-  SSHD  [2014]
       UKUT 00418 (IAC), and to the decision of the Upper Tribunal in  Nasim
       and Others  (Raju: Reasons not to follow) [2013] UKUT  610  (IAC)  in
       support of his submission that s85A of the  Nationality,  Immigration
       and Asylum Act 2002 does not  prevent  a  Tribunal  from  considering
       evidence that was before the Secretary of State  when  she  took  the
       decision, whether or not that evidence reached  her  only  after  the
       date of  application  for  the  purposes  of  paragraph  34F  of  the
       Immigration Rules.

    9. First-tier Tribunal Judge Traynor found  at  paragraph  [34]  of  his
       decision that the appellants were entitled to reply upon the decision
       of the Upper Tribunal in  Nasim  and  Others  as  authority  for  the
       proposition   that   documentary   evidence   submitted   after   the
       application, but which preceded  the  decision,  can  be  taken  into
       account.  He went on to find:

             "35.  It  is  evident  from  the  decision  letters  that  the
             Respondent does acknowledge that relevant marketing  materials
             were submitted after the application was made but  before  the
             decisions.   However, the Respondent's view was such  evidence
             could not be taken into account and, on that basis,  concluded
             that the applications stood for refusal because of  a  failure
             to provide the specified evidence.

             36.  Having carefully considered the submissions of Mr.  Iqbal
             in conjunction with all of the documentary evidence which  has
             been provided within the bundles of both  the  Respondent  and
             Appellants, I find that the terms  of  paragraph  41  -SD  (e)
             (iii) and (iv) have been met.

             37.  I find that there is evidence of marketing  materials  in
             the form of flyers, business cards and online advertising.   I
             also accept Mr. Iqbal's submission that the Appellants do  not
             seek to rely upon establishing their own website but that they
             used 'Go.Daddy.com' as a platform to advertise their business.
             Nevertheless,  there  is  evidence  of  their  business  being
             registered,  marketing  materials  being  provided,  including
             flyers, adverts and business cards, prior to 11 July 2014  and
             sufficient evidence showing the continuity  of  that  business
             from at least early June 2014. I  find,  therefore,  that  the
             business was clearly in operation for at least  three  months,
             including 11 July 2014, and on  that  basis  the  applications
             fulfil the requirements of the relevant Rule.

             38.  Even if I am wrong in the above  respect,  I  would  have
             found that the Respondent's decisions were not  in  accordance
             with the law because of its  failure  to  properly  apply  the
             evidential  flexibility  policy  as   now   contained   within
             paragraph 245AA of the Rules.   Upon reading the  Respondent's
             Decision Letters' it is noted  that  the  terms  of  paragraph
             245AA(b) have been set out in  full.  This  will  include  the
             Respondent exercising discretion to request information  which
             may perfect an application if  there  is  missing  information
             from  the  documents  which  have  been   provided.   In   the
             circumstances, the Respondent contends that  dates  have  been
             missed from various documents, although it not usual to expect
             business cards to bear a date. Nevertheless, if the Respondent
             specifically wanted those items to be  dated,  and  where  the
             Appellants clearly had provided all  other  documents  showing
             this as a genuine viable business, it was  therefore  open  to
             the Respondent to  request  that  information.   However,  she
             failed to do so.  However, given that I  find  the  Appellants
             have  submitted  evidence  prior  to   the   decisions   which
             demonstrates their ability to meet the  specific  requirements
             under Appendix A which justifies them an entitlement to the 25
             points claimed for their access to funds, then I  find  it  is
             not necessary for me to  make  any  further  ruling  that  the
             Respondent's decisions are not in accordance with the law.  It
             is sufficient for me to  allow  the  appeals  to  the  limited
             extent that the First and Second Appellants' applications  are
             entitled to the initial 25 points claimed under Appendix A for
             access to funds."

The Grounds of appeal

   10. The respondent appeals on the ground that First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Traynor correctly notes at paragraphs [13] and [15] of his decision:

             "13. ...However, under the provisions of Section  85A  of  the
             2002 Act, in Points-Based applications under the Rules  I  may
             only consider the circumstances appertaining at  the  time  of
             the decision and  I  may  only  consider  evidence  which  was
             submitted in support of and at the time of the making  of  the
             application.

             15.  In addition, the Respondent had considered the provisions
             of paragraph 245AA and, in particular,  sub-paragraph  (b)  in
             determining whether there should be discretion operated by the
             Respondent in accordance with her stated evidence  flexibility
             policy as now incorporated within that Rule."

       However, the Judge  then  erred  in  taking  into  account  the  post
       application documents without applying his mind to the provisions  of
       section 85A(4) of the 2002 Act and Section 19 of the UK  Borders  Act
       2007.

   11. At the hearing before me, Mr  Tarlow  on  behalf  of  the  respondent
       adopts the grounds  and  submits  that  the  decision  of  the  Judge
       discloses a material error of law that is capable  of  affecting  the
       outcome of the appeal.  He submits that the Judge allowed the appeal,
       having taken account of evidence which the Judge notes  at  paragraph
       [18],  was  additional  documentary  evidence,   submitted   by   the
       appellants in support of the application on  three  occasions,  after
       they had made  their  application,  but  prior  to  the  respondent's
       decision.   Mr  Tarlow  submits  that  had  the  Judge  limited   his
       consideration to the evidence submitted in support  of,  and  at  the
       time of making the application, the appeal could not have succeeded.

   12. In reply, Mr Iqbal submits that the respondent's  grounds  of  appeal
       are misconceived.  He submits that  it  is  common  ground  that  the
       additional material relied upon by the first  and  second  appellants
       was provided to the respondent prior to  the  respondent  reaching  a
       decision upon the application.  He submits that s85A of the 2002  Act
       does not preclude the respondent or the  Tribunal  from  taking  that
       further evidence, that is post application but provided in support of
       the application, into account, provided it was available  before  the
       respondent's decision.  He relies upon the decision of the  Court  of
       Appeal in Mansoor Ali -v- SSHD [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1198  and  the  two
       decisions that he had already drawn to the attention  of  the  First-
       tier Tribunal Judge.

   13. Mr Iqbal submits that any error of  law  with  regard  to  the  post-
       application evidence is immaterial because  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge found at paragraph [39] of his decision that he  "..would  have
       found that the Respondent's decisions were not in accordance with the
       law  because  of  its  failure  to  properly  apply  the   evidential
       flexibility policy as now contained within  paragraph  245AA  of  the
       Rules...".  Mr Iqbal submits that the appeal was bound to be  allowed
       in any event, by the First-tier Tribunal and that in any  event,  the
       matter would simply have been remitted back to the respondent for the
       respondent to properly consider the  application  of  the  evidential
       flexibility policy.

DISCUSSION

   14. Section 85(4) Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  provides
       that on an appeal, the  Tribunal  may  consider  evidence  about  any
       matter which it thinks relevant to the  substance  of  the  decision,
       including evidence which concerns a matter arising after the date  of
       the decision, but that is  subject  to  the  exceptions  set  out  in
       section 85A. Of these, only  Exception  2  is  relevant  for  present
       purposes. It is contained in subsections (3) and (4),  which  provide
       as follows:

              "(3) Exception 2 applies to an appeal under section 82(1) if-

                       (b) the immigration decision concerned an application
                  of a kind identified in immigration rules as requiring  to
                  be considered under a "Points Based System", and

                  (c)  the  appeal  relies  wholly  or  partly  on   grounds
                  specified in section 84(1)(a), (e) or (f).

             (4) Where  Exception  2  applies  the  Tribunal  may  consider
             evidence adduced by the appellant only if it-

                       (a) was submitted in support of, and at the  time  of
                  making, the application to which the immigration  decision
                  related,

   15. The first and second appellant made their application  for  leave  to
       remain in the UK as Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrants under the  'Points
       Based System" on 23rd August 2014.  The Judge notes in his  decision,
       at paragraph  [18]  that  the  appellants  had  submitted  additional
       documentary evidence on three occasions prior to the  decision.   The
       Tribunal  had  been  provided  with  various  Royal   Mail   tracking
       references that  confirmed  that  documents  had  been  sent  to  the
       respondent in support of the application before the decision  of  the
       respondent was made.  The appellants  explained  that  the  documents
       which were sent, included Santander Bank statements, printing  bills,
       brochure, seminar invitation card, and a seminar venue  bill.    That
       additional material that had been sent to the respondent between  the
       23rd August 2014 and the making of the respondent's decision was also
       referred to in the submissions made on behalf of  the  appellant  and
       recorded at paragraphs [29] and [30] of the decision  of  the  First-
       tier Tribunal.

   16. The narrow issue in the appeal before me is  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge was entitled to have regard to that material that  was
       submitted by the appellants to the respondent  in  support  of  their
       application, but between the date of the application and prior to the
       respondent's decision.

   17. The clear policy underlying sections 85 and 85A of the  2002  Act  is
       that the Tribunal should  be  able  to  consider  a  broad  range  of
       evidence in relation to appeals generally, but a more  limited  range
       of evidence in relation to appeals against decisions which have to be
       considered under the Points Based system.

   18. The decision of the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Nasim  and  Others   (Raju:
       Reasons not to follow) [2013]  UKUT  610  (IAC),  followed  from  the
       decision of the Court of Appeal in Raju and Others  -v-  SSHD  [2013]
       EWCA Civ 754 and, as the Upper Tribunal noted,  provided  a  suitable
       vehicle for considering the arguments advanced regarding  the  effect
       of the judgment of the Court  of  Appeal  in  Raju  and  Others.   At
       paragraphs  [72]  to  [76]  of  the  decision,  the  Upper   Tribunal
       considered the application of  s85A  of  the  2002  Act.   The  Upper
       Tribunal  set  out  in  the  decision,  the  stance  adopted  by  the
       respondent both before the Court of Appeal,  and  before  them.   The
       Upper Tribunal records;

             "73. Paragraph 29 of Mr Gullick's skeleton  argument  for  the
             respondent in Raju reads as follows:-

                  "29. Whilst the SSHD accepts,  having  further  considered
                  the  position  in  the  light  of  the  Upper   Tribunal's
                  judgment, that following the coming into force of  section
                  85A of the 2002 Act, an application is to  be  treated  as
                  continuing for evidential purposes after it  is  initially
                  submitted to the SSHD (and so  an  applicant  can  provide
                  further evidence, in addition to that initially submitted,
                  prior to the SSHD's decision), the question of  where  the
                  cut-off point in the 'fixed  historic  timeline'  for  the
                  award of points should fall is a somewhat different  one."
                  (original emphases)

             74.   Mr Gullick's skeleton argument in the  present  contains
         this paragraph:-

                  "41. It is clear ... that the SSHD has never suggested  in
                  this appeal that the SSHD is not entitled to consider post-
                  submission but pre-decision evidence.  The SSHD  has  also
                  made it clear that, in any event, the Tribunal is entitled
                  to  consider  the  evidence  that   the   decision   maker
                  considered.  Such evidence was considered in  these  cases
                  (and in the Raju cases), but did not result in  the  award
                  of 15 points for the reasons  given  in  Raju."  (original
                  emphasis)

             75.  In the light of the respondent's  position,  there  is  a
             considerable amount of agreement between  Mr  Gullick  and  Mr
             Iqbal.  In particular, they agree on  what  is  meant  by  the
             expression "the application" in section 85A.   They  disagree,
             however, about whether section  85A  imposes  any  substantive
             restriction on the  ability  of  the  respondent  to  consider
             evidence submitted after the date on which the application  is
             made for the purposes of  the  Rules  (pursuant  to  paragraph
             34G).  We agree with the respondent that section  85A  imposes
             no such restriction.

             76.  Accordingly, the respondent's position, in cases such  as
             the present, is that (as held in Khatel) section 85A precludes
             a  Tribunal,  in  a  points-based  appeal,  from   considering
             evidence as to compliance with points-based Rules, where  that
             evidence was not before  the  respondent  when  she  took  her
             decision; but the section does not  prevent  a  tribunal  from
             considering evidence that was before the respondent  when  she
             took the decision, whether or not that  evidence  reached  the
             respondent only after the date of application for the purposes
             of paragraph 34F. Although our view of the matter  is  obiter,
             we concur.

   19. The Upper Tribunal found in Nasim and Others, although section 85A of
       2002 Act precludes  a  Tribunal,  in  a  points  based  appeal,  from
       considering evidence as to compliance with points-based Rules,  where
       that evidence was not before the Secretary of State when she took her
       decision, section 85A does not prevent a  Tribunal  from  considering
       evidence that was before the Secretary of State  when  she  took  the
       decision, whether or not that evidence reached  her  only  after  the
       date of  application  for  the  purposes  of  paragraph  34F  of  the
       Immigration Rules.

   20. In my judgment, there is a distinction  to  be  drawn  between  those
       cases where an appellant seeks to rely, at the hearing of an  appeal,
       upon evidence that was not before the respondent at the time  of  her
       decision, and as here, cases in which an appellant seeks to  rely  at
       the hearing of an appeal, upon evidence that was not  submitted  with
       the application itself, but which was before the  respondent  at  the
       time  of  her  decision.   In  my  judgment,  where  a  Points  Based
       application is made and refused, the assessment by the Judge is to be
       of the material that was before the decision-maker rather than a  new
       consideration of new material. In other words, the appeal  if  it  is
       successful, is on the basis that the decision-maker with the material
       before him or her, should have made a different decision.

   21. The appellants' bundle before the  First-tier  Tribunal  contained  a
       number of material documents.  The respondent acknowledged  that  the
       relevant marketing materials were submitted after the application was
       made, but before the decisions.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Traynor
       found that there was within the material provided to  the  respondent
       before she reached her decisions,  evidence  of  the  business  being
       registered, marketing materials  being  provided,  including  flyers,
       adverts and business cards, prior to  11  July  2014  and  sufficient
       evidence showing the continuity of that business from at least  early
       June 2014.  The Judge found therefore, that the business was  clearly
       in operation for at least three months, including 11th July 2014, and
       on that basis, the applications fulfilled  the  requirements  of  the
       relevant Immigration Rule.  In  my  judgment,  section  85A  did  not
       preclude the Tribunal from taking these  documents  into  account  as
       they relate to the situation at the date  of  the  applications,  and
       were submitted before the decisions were made.

   22. It follows that in  my  judgment,  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal discloses no  material  error  of  law  and  the  appeal  is
       dismissed.  As the First-tier Tribunal records at paragraph  [40]  of
       it's decision,  the  respondent  is  now  entitled  to  conclude  the
       assessment of the applications in line with the findings made.

Notice of Decision

   23. The appeal is dismissed and the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
       shall stand.

   24. No anonymity direction is applied for and none is made.


Signed                                  Date

       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia



FEE AWARD

The First-tier Tribunal made a fee  award,  and  as  I  have  dismissed  the
respondent's appeal, that award shall stand.


Signed                                  Date

    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
