
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/48743/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 9 July 2015                       |On 16 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL MURRAY


                                   Between

                                     KPW
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Evans, Templeton Legal Services, Wembley Park,
Middlesex
For the Respondent:    Miss Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of  Jamaica  born  on  26  June  1971.   She
    appeals against the decision of the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department refusing her application for  a  derivative  residence  card
    under European Union law.  The refusal  letter  is  dated  21  November
    2014.  The appeal was heard by Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal Cope on
    27  February  2015.   The  appeal  was  dismissed  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 30 March 2015.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal Bird on 5 June  2015.   The
    grounds of application state that the Judge has not  correctly  applied
    the principles established in Harrison (Jamaica) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ
    1736 at paragraph 67, as  the  appellant  is  the  sole  carer  of  her
    daughter and there is evidence in the bundle from numerous  sources  to
    support this finding of fact.  The case of ZH Tanzania  v  SSHD  [2011]
    UKSC4 is referred to, and the grounds state that with  respect  to  the
    upbringing of  a  child  the  best  interests  of  the  child  must  be
    considered.  The grounds state that ZH states that there is no  precise
    definition of the best interests of  a  child,  but  the  child's  best
    interests must be the determining  factor  for  specific  actions,  one
    being separation of a child from his/her parents  against  their  will.
    The grounds state that the Judge failed to apply the correct test which
    is: "Would the  child's  quality  or  standard  of  life  be  seriously
    impaired by excluding the non EEA national from the UK?"   The  grounds
    state that in practice the expulsion  of  the  appellant,  who  is  the
    child's sole carer, would impair her standard  of  living  to  such  an
    extent that it would compel the British citizen daughter  to  accompany
    her mother to Jamaica, thus depriving her of her EEA rights.

The Hearing

 3. The appellant's representative submitted that Article 8 was  not  dealt
    with in the First-Tier decision  although  the  Judge  mentions  it  at
    paragraphs 90 to 94.  He submitted that the respondent has not  made  a
    decision to remove the appellant from the United Kingdom and  has  only
    refused to issue a derivative residence  card  to  the  appellant.   He
    submitted that there is no indication of any initiation of the  removal
    process under the EEA Regulations or the Immigration Rules and  nothing
    to indicate that  it  is  proposed  to  remove  the  appellant  at  any
    particular time.  He submitted however, that in spite of this,  Article
    8 should be considered as a right of appeal.  I was referred to Section
    84(1) of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  I  explained
    that I was not going to consider Article 8  as  no  removal  directions
    have been set.  The representative referred me to the case of  Vladimir
    Granovski [2015] EWHC 1478 (Admin) at paragraph 81.  He submitted  that
    there  is  no  category  of  immigration  decision  making,  to   which
    consideration of Section 55 or the duty under Section 6  of  the  Human
    Rights Act 1998 does not apply.  He submitted  that  the  Judge  in  Ms
    Walter's case has not adequately performed the exercise  of  discretion
    and as he has not considered all the factors in this case.

 4. The Presenting Officer pointed out that the  case  of  Granovski  is  a
    points based system case and KPW can make  a  fresh  application  under
    Article 8 of ECHR.  She submitted that Article 8 outside the Rules  has
    not  been  raised.   She  submitted  that  based  on  the  Regulations,
    discretion should not have been exercised  differently  and  Article  8
    cannot be dealt with at this hearing.

 5. I declined to consider Article 8 in this claim finding it would not  be
    appropriate for me to do so.

 6. The appellant's  representative  made  submissions  on  the  First-Tier
    Judge's determination submitting that the Judge has failed to  consider
    the said case of Harrison. He submitted that there is no evidence  that
    the child's father is in a position to look after  her.   He  submitted
    that the Judge did not consider the quality of life of the child and if
    the appellant's appeal fails the child will require to leave the United
    Kingdom with her mother and go  to  Jamaica.   He  submitted  that  the
    evidence is that Mr R, the child's father, has little contact with  the
    child and he submitted it has been accepted that the appellant  is  her
    sole carer and to remove her without the  child  will  break  the  bond
    between them.  He submitted that this is the only bond  the  child  has
    had since her birth and to  put  her  in  the  care  of  an  incapable,
    disinterested father must be against her interests.  He submitted  that
    it would be equivalent to putting her with a  foster  family  and  this
    would not be good for her.  He  submitted  that  the  Judge  failed  to
    consider the extent to which  the  child's  quality  of  life  will  be
    diminished if she remains in  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  appellant
    returns to Jamaica so the  child  will  require  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom with her mother.

 7.  The  Presenting  Officer  submitted  that  it  is   clear   from   the
    determination that the only issue is whether the child will be able  to
    remain in the United Kingdom  if  the  appellant  is  removed.   I  was
    referred to paragraph 51 of the determination and  paragraph  43.   She
    submitted that it is clear that the Judge has taken  this  matter  into
    account.  At paragraph 43 he states that it is  for  the  appellant  to
    establish to the appropriate standard  of  proof  that  she  meets  the
    requirements set out in the EEA Regulations for a derivative  residence
    card and it is not for the respondent to prove that she does  not  meet
    these requirements.

 8. The Presenting Officer submitted that the Judge has found there to be a
    lack of available evidence and because of this he finds  the  appellant
    has not discharged the burden of proof.  It is not clear whether  Mr  R
    has contact with the child and the judge was only able to consider what
    was before him.

 9. She submitted that the Judge refers to  letters  from  friends  of  the
    appellant but these letters only  refer  to  the  appellant  being  the
    primary carer, there is no evidence about Mr R.

10. I was referred to the case of  Sanneh  [2013]  AWHC  793  (Admin).   At
    paragraph 19  of  that  case  it  is  stated  that  nothing  less  than
    compulsion will engage Articles 20 and 21 of the TFEU and EU  law  will
    not be engaged where the EU citizen is not compelled to leave  the  EU,
    even if the quality or standard of life of the EU citizen is diminished
    as a result of the non EU national, upon whom she is  dependent.  being
    removed.  She submitted that the Judge used the correct legal test  and
    because of the lack of evidence about the child's father, has dismissed
    the appeal.

11. I was then referred to the case of  Hines  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  660.   At
    paragraph  24  of  that  case  alternative  care  is  considered.   The
    Presenting Officer submitted that what has to be considered is  whether
    the quality of life of the child would be so seriously impaired by  her
    removal from her mother or being placed in foster care, that she  would
    effectively be compelled to leave the UK.  In the  case  of  Hines  the
    child was going to be removed from the care of one  responsible  parent
    to the care of another responsible parent and so the situation in  that
    case is different.  The Presenting Officer submitted that the Judge has
    considered  the  alternative  care  options  and  I  was  referred   to
    paragraphs 74 and 75 of the determination.  At paragraph 75  the  judge
    finds that it would not be in the child's best interests for her to  be
    put into statutory care and it would not be in the  economic  interests
    of the United Kingdom either because of the cost  of  that  care.   The
    Presenting Officer submitted that the appellant is able  to  stay  with
    her father in the United Kingdom and because of the  lack  of  evidence
    about her father and his relationship with the child, the appellant did
    not discharge the burden of proof, so the Judge was entitled  to  reach
    the decision he did.

12. The appellant's representative referred me to the said case  of  Hines,
    accepting that the situation in that case  is  different  to  this,  as
    there were two responsible carers but he submitted that  the  appellant
    in this case is the sole carer of the child not just the primary carer,
    and the issue is to what extent the child's  enjoyment  of  her  rights
    would be diminished  if  the  appellant  has  to  go  to  Jamaica.   He
    submitted that at paragraph 19 of the said case of Sanneh reference  is
    made to the diminution in the quality of  life  of  the  child  and  he
    submitted that if the appellant and the child have to leave the  United
    Kingdom, the case of Sanneh makes it clear that this could result in an
    interference with EU law and that is the issue.  He submitted that  for
    the child to be cared for by anyone  other  than  her  mother,  in  the
    particular circumstances of this case, must diminish the quality of her
    life and he submitted that if her mother has to take her to Jamaica the
    Judge has made no finding about the  severity  of  the  change  in  the
    child's life.

13. I put to the representative that the  reason  the  Judge  came  to  his
    decision was because there was not enough evidence before  him  of  the
    child's relationship with her father  and  that  even  the  letters  of
    support made no reference to him.

14. The representative submitted that the appellant's previous  appeal  was
    abandoned because the child was not British at that time but the  child
    is now British.  He submitted that because Mr R is not  in  touch  with
    the appellant it was only by chance that the appellant found  out  that
    Mr R had  been  granted  British  nationality  thus  making  the  child
    British.

15. He submitted that the Judge found that the  appellant  has  raised  the
    child from birth and the letter from Social Services and the Children's
    Centre confirm this and support the appellant's appeal.   He  submitted
    that there is sufficient evidence about the effect the  destruction  of
    the appellant's relationship with the child would have  on  the  child,
    for the appeal to be allowed.

Decision

16. I have carefully considered the determination of the First-Tier  Judge.
    The Judge had to work with the evidence that was before him.  He points
    out that the appellant must have been in touch with Mr R in relation to
    the nationality application for the child, as  he  must  have  supplied
    various documents.  He found that there should be  much  more  detailed
    evidence obtained from Brent London  Borough  and  the  people  in  the
    nursery that the child attends, the family doctor and any church leader
    who could comment, from a more independent view, about why they believe
    the appellant to be the sole carer of the  child  and  on  what  basis.
    They could have commented on Mr R's role and whether he has or had  any
    involvement with the child or would have any involvement in her life if
    the appellant had to leave the United Kingdom.

17. The appeal was heard on the papers.

18. Paragraph 52 of the determination refers to the  lack  of  evidence  to
    support the appellant's claim.  The judge notes that there is no up  to
    date statement from the appellant.  Although this appeal was dealt with
    on the papers, the only evidence about Mr R not being involved  in  the
    child's life is from the appellant in her statement.  I noted that  the
    most recent evidence from the appellant was on  4  February  2014.  The
    situation about Mr R is not clear. The Judge found  he  was  unable  to
    find that Mr R has not and does not play any part in the  child's  life
    and he found that it was not clear whether Mr R would play  a  part  if
    the appellant had to leave  the  United  Kingdom.   He  refers  to  the
    letters of support, none of which mention Mr  R.   He  notes  that  the
    appellant had legal representatives although it was a paper hearing but
    the up to date information was not provided.  In  all,  the  Judge  has
    considered everything before him and finds that  he  cannot  allow  the
    appeal without further information about Mr R and what his relationship
    is with the child and what it would be if the appellant  had  to  leave
    the United Kingdom.  The judge accepts that for the child to be  placed
    in some sort of statutory care framework  would  not  be  in  her  best
    interests or in the best interests of the United Kingdom and he  refers
    to the said case of Harrison.  Based on the evidence before him  it  is
    not clear whether, if the appellant is removed from the UK,  the  child
    would  be  compelled  to  go  with  her.   The  test  is  high  and  is
    "compulsion". At paragraph 78 the judge refers to the case of  Zambrano
    [2011] IMM AR 521, stating that not only must  it  be  shown  that  the
    child would be unable to live in the United Kingdom  if  the  appellant
    leaves, but that she would also be unable to live in  another  European
    Union State, although he notes that in this  case  the  child's  mother
    appears to have no connection with any other European Union State.

19. At paragraph 82 the Judge states that the appellant has not provided  a
    sufficient evidential basis to establish that Mr R would not  care  for
    the child if the appellant had to leave the United Kingdom.   He  finds
    that this is a possibility and states that it has not been shown to  be
    more likely than not, so based on the standard of proof of the  balance
    of probabilities, he finds that the appellant has not  established  her
    case.

20. The Judge has carefully considered all the evidence before  him  and  I
    have considered all the evidence that was before him.

21. EU law will not be engaged where the EU citizen  is  not  compelled  to
    leave the EU, even if the quality or standard of life of the EU citizen
    is diminished as a result of the non EU  national,  upon  whom  she  is
    dependent, being removed.  Diminution in the  quality  of  the  child's
    life might engage EU law but based on what was before the Judge he  was
    unable to reach that conclusion.

22. The Judge has referred to Article  8  in  the  determination.   As  the
    appellant is not going to be removed from the  United  Kingdom  if  her
    derivative right of residence is not  granted,  I  do  not  require  to
    consider Article 8 of ECHR.  The Judge's dismissal of this appeal  does
    not have any adverse impact on  the  family  or  private  life  of  the
    appellant or her child.

23. Based on the above I find that the  Judge's  decision  to  dismiss  the
    appeal on European Union law grounds must stand.

24. The appellant's appeal is dismissed on all issues.

25. Anonymity has been directed.



Signed   Date

Designated Judge Murray
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

