
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/48751/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 October 2015                   |On 29 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             RUTH HARRIS CHANZA
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr S. Staunton, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Z. Arain, instructed by ARA Immigration Services
Ltd.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent (hereinafter "the claimant") is a citizen of Malawi born
    on 1 August 1983.  This appeal concerns the decision of  the  appellant
    (hereinafter "the Secretary  of  State")  to  refuse  to  grant  her  a
    residence card under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 ("the  2006
    Regulations") as confirmation of her right to reside in the  UK  as  an
    extended family member.

 2. The claimant applied for  a  residence  card  on  the  basis  that  she
    satisfied Regulation 8(5) of the 2006 Regulations; that is, she was  in
    a durable relationship with an EEA national.  The  Secretary  of  State
    rejected the application on the ground that insufficient  evidence  had
    been provided to demonstrate she was in a durable relationship.

 3. Having heard evidence from the claimant and  her  sponsor,  First  tier
    Tribunal (FtT) Judge Samimi determined that they were in a genuine  and
    durable relationship.  He  allowed  the  appeal,  concluding  that  the
    claimant had satisfied the requirements of Regulation  6  of  the  2006
    Regulations.

 4. The grounds argue that the FtT's decision contains a material error  of
    law because:

      a. it falls short of finding there  was  a  durable  relationship  but
         still allows the appeal;

      b. the matter has been considered under the wrong Regulation. The  FtT
         refers to Regulation 6 instead of 8(5); and

      c. the FtT failed to have regard to Ihemedu (OFM's - meaning)  Nigeria
         [2011] UKUT 00340 (IAC) under which the  matter  should  have  been
         remitted to the Secretary of State.

 5. Shortly before the error of law hearing commenced Mr Arain,  on  behalf
    of the claimant, applied for an extension of time on the basis that  he
    had only recently been instructed. At the hearing, I dealt with this as
    a preliminary issue. After hearing brief submissions I decided  to  not
    allow an extension as there had been sufficient notice of  the  hearing
    date for the claimant to instruct a representative.  I  then  proceeded
    to hear arguments.

 6. Mr Staunton stated that it was  no  longer  the  Secretary  of  State's
    position that the judge had erred in relation to his finding about  the
    relationship between the appellant and her sponsor. However, whether or
    not to issue a residence card  was  a  matter  of  discretion  for  the
    Secretary of State. Mr Arain  raised  no  objection  to  this  line  of
    reasoning.

Findings

 7. At paragraph [7] of the FtT decision, the judge states  that  the  Home
    Office Presenting Officer "in his submissions has accepted  that  there
    is now ample evidence to show that the couple have been  in  a  genuine
    and durable relationship." Given this concession  by  the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer, it is clear that the judge did not err  in  finding
    that  the  appellant  and  sponsor  were  in  a  genuine  and   durable
    relationship.

 8. However, the judge has made an error of law in failing to recognise the
    correct Regulation the claimant satisfied in consequence of being in  a
    durable  relationship  with  an  EEA  national.  The  judge  refers  to
    Regulation 6 of the 2006 Regulations but  the  relevant  Regulation  is
    8(5), which concerns the criteria to be met for a  partner  of  an  EEA
    national to be an "extended family member".

 9. For the reasons  set  out  by  the  FtT,  the  claimant  satisfies  the
    requirements of Regulation 8(5) and therefore is  an  "extended  family
    member". She is not, however, a "family member "of an EEA national.

10. Under Regulation 17(1) of the 2006 Regulations the Secretary  of  State
    must issue a residence card to a "family member".  In  contrast,  under
    Regulation 17(4) the Secretary of State may issue a residence  card  to
    an "extended family member". In other words, with respect  to  extended
    family members, such as the claimant, the  Secretary  of  State  has  a
    discretion. That discretion has not yet been exercised.   The  position
    was clarified in Ihemedu (OFM's - meaning) Nigeria  [2011]  UKUT  00340
    (IAC):

         Regulation 17(4)  makes  the  issue  of  a  residence  card  to  an
         OFM/extended family  member  a  matter  of  discretion.  Where  the
         Secretary of State has not yet exercised that discretion  the  most
         an Immigration Judge is entitled to do is to allow  the  appeal  as
         being not in accordance with the law leaving the matter of  whether
         to exercise this discretion in the appellant's favour or not to the
         Secretary of State.

Decision

11. The First tier Tribunal's decision contains an error on a point of  law
    and is set aside.

12. The decision I substitute is to allow  the  claimant's  appeal  to  the
    extent that her application for an EEA residence card  as  an  extended
    family member remains outstanding before  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    exercise discretion under Regulation 17(4) of the 2006 Regulations.

13. No anonymity order is made.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated: 26 October 2015               |

