
[pic]
IAC-AH-LEM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/48899/2014
                                                               IA/48927/2014
                                                               IA/48940/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 September 2015                 |On 5 October 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

                    mR Evgeny YARGUNKIN (FIRST Appellant)
                 mISS ANASTASIA SAFONOVA (SECOND Appellant)
               mS Avrora Elizabeth SAFONOVA (THIRD Appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr T Gaisford (Counsel instructed by AKL Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the appellants who are citizens of Russia  against
    a  decision  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Norton-Taylor)  who
    dismissed their appeals on immigration and human rights  grounds  in  a
    decision and reasons promulgated on  22  April  2015.   The  first  and
    second appellants made applications for  leave  outside  of  the  Rules
    refused on 25 January 2010 and their appeals dismissed on  11  February
    2010.  A further application was made following the birth of the  third
    appellant on 4 November 2012.  The  applications  were  refused  on  18
    November 2014.

2.   Their appeals came for hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  21
    April 2015.  The first and second appellants were husband and wife  and
    the third appellant is their daughter.  The first and second appellants
    entered the UK with entry clearance as seasonal workers  which  expired
    on 24 November 2006.  Thereafter the first and second  appellants  were
    overstayers.  Their daughter was born on 4 November 2012 and thereafter
    the appellants made further representations based on Article 8.

3.   The Tribunal considered Article  8  outside  of  the  Rules,  it  being
    accepted by the appellants' representatives that there was no  evidence
    to support a claim under Appendix FM.  Family life  outside  the  Rules
    would also fail given that there would  be  no  interference  with  the
    family life that they enjoyed together and they  would  be  removed  to
    Russia as a family unit.

4.    The  Tribunal  considered  the   relevant   case   law   focusing   on
    consideration of Article 8 outwith the Rules, together with Section 117
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as  amended.   [11-
    15]

5.   The Tribunal set out the relevant burden  and  standard  of  proof  and
    acknowledged that  whilst  there  was  no  proper  respondent's  bundle
    produced, it had notices  of  immigration  decisions  and  Reasons  for
    Refusal  Letters  together  with  the  bundle  for  hearing  from   the
    appellants.  The evidence given by the first and second appellants  was
    set out in the determination together with submissions.

6.   The Tribunal made its findings from paragraph 26-33. It concluded  that
    there was no evidence of any significant ties or private  life  on  the
    part of the first and second appellants in the UK.  Both appellants had
    familial ties in Russia where they would have family support on  return
    and both were young, willing and able to work.  The Tribunal dealt with
    the third appellant Avrora at paragraphs 33 - 36.

Permission to Appeal

7.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  McDade
    on 22 June 2015.  The grant finds that the Tribunal's apparent omission
    to consider Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act
    2009 ("section 55") arguably constituted an error of law.

8.   The respondent in a Rule 24  response  opposed  the  appeal  confirming
    that the Tribunal referred to the "best interests of the  child"  as  a
    primary consideration at paragraphs 17, 33 and 36.  There was no  other
    outcome that could have been reached by the Tribunal.



Error of Law Hearing

9.   At the hearing before me Mr Gaisford confirmed that he was new  to  the
    appeal and had not drafted the grounds.  He  submitted  that  the  best
    interests of the child had been overlooked in terms of Section  55  and
    under Article 8(2) ECHR.  The essential omission was  consideration  of
    the fact that the child was not registered as  a  Russian  citizen  and
    there was no certainty as to how or on what basis she could be  removed
    from the UK and returned to Russia.  The Tribunal's failure to consider
    the child's immigration  status  specifically  had  an  impact  on  its
    consideration  of  Section  55  issues.   There  had  been  no   direct
    consideration  by  the  Tribunal  of  the  child's  immigration  status
    notwithstanding the Tribunal's  consideration  and  assessment  of  the
    respective positions of the parents in the UK.

10.  Ms Isherwood opposed the appeal.  There was no evidence,  objective  or
    subjective, produced in support of the suggestion that the child  would
    not be able to return to Russia and/or obtain Russian nationality.  The
    appellants had been  represented  throughout  and  there  had  been  no
    reference  made  to  the  issue  of  the  child's  immigration   status
    whatsoever.  Ms Isherwood submitted that  the  grounds  amounted  to  a
    disagreement with the decision and that both  the  respondent  and  the
    Tribunal had given proper consideration to the best  interests  of  the
    child based on the evidence produced by the appellants.

Discussion and Conclusions

11.  At the end of the hearing I confirmed  my  decision  that  the  grounds
    disclosed no material error of law in the decision.

12.  My reasons are as follows.  The Tribunal properly and fully  considered
    all of the relevant issues before it.  Whilst no specific reference was
    made to Section 55 of the 2009 Act, it is clear from the decision  that
    the Tribunal did consider  the  third  appellant  and  where  her  best
    interests lie having  regard  to  the  evidence  that  was  before  the
    Tribunal.  I am satisfied that there was no reference either  from  the
    appellants' evidence or  any  independent  objective  evidence  to  any
    difficulties faced by the third appellant on return to  Russia.   There
    can be no criticism of the Tribunal for failing to  consider  a  matter
    that was not raised  before  it.   Furthermore  there  is  no  evidence
    adduced before this Tribunal  on  behalf  of  the  third  appellant  to
    support this claim.

13.  The determination has fully taken into account that all of the  factors
    relevant to  consideration  of  where  a  child's  best  interests  lie
    including her age, health, education, language, contacts, ties, etc.

14.  Accordingly I am satisfied that the grounds disclose no material  error
    of law and that such objections raised amount to  a  disagreement  with
    the decision made and an attempt to introduce  new  matters  that  were
    clearly not in evidence before the Tribunal.  There could be  no  other
    outcome to the decision made by the Tribunal and it is arguable that in
    this matter permission ought never to have been granted.

Notice of Decision

The determination discloses no material error of law and the decision  shall
stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 2.10.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

There will be no fee award.


Signed   Date 2.10.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black
