
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/48835/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 20 June 2014                                 |On 2 July 2014             |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             mr idrissa kamagate
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:  Ms M C Benitez, Counsel, instructed by Ahmed Rahman
Carr, Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. Mr Kamagate is a citizen of the Ivory Coast whose  date  of  birth  is
      recorded as 24 April 1972.  On 8 July 2013 he made application  for  a
      permanent residence card as confirmation of a right to reside  in  the
      United Kingdom.  On 5 December 2013 a decision was made to refuse  the
      application.  In the notice of immigration decision reference was made
      to Regulation 15(1)(b) of the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
      Regulations 2006 ("the 2006 Regulations").  It was  the  Secretary  of
      State's contention that Mr Kamagate not had established  that  he  had
      resided in the United Kingdom with the EEA National in accordance with
      the Regulations for a continuous period of five years.

   2. Mr Kamagate appealed.  However, the appeal which eventually was to  be
      heard by Judge Tipping sitting at Taylor House on 27 February 2014 was
      not the first appeal involving Mr Kamagate.

   3. On an earlier occasion, Mr Kamagate had applied for and been refused a
      residence card. He appealed that decision and the appeal was heard  by
      Judge Prior.  Reference  to  those  proceedings  is  to  be  found  at
      paragraph 4 of the Determination of Judge Tipping.  Judge Prior,  just
      as Judge Tipping was later to  find,  found  Mr  Kamagate  a  credible
      witness and found in those earlier proceedings that  Mr  Kamagate  and
      the EEA National had been in a relationship that had endured since not
      later than 3 March 2008.

   4. Judge Tipping whose Determination is dated  4  March  2014,  found  no
      basis for disagreeing with the earlier finding of Judge Prior.   Judge
      Tipping noted that it was the Respondent's case that  there  was  only
      sufficient evidence to demonstrate that the Sponsor  and  Mr  Kamagate
      had been in a  relationship  of  an  "extended  family  member"  since
      February 2011.  Judge Tipping found that the  Respondent  had  ignored
      the judicial finding of Judge Prior.  Judge Tipping at paragraph 10 of
      his Determination found as a fact that Mr Kamagate and the Sponsor had
      been in a relationship for a  period  in  excess  of  five  years  and
      allowed the appeal to the extent that it was remitted to the Secretary
      of State for a lawful decision to be made.

   5. Not content with the Determination of Judge Tipping, the Secretary  of
      State by Notice dated 19 March 2014 made application for permission to
      appeal to the Upper Tribunal. The grounds rehearsed  the  reasons  for
      refusal letter making reference to  the  fact  that  Mr  Kamagate  was
      issued with a residence card, following  the  Determination  of  Judge
      Prior, in February 2011.  However, by reference to regulation 7(3)  of
      the 2006 Regulations, the Secretary of State's contention was that  Mr
      Kamagate still was not entitled to succeed because  it  was  not  only
      necessary to establish five years residence but also necessary to show
      possession of a family permit, registration certificate  or  residence
      card for that period.  Regulation 7(3) reads as follows:

           "Subject to paragraph (4), a person who is  an  extended  family
           member and  has  been  issued  with  an  EEA  Family  Permit,  a
           registration certificate or a residence card shall be treated as
           the family member of the relevant EEA National for as long as he
           continues to satisfy the conditions in  Regulation  8(2),(3),(4)
           or (5)  in  relation  to  that  EEA  National  and  the  permit,
           certificate or card has not ceased to be valid or revoked."

    In other words the Secretary of State contended that the family permit,
    registration certificate or  residence  card  was  a  pre-condition  of
    entitlement.

   6.  On  17  April  2014  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  PJG  White  granted
      permission to appeal thus the matter came before me.

   7. Mr Whitwell for the Secretary of State relied on the grounds  but  had
      no further submissions to make.

   8. Ms Benitez submitted that the starting point in  my  consideration  of
      this appeal had to be the finding of Judge Prior that the parties  had
      been in a durable relationship since the  3  May  2008  and  that  the
      Sponsor had been working in accordance with the regulations,  with  Mr
      Kamagate having been in the United Kingdom throughout.

   9. Ms Benitez submitted  that  the  Secretary  of  State's  grounds  were
      materially flawed in law because the status of family member  was  not
      contingent upon the existence or grant of a residence  document  under
      national regulations.  The family residence card was, she submitted, a
      manifestation of an acquired right but not the  source.   Whether  the
      applicant, in this case, Mr Kamagate, is a family member under EEA law
      is a question of fact.  The permit cannot, she  submitted  be  a  pre-
      condition for the exercise of rights acquired under EEA law because to
      hold otherwise would run contrary to the basic tenet of the  directive
      on free movement of persons.

  10. Ms Benitez submitted further that it is an  established  principle  of
      law that all measures within the field of community competence are  to
      be interpreted solely by reference  to  and  in  accordance  with  the
      principles and policy of community obligations giving  rise  to  those
      measures and she relies on the guidance in the case of Marleasing SA v
      Comercial  Internacional  de  Alimentacion  SA  [1990]   ECR   I-4139.
      Additionally Ms Benitez contends that  the  directives  must  be  read
      purposefully.

  11. It is trite law to note that the rights to enter  and  remain  in  the
      United Kingdom for community purpose flow directly from the  directive
      rather than from the  regulations  and  the  only  formal  documentary
      requirement on free movement under EEA law is the  production  at  the
      border or on application of an original passport or national ID  card.



  12. Looking to the directive, 2004/38-EC Article 10.1 provides:

           "The right of residence of family members of a union citizen who
           are not nationals of a member state shall be  evidenced  by  the
           issuing of a document called "Residence Card of a Family  Member
           of a Union Citizen" no later than six months from  the  date  on
           which they submit the application..."

      The point taken by Ms Benitez  is  that  the  residence  card  is  the
      evidence but it is not the document which confers the right.  In  much
      the same way I observe that a person's nationality is not conferred by
      the issuing of a passport by  the  National's  state  but  rather  the
      passport is evidence of it.

  13. Rather more importantly, by Article  16  the  following  provision  is
      made:

           "Union citizens who have resided legally for a continuous period
           of five years in the host member state shall have the  right  of
           permanent residence there.  This right shall not be  subject  to
           the conditions provided for in Chapter III."

  14. By  reference  to  Article  16(1),  Ms  Benitez  submits  that  lawful
      residence is to be construed  to  mean  that  the  family  member  has
      resided in accordance with the  directive  not  the  regulations  made
      under it or any national legislation.

  15. Then by Article 25 the following is provided:

           "Possession of a registration  certificate  as  referred  to  in
           Article 8, of a document certifying permanent  residence,  of  a
           certificate attesting submission of an application for a  family
           member residence card, of a residence card  or  of  a  permanent
           residence card, may  under  no  circumstances  be  made  a  pre-
           condition for the exercise of a right or the  completion  of  an
           administrative  formality,  as  entitlement  to  rights  may  be
           attested by any other means of proof. "

  16. In this case, Ms Benitez submits that on two  separate  occasions  the
      First-tier Tribunal has found as a  fact  that  Mr  Kamagate  and  his
      Sponsor have satisfied the relevant conditions under the directive.

  17. It seems to me that the  only  point  upon  which  Mr  Whitwell  could
      realistically rely is paragraph 6 of the pre-amble  to  the  directive
      which provides:

           "In order to maintain the unity of the family in a broader sense
           and without prejudice to the prohibition  of  discrimination  on
           grounds of nationality, the situation of those persons  who  are
           not included in the definition  of  family  members  under  this
           directive, and therefore do not  enjoy  an  automatic  right  of
           entry and residence in the host member state should be  examined
           by the host member state  on  the  basis  of  its  own  national
           legislation in order  to  decide  whether  entry  and  residence
           should be granted to such  persons,  taking  into  consideration
           their  relationship  with  the  union  citizen  or   any   other
           circumstances, such as their financial or physical dependence on
           the union citizen."

  18. Paragraph 6 of the pre-amble,  set  out  above  implies  a  margin  of
      appreciation for member  states.   However,  when  one  looks  to  the
      directive and to the fundamental principle of freedom of  movement,  I
      find that the reasoning  of  Ms  Benitez  simply  cannot  be  faulted.
      Indeed if the Secretary of State were right and the relief sought were
      dependant upon possession of the permit or card as contended for  then
      there would be an element of arbitrariness since different  applicants
      might apply on the same date, yet not have the documents the Secretary
      of State contends are a pre-requisite to the relief now  being  sought
      in this appeal, issued to them until different dates  because  of  the
      different demands on the Secretary of State.  That  simply  cannot  be
      right.  What the regulations require is clear evidence and the way  in
      which the regulations are to be  reconciled  with  the  directive  and
      indeed the very forceful submissions of Ms Benitez is  that  paragraph
      7(3) should be read to mean "Entitled to be issued with..."

  19. In all the circumstances therefore the  appeal  of  the  Secretary  of
      State is dismissed.  The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  shall
      stand and in those circumstances the matter remains with the Secretary
      of State.



Signed                              Date

Designated First Tier Tribunal Judge
(Sitting as a Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal)
