
                                    [pic]

First-tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/48345/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Upper Tribunal                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14th December 2016                        |On 30th December 2016         |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK
                                     and
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                          MS JESSILA BIBAT MERCADO
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant has been  granted  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal for the reasons given by Judge Juliet Grant  Hutchison  on  23
    February 2016:

               1) The appellant seeks permission in time to  appeal  against
                  the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Tynan)
                  promulgated on 25 September 2015 whereby it dismissed  the
                  appellant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of   State's
                  decision to refuse the appellant  leave  to  remain  under
                  Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration  Rules
                  and under Article 8 of the ECHR.

               2) It is arguable that the Judge erred in law by  a)  failing
                  to direct himself as the appropriate standard  and  burden
                  of  proof;  b)  by  finding  the  [sponsor]  "deliberately
                  avoided" going into details of his asylum claim  when  the
                  appellant's bundle  included  documents  relating  to  the
                  basis of the claim;  c)  by  failing  to  give  sufficient
                  reasons for going behind the  official  grant  of  refugee
                  status to the [sponsor] on the basis of his homosexuality;
                  d) by finding that the appellant and her spouse "knowingly
                  and deliberately sought to withhold the fact that  he  has
                  been married from the respondent" and that they knew  that
                  the appellant's spouse is  still  married  to  Miss  Asadi
                  without putting the matter  to  the  parties  which  could
                  arguably be perceived to be unfair  and  material  to  the
                  outcome; e) by failing to reach any  findings  on  whether
                  the parties are in a genuine and  subsisting  relationship
                  which could be material to the outcome  on  the  basis  on
                  which Article 8, both inside and outside the Rules, can be
                  determined.

Relevant Background

 2. The appellant is a national of the Philippines, whose date of birth  is
    6 February 1981.  She first entered the United Kingdom on 3  June  2011
    with valid entry clearance as a student.  The period of leave was valid
    from 23 May 2011 to 30 September 2014.   She  successfully  applied  to
    extend her leave as a student until 10 October 2016. However, her leave
    was subsequently curtailed to end on 2 October 2014.

 3. By letter dated 1 October 2014 her solicitors submitted an  application
    by her for discretionary leave to remain on the  basis  of  family  and
    private life established in the UK. The application  was  supported  by
    signed statements from the  appellant  and  her  partner,  Mr  Mohammed
    Byrami.

 4. In a statement dated 24 September 2014, Mr Byrami said that he did  not
    have a passport as he had a problem in his country of Iran, so  he  had
    come to the UK illegally and had sought asylum here in the UK.  He  had
    been granted asylum in 2008 and he had  been  issued  with  the  travel
    document, which was valid until 2013.

 5. In a joint statement, the appellant and the sponsor said that they  had
    met through an online dating app which they had on their phones.  After
    exchanging messages and getting  to  know  each  other,  the  appellant
    decided to go out with Mohammed on 23 August 2013 for their first date.
     During 2014, Mohammed asked the appellant to live with  him,  and  she
    had accepted the invitation.  She  had  moved  in  to  his  flat  on  1
    February 2014.  On 11 September 2014 they got married  at  Morden  Park
    House.

 6. They both have grown up in conservative families.  She had been  raised
    in a strict family in the Philippines, and Mohammed had been raised  in
    Iran with a background of Islam.  So they needed to comply  with  their
    parents' decision, even though their own happiness was affected.   They
    could not see themselves being separated.  They were both "Asian",  and
    they could not live in their respective countries.   The  first  reason
    was that they were of different religion, Mohammed being Muslim and the
    appellant being a Roman Catholic.  His family was  not  accepting  that
    Mohammed was married to her.  Secondly, they did not know how to  speak
    each other's languages of respectively  Farsi  and  Tagalog.   Thirdly,
    they did not have a  means  of  re-establishing  themselves  in  either
    country.

 7. Other  problems  they  would  face  were  restrictions  on  freedom  of
    expression, the rights of women in Iran being oppressed, discrimination
    being  "highly  observed",  the   Government   not   recognising   dual
    nationality, and lastly Iran having a high risk of terrorism.

 8. On 26 November 2014 the respondent gave her reasons  for  refusing  the
    appellant's application.  In Mr Byrami's application for asylum  on  21
    May 2008, it was stated that he was previously married  in  Iran.   The
    appellant had not provided the evidence specified in paragraphs 23  and
    25-26 of Appendix FM-SE, to show that Mr Byrami's previous marriage had
    been dissolved.  There was no  evidence  that  this  was  a  polygamous
    relationship  that  fell  within  paragraph  278(i)   of   the   Rules.
    Accordingly, she failed to meet the requirement of paragraph E-LTRP.1.9
    of Appendix FM.

 9. But even  if  she  was  able  to  provide  the  evidence  specified  in
    paragraphs 23 and 25-26 of Appendix FM-SE, her application would  still
    fall for refusal because she did not come within the ambit of EX.1.(b).
     While it was acknowledged that her partner had lived in the  UK  since
    2008, this did not mean that they would not be able to live together in
    the Philippines.  Although relocating  there  together  might  cause  a
    degree of hardship for her settled  partner,  the  SSHD  had  not  seen
    evidence to suggest that there were  any  insurmountable  obstacles  in
    accordance with EX.2 preventing them from continuing their relationship
    in the Philippines.

10. In order to have the relationship they claimed to have in the  UK,  she
    and her partner must be able  to  communicate  with  one  another,  and
    therefore she could help and assist her  partner  in  the  Philippines.
    Furthermore, English was widely understood in the Philippines.  It  was
    noted that she was Catholic and her partner was Muslim.   She  provided
    no evidence to suggest that inter-faith marriages were not accepted  in
    the Philippines, or  that  she  would  face  significant  obstacles  in
    enjoying family life as a result of this.

11. The substantive hearing of the appellant's appeal was first  listed  to
    take place at Hatton Cross on 15 July 2015.  The appellant's bundle  of
    documents was delivered late, with the result was that the Home  Office
    Presenting Officer only saw them on the morning of the hearing.  As  is
    recorded in Judge Tynan's subsequent decision, the  Presenting  Officer
    noted that Mr Byrami had been granted asylum in the UK "as  an  alleged
    homosexual".   The  Presenting  Officer  considered  that  this   issue
    required further investigation.  So,  the  hearing  was  adjourned  and
    various  directions  were  made,  including  that  a  further   witness
    statement should be filed.





The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

12. The appellant's appeal came before Judge Tynan sitting at Hatton  Cross
    on 19 August 2015.  Mr Solomon of Counsel appeared  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant, and on this occasion there was no appearance by a Presenting
    Officer on the part of the respondent.

13. The appellant gave oral evidence.  As summarised at paragraph  [12]  of
    Judge Tynan's subsequent decision, she described her family  as  middle
    class.  She said that religion was not important to the family and they
    were not practising Catholics.  Her parents were initially shocked when
    she told them she was in a relationship with  an  Iranian  Muslim,  but
    they were now accepting the relationship.  They were now very happy for
    her, particularly since learning that she was pregnant, and they  hoped
    to visit her and Mr Byrami in the UK.

14. At paragraph [14] the Judge held that what the  appellant  and  sponsor
    had said in their joint statement was at odds with the appellant's oral
    evidence, and it was also difficult to reconcile with what she said  in
    her witness statement on 10 July 2015, in which she stated that she and
    Mr Byrami did not have any real sort of support base to  return  to  in
    the Philippines.  It was clear to the Judge that she had  a  close  and
    loving family in the Philippines who would welcome her and her  husband
    with open arms.

15. At paragraphs [16]-[21] Judge Tynan gave detailed reasons  for  finding
    that Mr Byrami's marriage to Miss Asadi had not been dissolved  at  the
    time of his purported marriage  to  the  appellant  in  the  UK  on  11
    September 2014.  The Judge also found that Mr Byrami knew at  the  time
    that the Family Court in Iran had yet to give its judgment as  to  Miss
    Asadi's entitlement to a divorce, and accordingly he knew that  he  was
    not legally in a position to marry the appellant on 11 September 2014.

16. At paragraphs [22] and [23] Judge Tynan contrasted what Mr  Byrami  had
    initially said about his reason for claiming asylum with  what  he  had
    said following the adjourned hearing on 15 July 2015.   Mr  Byrami  had
    filed a statement dated 4 August 2015 in which he stated  that  he  had
    begun to attend a Mosque once he was settled in the UK, and  that  with
    the help and guidance of Allah, his sexual preference had changed.

17. At paragraph [24] the Judge said that there were  three  possibilities.
    The first was that Mr Byrami's sexuality was fluid,  and  that  he  was
    attracted to both men and women.  The second was that he  had  lied  in
    2008 when he claimed asylum on the basis that he was  homosexual.   The
    third was that he was still a homosexual, in which case  that  must  at
    least give rise to a legitimate question  as  to  whether  he  and  the
    appellant had a genuine and subsisting relationship. He continued:

         Neither the appellant nor Mr Byrami provided satisfactory responses
         to the questions I asked them on  this  issue.   Mr  Byrami  was  a
         particularly unconvincing witness.  It is apparent from my findings
         already that I formed an adverse view as to Mr Byrami's honesty and
         credibility.  He has, as I  have  found,  sought  to  mislead  this
         Tribunal.

18. The Judge held in  paragraph  [25]  that  Mr  Byrami  had  deliberately
    avoided going into the details of his asylum claim,  precisely  because
    he knew that it potentially called into question his claim to be  in  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with the appellant.  He might  have
    elected to open and up-front about this issue, but he chose not to  be.
    He continued:

         Against the background that he has purported to marry the appellant
         when he knew he was  not  free  to  do  so,  I  have  come  to  the
         conclusion that Mr Byrami is not a homosexual  and  has  never  had
         sexual  or  other  feelings  of  attraction   towards   men.    The
         appellant's evidence was that she had not discussed  her  husband's
         claimed homosexual past with him.  She claimed that it was  in  the
         past and that she had no desire to ask him about  his  past  or  to
         aggravate it.  She said that she did not wish her family life to be
         ruined by discussion of the matter.  That was the  full  extent  of
         her evidence on the subject.

19. The judge noted that she does not address the issue in  either  of  her
    two supplemental statements dated 4 August 2014, nor was it referred to
    in the joint statement headed "History of the Relationship" or  in  her
    statement dated 10 July 2015.  The judge found  her  evidence  on  this
    issue unconvincing and lacking credibility:

         Anyone in the appellant's position would  want  to  understand  why
         their partner  had  claimed  asylum  on  grounds  of  their  stated
         homosexuality, would be keenly interested to know whether they  had
         in fact had homosexual experiences  in  the  past,  would  want  to
         understand their sexual orientation and the potential  implications
         for their relationship.

20. At paragraph [29] the Judge concluded that both the  appellant  and  Mr
    Byrami knowingly and deliberately sought to withhold the fact  that  Mr
    Byrami had been married, and the reason why they  did  so  was  because
    they knew  that  Mr  Byrami  was  still  married  to  Miss  Asadi,  and
    accordingly they knew that their own marriage  was  invalid,  but  they
    went through the ceremony of marriage  as  the  appellant's  leave  was
    about to end.

21. The Judge then turned to consider whether the appellant and  Mr  Byrami
    were in a genuine and subsisting relationship.  He conjectured that the
    respondent would be further influenced  in  her  view  of  the  claimed
    relationship if she was aware that the marriage was  invalid.   But  as
    the respondent was not represented at the adjourned hearing, he decided
    that the most appropriate course was to make no specific finding either
    way, but,  "for  the  purposes  of  this  appeal,  to  proceed  on  the
    assumption that the appellant and  Mr  Byrami  are  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship and  that  Mr  Byrami  is  the  father  of  the
    appellant's unborn child."

22. At paragraphs [31]-[34] the Judge gave his  reasons  for  finding  that
    there were no insurmountable obstacles to family life being carried  on
    in the Philippines.

23. At paragraphs [37]-[38], the Judge addressed the question  whether  the
    appellant qualified for Article 8 relief outside the Rules  on  account
    inter alia of her being  six  months'  pregnant.   Notwithstanding  his
    findings  regarding  the  appellant  and  Mr   Byrami's   conduct,   he
    disregarded this in terms of whether it  would  be  a  disproportionate
    interference to require the appellant to return to the Philippines.  He
    held that the appellant and Mr Byrami  did  not  forfeit  their  rights
    under Article 8, nor were their rights  diluted,  by  reason  of  their
    conduct that could  be  criticised  or  because  they  had  engaged  in
    deception.  However, having regard to the appellant's  support  network
    in the Philippines, and since she would be returning to  a  country  in
    which she had lived for the majority of her life and with which she was
    very familiar, he  was  satisfied  that  the  appellant  was  eminently
    capable of navigating its healthcare system and accessing the  services
    which the state made available to pregnant women.

24. He accepted that there would be an  inevitable  and  not  insignificant
    degree of inconvenience until the couple  were  fully  settled  in  the
    Philippines, but  notwithstanding  the  appellant's  pregnancy  and  Mr
    Byrami's circumstances and situation, they could reasonably be expected
    to continue their family and private life in the Philippines, and  they
    would be able to do so without undue hardship to either them  or  their
    child.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

25. At the outset of the hearing, we drew attention to the  fact  that  the
    appellant had written to the Tribunal on 15 November  2016.   She  said
    that she had given birth  to  a  child  by  Mr  Byrami,  but  that  her
    relationship with Mr Byrami had come to an end.  She  was  now  seeking
    leave to remain in the UK as the primary carer of  a  British  national
    child on Zambrano grounds.  She indicated that she was content for  the
    appeal to proceed in her  absence.   We  informed  Mr  Clarke  that  we
    considered that it was in the interest of justice to proceed  with  the
    hearing in her absence, pursuant to Rule 38 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

26. Mr Clarke identified seven discreet points raised  by  Counsel  in  the
    application for permission to appeal, and he addressed us  on  each  of
    them.  We reserved our decision.

Discussion

27. Ground 1 is that the Judge failed to direct himself on the  appropriate
    standard of proof.  We  accept  that  there  is  no  reference  in  the
    decision to the appropriate standard of proof being on the  balance  of
    probabilities.  But we are not persuaded that the Judge has  applied  a
    "much higher standard" in evaluating the claim.  We consider  that  the
    Judge has assessed the evidence on the balance of probabilities and  we
    were unable to identify any finding which appears to have been  reached
    by the Judge inappropriately applying a higher standard of proof,  such
    as beyond reasonable doubt.

28. Judge Grant Hutchison also gave permission to appeal on the ground that
    it was arguable that the Judge had misdirected himself as to the burden
    of proof. But this is not  a  criticism  made  by  Mr  Solomon  in  the
    application for permission to appeal, and we can discern  no  error  in
    this regard.

29. Grounds 2 and 3 are lengthy and discursive. They  have  been  helpfully
    distilled by Judge Grant Hutchison into sub-paragraphs (b)  to  (d)  of
    her reasons for granting permission.

30. The finding that the sponsor  had  "deliberately  avoided"  going  into
    details of his asylum claim is pleaded as being  neither  rational  nor
    adequately reasoned.   We  do  not  agree.  The  Judge  has  adequately
    explained the relevant sequence of events.  The evidence  submitted  in
    support of the application for leave to remain  was  silent  about  the
    reason put forward by Mr Byrami for claiming asylum.  It was only  when
    the extensive appellant's bundle was seen by the Presenting Officer  on
    the day of the hearing scheduled for July 2015 that it became  apparent
    that Mr Byrami had successfully claimed asylum on the  grounds  of  his
    claimed homosexual orientation.   For  that  reason,  the  hearing  was
    adjourned so as to give Mr Byrami the opportunity to explain himself in
    a witness statement.

31. Mr Byrami's claimed homosexual orientation was relevant to the question
    of whether the relationship between him and the appellant  was  genuine
    and subsisting, which was not conceded in the refusal decision.  It was
    open to the Judge to find, for the reasons which he gave, that  neither
    the appellant nor Mr Byrami was 'up-front' about this  issue  when  the
    appellant applied for leave to remain on  the  basis  of  her  asserted
    genuine and subsisting marital relationship with Mr Byrami. It was only
    because the voluminous appellant's bundle contained  the  statement  of
    additional grounds in the asylum claim that the Presenting Officer  was
    alerted to the fact that the asserted fear on return  to  Iran  was  Mr
    Byrami being persecuted on account of his  homosexual  orientation.  In
    his subsequent witness statement, My Byrami did not go into the details
    of his asylum claim, but simply said that his  sexual  orientation  had
    changed in the UK. Against this background, it was not perverse of  the
    judge to find that  Mr  Byrami  had  deliberately  avoided  going  into
    details of his asylum claim.

32. It is not suggested that Mr Byrami acquired refugee status following  a
    successful appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal,  and  so  the  grant  of
    refugee status on the grounds of his  claimed  homosexuality  does  not
    give rise to an evidential presumption. It was open  to  the  Judge  to
    find that Mr Byrami was not a homosexual, and never had been,  for  the
    reasons which he gave.

33. There is no error of law challenge  to  the  Judge's  finding  that  Mr
    Byrami's previous marriage to Miss Asadi had not been dissolved by  the
    time of his marriage to the appellant on 11 September 2014.  The  Judge
    reached his conclusion on the  basis  of  a  careful  analysis  of  the
    documents from the Family Court in Iran which Mr Byrami  had  provided.
    The Judge also took into account Mr  Byrami's  account  of  the  Family
    Court proceedings, and in particular his  explanation  about  the  date
    which appeared on the judgment issued by the Family Court.

34. As  the  Judge  rejected  Mr  Byrami's  account  of  the  Family  Court
    proceedings, and his explanation for  the  date  of  the  judgment,  it
    followed almost inexorably that Mr Byrami  had  entered  into  marriage
    with the appellant when he knew that he was not free to do  so,  as  he
    was still married to Miss Asadi.  Since he and the appellant claimed to
    be in a genuine and subsisting relationship, it was open to  the  judge
    to infer that  the  appellant  was  also  aware  that  their  purported
    marriage was invalid due to it being bigamous.  So we do  not  consider
    that it was procedurally unfair for the Judge not to have explored this
    case theory with the witnesses.

35. In addition, we do not consider that the Judge's finding  of  deception
    was material to the outcome.  It had no bearing on  his  assessment  of
    whether there  were  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life  being
    carried on in the Philippines, and he expressly  disregarded  deception
    in his assessment of proportionality.

36. Ground 4 is that the Judge erred in failing to reach  any  findings  on
    whether the parties were in a genuine and subsisting relationship.   We
    consider this ground is without merit.  The Judge expressly decided  on
    procedural fairness grounds to assume in the  appellant's  favour  that
    her relationship with Mr Bryami was genuine and subsisting.

37. Ground 5 is that the Judge wrongly applied the test  of  insurmountable
    obstacles under paragraph EX.1 by requiring the appellant to show  that
    it would  be  impossible  for  the  couple  to  live  together  in  The
    Philippines.  We find that the Judge correctly applied  the  definition
    of insurmountable obstacles provided in  EX.2.  He  considered  whether
    there were very significant difficulties which would be  faced  by  the
    applicant or their partner in continuing  their  family  life  together
    outside the UK, and which could not be overcome or  would  entail  very
    serious hardship for the applicant or their partner.  The Judge did not
    apply the higher test of impossibility.

38. In the course of  his  discussion,  he  said  he  did  not  accept  the
    appellant's evidence, "that it would be impossible  for  them  to  live
    together or that Mr Byrami will be unable to obtain and job and  pursue
    a career".  It is clear from the  context  that  the  judge  is  simply
    responding to the case put forward by the appellant. He is not  thereby
    adopting a higher test of impossibility.

39. Ground 6 relates to the question of whether there are insuperable legal
    obstacles to Mr Byrami joining the appellant  in  the  Philippines,  on
    account of his status.  The Judge found that Mr Byrami  could  lawfully
    enter the Philippines using a Balik  Biyan  visa,  which  is  mentioned
    briefly at page 273 of  the  appellant's  bundle.  He  held  that  this
    permitted him to enter the country without a visa for a period of up to
    one year, and it did not require him to demonstrate any specific  level
    of savings.  He held that Mr Byrami could make a short visa run out  of
    the country once a year until the requisite savings  of  US$10,000  had
    been accumulated. Once he had savings in this amount, Mr  Byrami  would
    be eligible to reside in the country on a permanent basis.

40. Mr  Solomon  pleads  that  the  Judge's  findings  on  this  issue  are
    inadequately  reasoned  or  irrational.   The  irrationality  complaint
    arises from the Judge's finding that the appellant and  Mr  Bryami  are
    not  legally  married.   While  this  might  be  an  impediment  to  an
    application for permanent residence,  it  is  a  difficulty  which  can
    easily be  overcome  by  the  parties  contracting  a  valid  marriage.
    Moreover, there is nothing in the information given at page 273 of  the
    appellant's bundle to indicate that Mr Byrami could  not  have  entered
    the Philippines as the unmarried partner of the appellant  on  a  Balik
    Biyan visa.  So we find Ground 6 is not made out.

41. Ground 7 is that no proper consideration was given  to  the  impact  of
    removing the appellant when she was nearly six months pregnant, and  no
    proper consideration  was  given  to  other  issues  bearing  upon  the
    proportionality assessment, such as the public interest  considerations
    arising under section 117B.

42. There was no specific evidence that the appellant had reached  a  stage
    in her pregnancy when it was medically unwise for her to undertake on a
    long haul flight. We also do not consider that the Secretary  of  State
    would seek to remove a woman in a late stage of pregnancy. So the judge
    did not err in not asking himself the question whether at the  date  of
    the hearing the appellant could be safely flown home. It  was  open  to
    the judge to focus on the question of  whether  it  was  reasonable  to
    expect the appellant to go back home to give birth  to  the  child,  or
    whether she should in effect be given special  dispensation  to  remain
    here for the remainder of her pregnancy.

43. The Judge's failure to  make  express  reference  to  section  117B  is
    immaterial, following AM (s117B) Malawi [2015]  UKUT  0260  (IAC).   We
    consider that the Judge gave adequate reasons  for  finding  that  that
    there were not sufficiently compelling or  compassionate  circumstances
    to justify the appellant being granted Article  8  relief  outside  the
    Rules.

Notice of Decision

44. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  contain  an  error  of
    Law, and accordingly the decision stands.  This  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal is dismissed.

We make no anonymity direction.


Signed                              Date 30/12/2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
