
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: IA/48104/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 October 2015                   |On 3 November 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        MR RICHARD OLAREWAJU OWOLABI
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant   Mr Nath (Home Office Presenting Officer)
Respondent  Mr Khan, Counsel, instructed by Legacy Law


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Whereas the original respondent is the appealing party, I shall, in the
    interests of convenience and consistency, replicate the nomenclature of
    the decision at first instance.

 2. The appellant is a national of Nigeria and he applied for the permanent
    residence card as confirmation of a  right  to  reside  in  the  United
    Kingdom on September 3, 2014. The respondent refused his application on
    November 15, 2014 because she  was  not  satisfied  the  appellant  had
    demonstrated that his former wife had exercised treaty rights up to and
    including the date of the decree absolute.

 3. The  appellant  appealed  this  refusal  under  Regulation  26  of  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

 4. The matter was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Symes  on  May
    6, 2015 and in a decision promulgated on  June  2,  2015  the  Tribunal
    allowed his appeal under the 2006 Regulations.

 5. The respondent applied  for  permission  to  appeal  on  June  9,  2015
    submitting  the  Tribunal  had  erred  by  allowing   the   appeal   in
    circumstances where the appellant had accepted he had  been  unable  to
    provide evidence that his former wife had  been  trading  between  June
    2012 and August 2013.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Ford on August 25, 2015 on the basis that it was arguable the  Tribunal
    had erred for the reasons set out in the  grounds  of  permission  save
    paragraph [8] of the grounds was rejected.

 7. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity  direction  and
    pursuant to Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I see no reason to make an order now.

    SUBMISSIONS

 8. Mr Nath relied on the grounds of appeal  and  in  particular  submitted
    that there was no documentary evidence  to  demonstrate  that  the  EEA
    national wife had been exercising treaty rights during the period  July
    2012 and August 2013. The letters from HMRC dated  July  15,  2013  and
    August 5, 2013 did not address the gap between July 2012 and July  2013
    and at the very best all it could be said was that she had demonstrated
    an intention to run a business from July/August 2013 but this  did  not
    satisfy the EEA Regulations that required the appellant to  demonstrate
    that she had been exercising treaty rights. Oral evidence given to  the
    Tribunal was insufficient to demonstrate this and there was an error in
    law.

 9. Mr Khan submitted there was no error of law and invited me to take into
    account the fact that this was a domestic violence case  and  obtaining
    evidence from the appellant's  former  wife  would  be  difficult.  The
    Tribunal had heard oral evidence from the appellant and found him to be
    a credible witness and the Tribunal also had the aforementioned letters
    from HMRC and he submitted that HMRC would  not  have  issued  the  EEA
    national with a UTR reference if it was not satisfied she was genuinely
    self-employed. He invited me to find there was no error in law.

    DISCUSSION AND FINDINGS

10. Permission to appeal had been granted to the respondent on the basis it
    was arguable that the Tribunal had erred in  concluding  in  paragraphs
    [22] and [23] that the EEA national was established in business.

11. The appellant had accepted in both his written and oral  evidence  that
    he could not provide evidence demonstrating that she had been  actively
    working during the period July 2012 and August 2013. The Tribunal heard
    oral evidence from him and that evidence was recorded in paragraph [21]
    of the Tribunal's decision. In short, the tribunal  took  into  account
    the appellant's oral evidence and the two letters from July and  August
    2013.

12. The argument put forward today by Mr Nath is  that  this  evidence  was
    insufficient for the Tribunal to make a finding  that  the  appellant's
    wife had been a qualified person for the purposes of the Regulations.

13. Whilst I note Mr Khan's submissions I am  satisfied  that  there  is  a
    material error in law.  The  Regulations  do  not  distinguish  between
    parties who are together and parties who are separated. Many cases come
    before these Tribunals where parties are separated but the burden is on
    the appellant to satisfy the Tribunal that the EEA national was at  all
    times a qualified person.

14. In this particular appeal whilst I take on board Mr  Khan's  submission
    relating to the two letters dated July and August 2013 I  am  satisfied
    that that his submission does not  address  the  previous  twelve-month
    period (July 2012 to July 2013) where  there  was  an  absence  of  any
    evidence of employment.

15.  Those  HMRC  letters  may  indicate  that  in  July/August  2013   the
    appellant's ex-wife decided to start her  own  business  and  if  those
    letters had been dated July 2012 then Mr Khan's argument may  have  had
    more weight. However, the Tribunal erred because it had no evidence  to
    cover the  missing  twelve-month  period  and  the  oral  evidence  was
    insufficient because the appellant was not in  a  position  to  provide
    evidence that she was working or running her own business.

16. In the circumstances the Tribunal was wrong to find  the  EEA  national
    was a qualifying person up to and including  the  date  of  the  decree
    absolute.

17. I indicated to both representatives at the hearing that if there was  a
    material error then this appeal had to fail. Accordingly, I  set  aside
    the Tribunal's earlier decision allowing this  appeal  under  the  2006
    Regulations.

    DECISION

18. There was a material error.  I set  aside  the  original  decision  and
    remake the decision and dismiss the appeal under the 2006 Regulations.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award as the appeal has been dismissed.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
