
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                    Appeal
Number:     IA/48474/2013
                                                               IA/48484/2013
                                                               IA/48487/2013
                                                               IA/48471/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|                                           |Determination Promulgated  |
|Heard at Field House                       | On 2 July 2014            |
|On 18 June 2014                            |                           |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA

                                   Between

                            MRS FARZANA YEASMIN`
                            MR ABDUL ILHAM JALIL
                             MISS FATIMAH JAILIL
                         MASTER MOHAMMD ABDUL JALIL
                       (Anonymity directions not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY Of STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the appellant: Ms J B Herwood, Senior Presenting Officer
For the respondent: Mr M.I. Hossain, Counsel


                         DETERMINATION  AND REASONS


   1. The appellant is the  Secretary  of  State  and  the  respondents  are
      citizens of Bangladesh born on 30  July  1983,  15  October  1975,  18
      August 2006 and 16 February 2011 respectively. They are mother, father
      and their two children. I shall however, for the sake of  convenience,
      refer to the Secretary of State as the respondent and  the  appellants
      as the appellants which are the designations they had before the first-
      tier Tribunal.


   2. They appellants appealed against the decision of the respondent  dated
      6 November 2013 to refuse to vary their leave to remain in the  United
      Kingdom on the basis of private and family life pursuant to  paragraph
      276B of  the  Immigration  Rules.   First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Moore
      dismissed the appellant's appeal pursuant to the Immigration Rules but
      allowed  the  appellant's  appeal  pursuant  to   Article   8   in   a
      determination promulgated on 28 April 2014.  Judge Saffer of the First-
      tier Tribunal gave the respondent permission to appeal and  said  that
      it is arguable that the Judge may have misapplied paragraph 276ADE  of
      the Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules HX395  as  indicated  in
      the grounds of appeal.


    Findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge


   3.   The First-Tier Tribunal found the following.


   I. The first appellant entered the United Kingdom on 1  July  2006  as  a
      student with leave to enter, valid until 30 July  2007.  Her  husband,
      the second appellant  joined  her  on  21  February  2007.  They  have
      continued to live in this country and were granted  further  leave  to
      remain on several occasions, the last  leave  to  remain  being  valid
      until 12 October 2013.


  II. On 18 August 2006, the third appellant was born six  weeks  after  the
      first appellant entered the United Kingdom. The fourth  appellant  was
      born in the United Kingdom on 16 February 2011.


 III. On 9 October 2013 an application was made which was based on the third
      appellant having lived in the United  Kingdom  continuously  for  more
      than seven years and in the circumstances has met the requirements  of
      paragraph 276 ADE (iv) of the Immigration Rules. As a consequence  the
      three other appellants should also be granted leave to remain in  line
      with the third appellant's leave as they have demonstrated  that  they
      have a genuine and subsisting relationship with the third appellant.


  IV. The case turns on the issue in relation to the third appellant who was
      born on 18 August 2006 and is now approaching eight years of age.  The
      fourth appellant is just three years of  age  and  has  yet  to  start
      nursery school.


   V. The third appellant who has lived in this country for seven years  and
      was born in the United Kingdom in August 2006 would appear to  satisfy
      the requirements of leave for him to remain in the United  Kingdom  on
      the grounds of private life by reference to paragraph 276 ADE (iv)  of
      the Immigration Rules.


  VI. It is the best interests of the third appellant  to  remain  with  his
      parents, wherever they may be. Indeed it was never  the  intention  of
      the respondent in the decision for anything other than the  family  to
      return to Bangladesh as a family unit.


 VII. It is clear from the judgement of ZH Tanzania that the best  interests
      of the child is an issue which has to be  addressed  first  and  is  a
      distinct stage of the enquiry. Consideration  should  be  given  to  a
      variety of individual circumstances, such as the age of the child, the
      level of maturity of the child, the presence or  absence  of  parents,
      the child's environment and experiences,  (guidelines  on  determining
      the best interests of the child UNHCR May 2008) and  the  comments  of
      Baroness Hale in ZH Tanzania.


VIII. The appellant now appears to be  doing  particularly  well  at  school
      having made a number of school  friends  and  demonstrating  excellent
      progress and clearly removing him from this environment would not only
      disrupt such educational  progress,  it  would  inevitably  cause  the
      breakdown of relationships made at  school  and  would  be  likely  to
      substantially hinder educational  progress  and  future  prospects  in
      terms of job or career. The  third  appellant  clearly  satisfies  the
      immigration rules under paragraph 276 ADE (iv).


  IX. In considering particular circumstances which  constitute  exceptional
      circumstances contained  in  Article  8  of  the  EEC  HR,  the  third
      appellant's education will be disrupted and this would lead  to  long-
      term disruption to the third appellant's life. The evidence  from  his
      mother, the first appellant was that they no longer have any family in
      Bangladesh or any cultural and religious links to that country.


   X. There is a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship  between  the
      third appellant and his parents and it would be unreasonable to expect
      the child to leave the United Kingdom. He has never visited Bangladesh
      and there is no evidence of any existing family or  social  ties  with
      that country. He has never attended school in Bangladesh and whilst he
      can converse occasionally with his father in Bengali, he does not read
      or write in that language. The third appellant would not be likely  to
      integrate readily into Bangladesh. The guidance recognises that  after
      seven years, children start putting roots and integrate into  life  in
      the United Kingdom and requiring the  third  appellant  to  leave  the
      country would be unreasonable.


  XI. All four appellant have lived in the United Kingdom lawfully and there
      is no issue of criminal conduct of  they  have  not  had  recourse  to
      public funds in order to maintain and accommodate themselves.


 XII. The respondent's decision is an interference with the exercise of  the
      third appellant's right to respect  for  his  private  life  and  that
      interference is of such gravity as to potentially engage Article 8. It
      would also be disproportionate to the third  appellant  to  leave  the
      United Kingdom in order that the respondent's legitimate aim and right
      to regulate and control immigration should be maintained.


XIII. The parents of the third appellant  also  get  the  benefit  from  the
      third appellant's right to pirate life.


      The respondent's grounds of appeal


   4. The respondent in her grounds of appeal states the following  which  I
      summarise. Paragraphs 276 ADE (iv)  allows  an  applicant  to  succeed
      under the Rules if he, is under the age of  18  years  and  has  lived
      continuously  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  at  least   seven   years
      (discounting  any  period  of  imprisonment)  and  it  would  not   be
      reasonable to expect the applicant to leave the  United  Kingdom.  The
      Rule therefore has two limbs, the first is that the  child  must  have
      lived continuously in the United Kingdom for seven years and it cannot
      be reasonable for him to leave the United  Kingdom.  The  Judge  found
      that it is not disputed that the third  appellant  has  lived  in  the
      United Kingdom continuously for more than  seven  years,  having  been
      born in the United Kingdom in August 2006. In those circumstances, the
      third appellant would appear to satisfy the requirements of  leave  to
      remain in the United  Kingdom  on  the  grounds  of  private  life  by
      reference to paragraph 276 ADE (iv) of the Immigration Rules.


   5. The Judge however failed to properly to consider the second limb which
      is the reasonableness  of  the  third  appellant  leaving  the  United
      Kingdom in light of his age. In Azimi-Moayed [2013]  UKUT,  the  Upper
      Tribunal held that the connection which are  established  by  a  child
      from birth to age 7 are less significant than those established in the
      seven year period later in a child's minority.


   6. The third appellant can be removed from the United  Kingdom  with  his
      parents and younger sibling. The Judge  found  that  contrary  to  his
      parent's evidence, the third appellant did understand  and  conversion
      Bengali with his parents. In  EA  (article  8-best  interests  of  the
      child) (Nigeria) [2011] UKUT (IAC) it was held by the  Upper  Tribunal
      at paragraph 46 stated that "equally we do not conclude that the  fact
      that the children had lived in the UK for most of their lives who  are
      being expected to move to a country they do  not  yet  know  does  not
      makes that disproportionate. There must  be  individual  consideration
      and assessment of best interests in each and every case.  By  contrast
      with ZH Tanzania, the move to Nigeria in that  case  from  the  United
      Kingdom does not involve separation from a carer  or  the  country  of
      nationality. These decisions to not interfere with  the  enjoyment  of
      family life on the part of any of the appellant's".


   7. The Judge failed to consider the effect of the third  appellant  being
      removed with this family unit upon his private as distinct from family
      life is a further factor tending towards  the  reasonableness  of  the
      third appellant's removal. The Judge also failed to consider the third
      appellant's parent's temporary student migrant status  when  assessing
      the  reasonableness  of  the  third  appellant's  removal.  In  EA  at
      paragraph 43 it is stated that it is important to recall that  all  of
      the appellants may all have been here lawfully but they  came  to  the
      United Kingdom for temporary purposes with  no  expectation  of  being
      able to remain in the UK. The third appellant happened to be  born  in
      the United Kingdom whilst  his  parents  were  here  for  a  temporary
      purpose. The expectation was that they would  all  return  to  Nigeria
      once the first appellant studies were completed. Those who have  their
      families with them during a period of study in the United Kingdom must
      do so in the light of that expectation of return."


   8. The Judge allowed the appellant's appeal under Article 8  rather  than
      paragraph 276ADE holding that the appeal in respect of all  appellants
      should also be allowed in line  with  the  third  appellant  on  human
      rights grounds. By allowing the third appellant's appeal under article
      8 rather than the Immigration Rules  the  Judge  materially  erred  by
      failing  to  identify  in  the  third  appellant's  case,   compelling
      circumstances not sufficiently recognised under the Immigration  Rules
      of the sort required to ground  an  arguable  case  for  consideration
      outside the Immigration Rules in accordance with the case of Rv  Ngare
      versus SS HD [2013] (admin). The Judge also erred by failing  to  have
      regard to  the  requirements  of  paragraph  276  ADE  is  a  relevant
      consideration in the proportionality evaluation.  He  also  materially
      erred in failing to  have  regard  to  the  public  interest  in  firm
      immigration control. Therefore if the  decision  in  relation  to  the
      third appellant is erroneous, the decision in  respect  of  the  other
      appellants must fall with it.


      The hearing and the parties' submissions


   9. At the hearing, Miss Isherwood on behalf of the respondent stated that
      the appellant's family came to this country in a  temporary  capacity.
      They waited until the third  appellant  was  seven  years  old  before
      making an application for the entire family to live in  this  country.
      The Judge failed to consider why the child should not go back with his
      parents to Bangladesh. There are two elements to paragraph 276ADE. The
      judge stopped at the first one. There was  no  identification  of  the
      compelling circumstances in the appellant's case  for  why  he  cannot
      return with  his  family  as  a  family  unit.  The  only  exceptional
      circumstances identified by the Judge was  that  the  third  appellant
      does not speak Bengali and that he has never been to  Bangladesh.  The
      third appellant has been to school for four  years  and  as  such  his
      needs and social interests is based on his family  unit.  Even  though
      the education system may be better in the United  Kingdom,  the  third
      appellant is not a British  citizen  so  he  is  not  entitled  to  be
      educated in the United Kingdom. Family units of non-British  nationals
      has not been considered by the judge.


  10. The Judge states that the appellant should  remain  with  his  parents
      wherever they may be. Paragraph 29 of ZH Tanzania  referrers  and  the
      Judge  failed  to  engage  with  Article  8  as  to   the   compelling
      circumstances in this case. The appellants could have  no  expectation
      that they would be allowed to live in this country for ever. There are
      also no evidence of difficulties that the family  would  encounter  on
      their return to Bangladesh.


  11. Mr Hossain made the following submissions. Paragraph  26  states  that
      the third appellant has lived in the United  Kingdom  and  it  is  not
      reasonable for him to leave this country. The Judge  at  paragraph  30
      mentions exceptional circumstances and therefore  has  considered  the
      second limb of the immigration rule.


  12. Ms Isherwood said that the appellant's  representative  is  indicating
      today that the third appellant's appeal should be  allowed  under  the
      Immigration Rules which was not in the appellant's grounds of  appeal.
      There was an error of law and the decision should be set aside.




    Did the determination of the First-tier Tribunal involve the making  of
    an error of law?


  13. I have considered the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge,  the
      skeleton argument and the  submissions  made  by  the  parties  as  to
      whether there  is  an  error  of  law  in  the  determination.  Having
      considered  the  determination  as  a  whole,  I  find  Judge  Moore's
      consideration of the appellant's appeal in respect of the  Immigration
      Rules and Article 8 of the European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  is
      materially flawed.


  14. I agree with the respondent that the Judge  did  not  give  sufficient
      reasons for why the third appellant who has just  passed  the  age  of
      seven should not return to Bangladesh with the rest of his family  who
      are in  this  country  on  a  temporary  basis  or  why  it  would  be
      unreasonable for him to do so. The agreed facts  are  that  the  first
      appellant, the mother, came to this country in 2006 on a student visa.
      The first appellant was born very soon after she came to this country.
      The fourth appellant was also born in this country but the  Judge  did
      not take into account they are all nationals  of  Bangladesh  and  not
      British  citizens  and  therefore  did  not  make  our  fact  specific
      evaluation.


  15. The Judge failed to recognise that the Immigration Rules are Article 8
      compliant and that it will only be in exceptional circumstances  where
      the appellant should succeed under Article 8 when  he  cannot  succeed
      under the Immigration Rules. The  Judge  found  that  the  exceptional
      circumstances in the appellant's case consist of the appellant not  to
      being able to speak Bangladeshi and the fact that he has never visited
      Bangladesh and that his education will  be  fatally  compromised.  The
      evidence that the Judge recognised  was  that  the  third  appellant's
      father and mother do not speak English or  very  limited  English  and
      converse with the third appellant in Bengali. The Judge failed to take
      into account that the appellant who has just passed the age  of  seven
      years and that his cultural and social identity is  derived  from  his
      parents and their community. He also failed to take  into  account  at
      eight years old, his ties to this country are less  relevant  at  this
      stage of his life.


  16. The Judge also took  into  account  irrelevant  factors  such  as  the
      appellant's education would  be  hindered  if  he  had  to  return  to
      Bangladesh and that this would ruin his future prospects. He failed to
      take into account  that  Bangladesh  has  educational  facilities  for
      children who live in Bangladesh. He also failed to take  into  account
      that a non-British  child  is  not  entitled  or  should  not  have  a
      reasonable expectation that he will be educated to British standards.


  17. Although the Judge cited all the relevant case law in respect  of  the
      interests of children in the United Kingdom, he failed  to  take  into
      consideration that he must conduct  an  individual  consideration  and
      assessment  of  the  best  interests  of  the  appellant's  particular
      circumstances. He failed to take into  account  that  the  appellant's
      exclusion from the United Kingdom and for him to return to  Bangladesh
      with his family does  not  involve  separation  from  his  parents  or
      siblings which has been held to be the starting point as to  the  best
      interests of the children that is to be with  both  parents  and  that
      dependent children will form part of their household will  be  removed
      unless there is some reason to the contrary. The judge failed to  give
      cogent reasons for why the third dependent child should not return  to
      Bangladesh with his family. The Judge failed to  consider  that  being
      removed with his family unit  is  a  factor  which  goes  towards  the
      reasonableness of the third appellant's removal with  all  his  family
      members.


  18. The Judge also failed to consider that  the  appellants  were  granted
      leave to remain in the United Kingdom on a temporary basis  and  could
      not have had any legitimate expectation that they could live  in  this
      country on a permanent bases unless they complied with the Immigration
      Rules for further leave to remain. The Judge failed to  consider  that
      non-nationals who come to this country to study  with  their  families
      must know that they will have to return to  their  home  country  with
      their children after the completion of their studies.


  19. Finally, the Judge did not allow  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
      Rules but pursuant to Article 8. The grounds of appeal do not seek  to
      challenge his finding that the appellants do not meet the requirements
      of the Immigration Rules.


  20. I find there is a material error of law in the determination and I set
      it aside in its entirety. The  appeal  to  be  reheard  in  the  Upper
      Tribunal.


DECISION

Appeal allowed




Signed by

A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Mrs S  Chana                                                Dated  this  1st
    day of July 2014
