
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/48702/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 14th April 2014                            |On 8th August 2014           |
|Given extempore                               |                             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

                                 mohil kumar

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Richmond, Counsel instructed by Richmond
Chambers LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of India, who was  born  on  20th  November,
    1972, and who made application to the respondent through solicitors for
    indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom,  outside   the
    Immigration Rules.  The respondent refused that application in a letter
    dated 3rd November, 2013, and on  11th  November,  2013,  directed  the
    appellant's removal as an  illegal  entrant  or  a  person  subject  to
    administrative removal under Section 10 of the 1999 Act.  The appellant
    appealed that decision and his appeal was heard by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Maxwell at Richmond on 20th February this year.

2.   The appellant claimed to have been  deserted  by  his  natural  parents
    when he was very young and  thereafter  to  have  been  reared  by  his
    maternal grandparents in India until he was approximately 12  years  of
    age.  His grandparents then decided to emigrate to the United States of
    America to live with their son and, he  claimed,  brought  him  to  the
    United Kingdom in 2005, ostensibly to  visit  their  daughter  and  her
    family.  They told the appellant's aunt and uncle that they were taking
    the appellant to live with them in the USA, but in  fact  left  him  in
    their care after about a week when they continued their onward journey.
     The appellant and his grandparents had been granted family visit visas
    to enter the United Kingdom.

3.   Shortly after their arrival in the USA,  the  appellant's  grandparents
    apparently contacted their daughter and son-in-law  and  informed  them
    that they were not intending to  bring  the  appellant  to  the  United
    States and that they would leave him in the  United  Kingdom  in  their
    care.

4.    The  appeal  was  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Maxwell  who
    considered the human rights appeal under Article 8  and  dismissed  the
    appeal.  Unfortunately, in doing so, he did not  indicate  anywhere  in
    his determination the standard of proof he was applying.   That  formed
    the first basis of challenge on behalf of the appellant.

5.   Before me today Mr Tufan accepted that there was no indication  in  the
    determination anywhere as to the  standard  of  proof  applied  by  the
    judge, although the burden of proof was referred to at paragraph 11  of
    the determination.  Since the judge will frequently  deal  with  asylum
    matters, irrespective of any other jurisdictions the  judge  might  sit
    in, he will be familiar with the two alternative  standards  applicable
    in this jurisdiction and it is imperative  that  he  indicates  in  his
    determination which standard he is applying.  Since he has not done  so
    in this determination, I set it aside.  None of the  findings  of  fact
    shall stand.

6.   Mindful of the Senior President's Practice Statement, I concluded  that
    it is likely that the appellant will have an earlier hearing before the
    First-tier Tribunal than would be the case were the  matter  to  remain
    with the Upper Tier and, as a result, the matter  is  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for  hearing  by  a  judge  other  than  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Maxwell.





Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

