
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/48905/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 4th May 2016                          |On 27th May 2016                  |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                  Between:

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Hamid Ali Khan
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Z Miah, solicitor


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, I shall refer  to
    the parties as in the First-tier Tribunal.  The Appellant is a  citizen
    of  Afghanistan  born  on  5th  May  1986.   His  appeal  against   the
    Respondent's decision of 17th November 2014 to refuse to grant leave to
    remain in the UK as a Tier 4 (General) Student under paragraph 245ZX of
    the Immigration Rules, and the decision to remove him from the UK under
    Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality  Act  2006,  was
    allowed on Article 8 grounds by First-tier Tribunal Judge Jackson in  a
    decision promulgated on 19th November 2015.

2.   The Respondent appealed against the decision on two  grounds.  Firstly,
    the judge found that the Appellant could not  satisfy  the  Immigration
    Rules because his bank statements did not show the  required  level  of
    funds for the 28-day period and therefore the judge was unable to  take
    into account evidence submitted post-application. However, in  allowing
    the appeal under Article 8 the judge found that the Appellant could  in
    substance meet the Immigration Rules on the basis  of  bank  statements
    post-dating the application. This was a clear failure on  the  part  of
    the judge to have regard to the requirements of specified evidence  and
    therefore the judge had misdirected himself in law.

3.   Secondly, the judge failed to give adequate reasons  for  allowing  the
    appeal on Article 8 grounds. In  finding  that  the  substance  of  the
    Immigration Rules were met, the judge failed to accord  due  weight  to
    the public interest.  The Appellant did not meet the Immigration  Rules
    and disruption to the Appellant's studies did not render  the  decision
    to remove him disproportionate. The judge's failure to identify further
    reasons for allowing the appeal was perverse.

4.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Saffer
    on 16th March 2016 on the basis that it was arguable that the judge had
    erred in allowing the appeal on human rights grounds  having  dismissed
    the appeal under the Immigration Rules.


The Judge's Findings

5.   The judge's findings are  set  out  at  paragraphs  16  to  21  of  the
    decision. The judge found that the Appellant's appeal failed under  the
    Immigration Rules because she was  unable  to  take  into  account  the
    further evidence submitted by the Appellant and there  was  no  dispute
    that the bank statements submitted for the relevant period did not show
    that the required level of funds were held for 28 days.

6.   The judge then went on to consider the Appellant's appeal  outside  the
    Immigration Rules on Article 8 grounds. The  judge  accepted  that  the
    Appellant was relying only on his private life established  here  as  a
    student. He found that there was interference, but it was in accordance
    with the  law  and  the  legitimate  aim  of  protecting  the  economic
    wellbeing  of  the  country.  The  judge  then  went   on   to   assess
    proportionality.

7.   The judge made the following findings at paragraph 19 to 21:

       "19.   The final question under Article 8 is whether the  Appellant's
           removal would be a disproportionate interference with his  right
           to respect for private life.   When  undertaking  the  balancing
           exercise I take into account the limited utility of Article 8 in
           private life cases as set out in Patel and Others v Secretary of
           State for the Home Department  [2013]  UKSC  72  and  Nasim  and
           Others (Article 8) [2014] UKUT 00025 IAC and also the factors in
           Section 117B of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
           2002. The maintenance of immigration control is  in  the  public
           interest and little weight is to be  attached  to  private  life
           established at a time when  a  person's  immigration  status  is
           precarious which the Appellant's has always been as he  has  had
           only limited leave to remain.  However, the public  interest  in
           immigration control in this case has to be  reduced  given  that
           the Appellant can in substance meet the requirements  of  having
           sufficient funds to maintain himself for the  remainder  of  his
           course.  His  more  recent  bank  statements  show   more   than
           sufficient funds and he has already paid his  tuition  fees  for
           his final year. The public interest in removing an Appellant who
           is self-sufficient, who  speaks  English  and  who  has  a  good
           immigration history in the present  circumstances  is  far  less
           than in other cases.


       20.    The Appellant would be returning to Afghanistan  or  Pakistan,
           most likely the latter where his family are currently based  and
           could potentially make an application  for  entry  clearance  to
           return to finish his course in the United Kingdom, although this
           would entail additional cost and  delay  to  completion  of  his
           degree and it is unknown as to whether he could defer the  final
           part of his last year to do so.


       21.    In this case the question of whether the  Appellant's  removal
           from the United Kingdom is disproportionate  to  the  legitimate
           aim is a finely balanced one given that there is little strength
           in the public interest side of the equation on the facts of this
           case. Overall, I find that  the  Appellant's  removal  from  the
           United Kingdom prior to the end of his current course  of  study
           expected  to  be   completed   in   June   2016   would   be   a
           disproportionate interference with  his  right  to  respect  for
           private life contrary to Article 8 of the European Convention on
           Human Rights.  There is no risk to the public purse in this case
           given the Appellant's financial resources and  on  the  opposing
           side there would be significant disruption to him in  not  being
           able  to  complete  his  course   as   planned   now.   In   the
           circumstances,  this  case  can  be   distinguished   from   the
           circumstances in Nasim where former students simply  desired  to
           continue a private life by undertaking post-study  work.   Here,
           the Appellant desires only to complete his course for  which  he
           has a matter of months remaining which he has substantially done
           so far and there are reasons to reduce the  public  interest  in
           removal.  I therefore allow the appeal on human rights grounds."


Submissions

8.   Mr Tufan relied on the case of Patel  in  particular  at  paragraph  57
    which states:

         "It is important to remember  that  Article  8  is  not  a  general
         dispensing power.  It is to be distinguished from the Secretary  of
         State's discretion to allow leave to remain outside the Rules which
         may be unrelated to any protected human right.   The  merits  of  a
         decision not to depart from the Rules are not reviewable on appeal:
         Section 86(6).  One may sympathise with Lord Justice Sedley's  call
         in Pankina for common sense in the  application  of  the  Rules  to
         graduates who have been studying in the  UK  for  some  years  (see
         paragraph 47  above).   However,  such  considerations  do  not  by
         themselves provide grounds of appeal  under  Article  8,  which  is
         concerned with private or family life, not education as  such.  The
         opportunity for a promising student to complete his course in  this
         country, however desirable in general terms, is  not  in  itself  a
         right protected under Article 8."

9.   Mr Tufan also relied on the case of Chau Le  (Immigration  Rules  -  de
    minimis principle) [2016] UKUT 00186 (IAC).  Mr Tufan produced  a  copy
    of the headnote which states:

         "The de minimis principle is not engaged  in  the  construction  or
         application of the Immigration Rules. Properly analysed,  it  is  a
         mere surrogate for the discredited 'near miss' or  'sliding  scale'
         principle."

10.  Mr Tufan submitted that this case was a near miss argument. There  must
    be compelling circumstances in  order  for  the  judge  to  conduct  an
    Article 8 assessment outside the  Immigration  Rules.   The  judge  had
    failed to comply with Singh and had failed to say what  the  compelling
    circumstances were in this case.  He relied on the grounds of appeal.

11.  On behalf of the Appellant, Mr Miah submitted  that  this  case  was  a
    near miss  as  to  the  availability  of  documents  not  actually  the
    availability of funds. The judge was  correct  to  consider  Article  8
    outside the Immigration Rules for the reasons she gave at paragraphs  3
    to 6 of her decision in which she refers to MM (Lebanon) v Secretary of
    State [2014] EWCA Civ 985:

         "3.  ... That the proportionality  test  will  remain  relevant  in
             cases where the Immigration Rules do not  provide  a  complete
             code for dealing with a person's  Convention  rights  and  the
             proportionately  assessment  under  Article  8  would   remain
             relevant in such cases.


         4.    Following  this,  the  High  Court  has,  in   cases   of   R
             (Ganesabalan) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
             [2014] EWHC 2712 (Admin) and R (Aliyu) v  Secretary  of  State
             for the Home Department [2014] EWHC 3919  (Admin)  found  that
             where the Immigration Rules do not  provide  a  complete  code
             (such as in deportation cases),  the  Secretary  of  State  is
             always under a duty to consider  the  exercise  of  discretion
             outside  the   Rules   which   will   involve   applying   the
             proportionality test by reference to  Article  8  without  any
             threshold test for doing so.  However the nature and extent of
             the consideration required will depend  on  factors  including
             the extent to which the individual's circumstances  have  been
             taken into account under the Immigration Rules and if  so  the
             reasons are likely to be more briefly stated."

    The judge then set out the five-stage test in Razgar and in paragraph 6
    set out paragraphs 20 and 21 of the case of Nasim.

12.  Mr Miah submitted that the judge had therefore  appropriately  directed
    herself in considering Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules and  her
    conclusion that, on the particular facts of this case, the  Appellant's
    removal was disproportionate, was one which was  open  to  her  on  the
    evidence. The Appellant stated that he had  been  allowed  to  continue
    studying whilst his appeal had been pending and his last  exam  was  on
    18th May 2016. He expected his results at the end of June 2016 and  the
    graduation ceremony in July. He therefore requested that his  leave  be
    extended at least so that he would be able to complete his  course  and
    attend the graduation.


Findings and Conclusions

13.  Mr Tufan essentially makes two points.  The first point is that  relied
    on in the grounds of appeal and the second point is that the  judge  in
    any event should not have gone on to look at Article 8 given  that  the
    Appellant could not satisfy the Immigration Rules  and  there  were  no
    compelling circumstances justifying consideration of Article 8  outside
    the Immigration Rules.

14.  I will deal with the second point, first. It is clear  from  paragraphs
    3 to 6 of the judge's decision that she properly  directed  herself  in
    law and that, following the case law which was  set  out  therein,  the
    judge was entitled to look at Article 8 outside the Immigration  Rules.
    The judge's approach to the appeal therefore did not disclose an  error
    of law.  She quite rightly considered first whether the Appellant could
    satisfy the Immigration Rules and found that he could  not  because  he
    was unable to show that he had the required level of funds for 28 days.



15.  However, in looking at Article 8 the judge was entitled to look at  all
    the circumstances  appertaining  at  the  date  of  decision.  She  was
    therefore able to take into account the  Appellant's  explanation.  The
    reason he was unable to show the required funds for the  28-day  period
    was that he had to return to Pakistan because  of  family  difficulties
    and he therefore had problems in transferring funds.  Once he was  able
    to transfer such funds they were more than ample to, not only  pay  his
    tuition fees, but to support him during the  continued  period  of  his
    study.

16.  Therefore, whilst the Appellant was unable  to  satisfy  the  specified
    requirements at the time of the application, he quite clearly  had  the
    funds available to him at the time, although he was unable  to  produce
    the evidence to show it.  The  judge  took  into  account  the  factual
    circumstances and the fact that the Appellant  could  not  satisfy  the
    Immigration  Rules  because  of  Section  85A   of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and the judge took this into account in
    assessing proportionality.

17.  The judge properly directed herself following Patel and  Nasim,  namely
    that private  life  considerations  would  not  usually  give  rise  in
    themselves to a right protected under Article 8. The judge  stated  the
    limited utility of Article 8 in private life cases set out in Patel and
    Nasim. Therefore, she appreciated the situation the Appellant was in.

18.   The  judge  properly  applied  Section  117B   of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 in looking at the weight to be attached
    to the public interest. She found that the weight to  be  attached  was
    reduced by the fact that the Appellant  did  in  fact  have  sufficient
    funds in order to satisfy the Immigration Rules,  but  for  unfortunate
    reasons he had been unable to produce the documents to  show  that,  at
    the time of his applications.  Since he has more than sufficient  funds
    he would not be a drain on the  public  purse  and  he  had  sufficient
    English language ability such that the weight to  be  attached  to  the
    public interest was reduced.  There was no error of law in the  judge's
    application of section 117B.

19.  The judge quite clearly  found  the  case  was  one  which  was  finely
    balanced and, having properly reduced the weight to be attached to  the
    public interest, found that the disruption  to  his  private  life  did
    outweigh the public interest in maintaining immigration control in  the
    economic interests of the country.  On  the  particular  facts  of  the
    Appellant's case, she found that this case could be distinguished  from
    Nasim in that the Appellant was not seeking a  further  opportunity  to
    seek post-study work, but was merely seeking to continue his course for
    a further few months to enable him to complete his degree.

20.  I appreciate Mr Tufan's point that  private  life  cases  have  limited
    utility when one reads the case of Patel.  However, it is not the  case
    that no private life student case could in fact succeed  on  Article  8
    grounds and it is quite clear that this case is an exceptional one  and
    one in which the judge properly considered all relevant factors.

21.  On the facts of this case, the Appellant will  complete  his  exams  on
    18th May 2016 and complete his course at the  end  of  June,  and  that
    again was another factor which the judge  was  entitled  to  take  into
    account and she did so.

22.  In conclusion, the judge's finding that  on  the  particular  facts  of
    this case the Appellant's personal circumstances outweighed the  public
    interest were open to her on the evidence.  She clearly identified  the
    limited utility of private life cases such as this, but found that  the
    public interest was reduced in  properly  applying  section  117B.  She
    balanced all relevant factors and found that the significant disruption
    caused to this Appellant was sufficient to amount to a disproportionate
    interference with his right to private life.




23.  Accordingly, I find that there was no  error  of  law  in  the  judge's
    decision to allow the appeal on  Article  8  grounds.   The  judge  was
    entitled to look at Article 8 outside the  Immigration  Rules  and  she
    took  into  account  all  relevant  factors  in   her   proportionately
    assessment. Her conclusion was  one  which  was  open  to  her  on  the
    evidence which was before her. The Respondent's appeal is dismissed.


Notice of decision

Appeal dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 25th May 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Frances





