
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/48051/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 4th September 2014                           |On 15th September 2014     |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAIRD

                                   Between

                         MR CHRISTIAN CHISOM Okeiyi
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Collins - Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by Mr Christian Chisom Okeiyi, a citizen  of  Nigeria
    born 14th August 1980.  He appeals against the determination of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Prior issued on 31st March  2014  dismissing  under
    the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006  ("the  EEA  Regs")  his  appeal
    against the decision of the Respondent made on  7th November  2013  to
    refuse to grant a residence card as the unmarried partner  or  extended
    family member of a Polish national.  The Appellant's partner's name  is
    Ewelina Zaneta Wojtuszkiewic.  On 9th May 2014 a Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal refused permission to appeal concluding that Judge  Prior
    had found the  Appellant  to  be  an  unreliable  witness  and  reached
    conclusions open to him on the evidence.

 2. Grounds were then submitted to the Upper Tribunal and on 2nd July  2014
    Upper Tribunal McGeachy granted permission.  He said:

         "1.  The Grounds of Appeal assert that the Judge of the  First-tier
         Tribunal was wrong to find that the Appellant was not credible with
         regard to his relationship with an EEA national  and  that  he  was
         wrong to consider  the  Appellant's  underlying  intentions.   They
         assert that he was wrong to find  that  the  relationship  was  not
         durable.

         2.   I consider that there is a lack of clarity in the findings  of
         the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal who states that he  found  the
         Sponsor to be consistent and  credible  but  does  not  accept  the
         evidence of the Appellant.  It is arguable that the lack  of  clear
         findings relating to how long the Appellant and  the  Sponsor  have
         lived together and the nature of their relationship is an error  of
         law.

 3. It is submitted in the grounds seeking  permission  that   Judge  Prior
    erred in:

               (i)  applying   the   wrong   test   in   assessing   durable
             relationships;

              (ii)     failing to give proper weight to material factors  in
                  assessing that relationship;

              (iii)    giving inordinate weight to matters peripheral to the
                  assessment of that relationship; and

               (iv)      mischaracterising  the  Appellant's   evidence   as
                  incredible and reliable."

 4. It is further submitted that  the  meaning  of  "durable  relationship"
    employs consideration of the quality of the relationship hitherto.   It
    is arguable therefore that the Judge applied the wrong test  by  saying
    that the  central  issue  was  the  couple's  "mutual  intent  to  live
    permanently together".   This  language  and  concept  comes  from  the
    Immigration Rules but does not apply to Regulation  8(5)  of  the   EEA
    Regs.  That provision is in the present tense i.e.  "is  in  a  durable
    relationship".  The Judge should not have applied  a  "future-focussed"
    Immigration Rule concept to this case.  He arguably also  strayed  into
    the area of enquiring into motive.  It is further  submitted  that  the
    Judge did not give due weight to photographic evidence  of  the  couple
    together since 2009 or of the fact  that  the  Appellant's  partner  is
    financially supporting him.  It is submitted that the evidence  of  one
    partner to the relationship is as weighty as the other and the credible
    evidence of one party is sufficient to discharge the burden  of  proof.
    It is  submitted  that  the  Judge  also  erred  in  referring  to  and
    apparently relying on  the  Appellant's  "unhappy  recent  personal  or
    immigration history" which irrelevant in the context of the EEA Regs.

 5. The facts of this case are that the Appellant had come  to  the  United
    Kingdom initially in  2006  with  a  Slovakian  national.   They  lived
    together in the UK and had a son born to them on 4th  June  2007.   The
    relationship ended in September 2009.  The Appellant was apparently not
    clear about when his relationship  with  the  Sponsor  in  the  current
    appeal had begun in that he claimed to have met  her  in  August  2009,
    saying firstly that his previous relationship had not  broken  down  by
    then and then that it had broken down in about May 2009 or about  three
    months before he and the Sponsor met.  He then said that he  was  still
    living with his first partner when he met the Sponsor  in  August  2009
    leaving her house a few weeks later to go and live with the Sponsor  at
    her  address.  Judge  Prior  acknowledged  that  photographs  had  been
    produced showing the couple together between November 2009 and February
    2010 with some others from March 2012.  Evidence had also been provided
    that the Sponsor had provided funds for the benefit of the  Appellant's
    son in the period September to December 2013 and there was a water bill
    dated 22nd July 2013 in the names of both parties.  What the Judge said
    at paragraph 8 was that he  found  the  Sponsor  to  be  a  consistent,
    unhesitant and plausible witness whose testimony was only undermined by
    the fact that she was uncertain about the dates she  had  resided  with
    the Appellant  at  their  various  addresses.   The  couple  were  both
    inconsistent about those dates.  He went on to say that the Appellant's
    evidence about this issue differed from that of the  Sponsor  and  that
    that was a very small example of the poor quality  of  the  Appellant's
    testimony manifested in much more significant instances.   Judge  Prior
    took into account that the Sponsor could not remember when he first met
    the Appellant in person (they had been chatting on a  website)  despite
    the fact that according to the evidence  of  the  Sponsor  it  was  his
    birthday.  His evidence of his break up from his previous  partner  was
    inconsistent and unreliable.  He attributed the cause of the  break  up
    of the relationship to his inability to work and support his family,  a
    situation that prevails in the context of  his  relationship  with  the
    Sponsor.

 6. Much reliance was placed by Mr Collins at  the  hearing  before  me  on
    paragraph 11 of the determination in which   Judge Prior  said  that  a
    central issue in the appeal was "the degree of the  commitment  of  the
    couple to each other and whether it was their  mutual  intent  to  live
    permanently together".  He said that in contrast to the Sponsor he  was
    not  satisfied  as  to  any  durable  degree  of  commitment   to   the
    relationship on the part of the Appellant or as to his intent  to  live
    permanently with the Sponsor.  When he was cross-examined about this he
    began immediately by stressing how very hard his situation was and  how
    because of his immigration status he had  no  way  in  which  to  prove
    himself.  Only after that did he add that  he  loved  the  Sponsor  and
    wanted to be with her and have a good future in England.   Judge  Prior
    said that his conclusion was,  "taken with the thrust of  the  evidence
    that  he  had  quoted  from  the  Appellant's  statement"    that   the
    Appellant's  only real commitment was to secure  legal  status  in  the
    United Kingdom, have an economic  future  in  the  country  and  secure
    remunerated employment.  He went on to accept that the  couple  have  a
    social life together  but pointing out that the letter  from  a  friend
    confirming this reveals nothing about  the  underlying  intentions  and
    agenda of the Appellant.  He said that the same observation has  to  be
    made when considering his finding that the couple  had  lived  together
    for approaching two years at the date of the  hearing  at  a  house  in
    Basildon.  One water bill dated January 2013 addressed to them in joint
    names at that house had been supplied for a previous address that  they
    lived at.  He concluded that the couple's residence  at  the  house  in
    Basildon was satisfactorily documented in the Appellant's  bundle.   He
    went on to conclude that the Appellant "does not have an unhappy recent
    personal or immigration history and proved to me to  be  an  unreliable
    witness.  I was not satisfied that he  had  discharged  the  burden  of
    proof in the appeal."

 7. In oral submissions Mr Collins said that he had been unable to find  in
    the case  law  any  definition  of  "durable  relationship".  He  cited
    Regulation 8(5) which states:

         "A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if  the  person
         is the partner of an EEA national (other than a civil partner)  and
         can  prove  to  the  decision  maker  that  he  is  in  a   durable
         relationship with the EEA national."

 8. Mr Collins said that the UKBA casework instruction for EEA  cases  says
    that what a person considering an application for a residence  card  on
    the basis of a durable relationship has  to  consider  is  whether  the
    parties have been living for two years in their  relationship  akin  to
    marriage and whether they intend to live together.  He said this is  an
    attempt to marry the EEA Regs with the Immigration Rules and it is  not
    a requirement of the EEA Regs that future intention be  considered.  He
    asked me to take into account that Judge Prior had failed to take  into
    account that the Appellant was in a previous relationship with  an  EEA
    partner.  There is nothing to suggest that he is an  economic  migrant.



 9. Mr Avery referred to the decision YB saying the view of  the  Secretary
    of State is that the criteria set out in the Rules should be applied in
    such cases.  He said the question is whether  the  Judge  believed  the
    Appellant and whether his reasoning is sustainable.  He submitted  that
    he did not believe the Appellant and his reasoning is sustainable.   It
    is perfectly feasible that one partner in a relationship  will  have  a
    different view of it to the other.  Intention is crucial  when  one  is
    considering whether or not a relationship is durable otherwise it would
    be an unacceptable test.  It would be perverse to say that intention is
    irrelevant.

10. In response Mr Collins questioned how the Judge got to  the  conclusion
    he did which flies in  the  face  of  the  previous  evidence  that  he
    accepted as showing that the couple had been living  together  for  two
    years.

11. In  YB (EEA reg 17(4) - proper approach) Ivory Coast [2008] UKAIT 00062
    the Upper Tribunal set out the corret  approach  to  be  adopted  by  a
    decision -maker when deciding whether or not to issue an EEA  Residence
    card to an extended family member.

         (b) next have regard, as rules of thumb only, to the  criteria  set
         out in comparable provisions of the Immigration  Rules.  To  do  so
         ensures the like treatment of extended family members  of  EEA  and
         British nationals  and  so  ensures  compliance  with  the  general
         principle  of  Community  law  prohibiting  discrimination  on  the
         grounds of nationality. The foregoing  means  that  for  Reg  17(4)
         purposes the comparable immigration rules cannot be used to  define
         who are extended family members, but only to furnish rules of thumb
         as to what requirements they should normally be expected  to  meet.
         The fact that a person meets or does not meet the  requirements  of
         the relevant immigration rules cannot be treated  as  determinative
         of the question of whether a residence card should or should not be
         issued.

12. Judge Prior did not find the Appellant  to be credible and  gave  sound
    reasons for that.  Mr  Collins  submitted  that  the  evidence  of  the
    Sponsor, who was found to be credible was sufficient  but that can only
    apply to her evidence about the fact that they were  living   together.
    Her perspective of the relationship may have been  different  from  the
    Appellant's and she could not speak to his intentions.  I also  do  not
    agree with Mr Collins that the fact that the Appellant had  a  previous
    relationship with an EEA national  assists  in  an  assessment  of  his
    intentions.

13. There is no definition in the EEA Regs of 'a durable relationship'  and
    I can find no caselaw to assist. What Reg 8 says is that the  decision-
    maker  has to  be  satisfied  that  the   applicant  is  in  a  durable
    relationship. Mr Collins relied on the fact that this is in the present
    tense but  my  understanding  is   that  'durable'  means  'capable  of
    lasting' and that imports the future. Whilst it may well be that  Judge
    Prior placed too much emphasis on wording that appears to come from the
    Immigration Rules, I do not accept that he was  obliged  to  allow  the
    appeal simply because he found that the Appellant and his  partner  had
    lived under the same roof for two years  without  taking  into  account
    whether the relationship was genuine and capable of lasting, a question
    that required an assessment of the intention and  possibly  motives  of
    the parties. Such a question  is  common  in  the  application  of  the
    Immigration Rules and in my view is within the ambit of what  was  said
    in YB.

    DECISION

    I find that the determination of the Upper Tribunal does not contain  a
    material error of law and shall stand.



Signed                              Date: 12th September 2014

N A Baird
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

