
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/48124/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 January 2016                    |On 21 January 2016                   |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM


                                   Between

                                  ASAR ALI
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Biggs, SEB Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the appeal of Asar Ali, a national of Bangladesh,  born  on  10
    January 1970.  He appeals against the decision of Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Devittie who, in a decision promulgated on  17  September
    2014, dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  against  a  decision  by  the
    respondent refusing him leave to remain in the United Kingdom on  human
    rights grounds.





Background

2.   The appellant first entered the United Kingdom on  a  six  month  visit
    visa on 28 July 2006. He subsequently overstayed. He  has  a  daughter,
    Sultana Aktar, born on 17 January 1989.  She entered the United Kingdom
    on 5 September 2012 pursuant to a spousal  entry  clearance.   She,  in
    turn, gave birth to a son born in the United Kingdom on 4 July 2013.

3.   As a result of domestic violence the appellant's daughter  was  granted
    leave to remain  on  21  November  2013  under  the  domestic  violence
    concession. This was for a period  of  three  months,  valid  until  20
    February 2014. Her current immigration status, and that of her son,  is
    unknown. Neither of the  representatives  was  able  to  assist  as  to
    whether she made an application for further leave to remain on the same
    or similar basis. Nor is it clear that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    was aware of the uncertainty surrounding the immigration status of  the
    appellant's daughter.

4.   The appellant applied for  indefinite  leave  to  remain  (ILR)  on  26
    October 2012. This was stated to  be  an  application  outside  of  the
    Rules. It was made on the basis  of  compassionate  circumstances.  The
    application was refused on 22 October 2013. The appellant  appealed  to
    the First-tier Tribunal and his appeal was heard on 23 August 2014.

The First-tier Tribunal decision

5.   The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  heard  oral  evidence  both  from  the
    appellant and from his daughter. It was  submitted  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant that he had established a very close  relationship  with  his
    daughter and his grandson. There were said to be strong emotional bonds
    and the family operated as a single unit.

6.   It was common ground that the appellant did not meet  the  requirements
    of Appendix FM to the immigration rules. The judge therefore went on to
    consider Article 8 outside of the immigration rules. In paragraph 6  of
    his decision the judge stated:
         "The Tribunal has held in  several  recent  cases,  that  where  an
         applicant fails to  meet  the  Article  8  requirements  under  the
         Immigration Rules, he has to show arguably good grounds before  the
         Tribunal can proceed to consider his Article 8 appeal  outside  the
         Immigration Rules. I  accept  that  the  appellant  has  a  genuine
         relationship with his daughter and grandchild. I also  accept  that
         he has a played a  supportive  role  during  the  difficulties  she
         experience in her marriage. I accept that she  was  the  victim  of
         domestic violence. I do not however consider  that  these  features
         are  sufficiently  strong  to  justify  a  consideration  of   this
         appellant's claim outside the Immigration Rules."

7.   The judge  nevertheless  proceeded  to  set  out  the  requirements  of
    Article 8 and give it consideration. In paragraph  9  the  judge  found
    that the relationship between the appellant and his daughter did not go
    beyond the normal emotional ties that exist  between  adult  relatives.
    The judge said there was  no  suggestion  that  the  daughter  was  not
    capable of caring for herself and her child in the appellant's absence.
    In respect of the appellant's private life claim the judge said this:
         "The  appellant  claimed  that  his  family  in  Bangladesh,  which
         included a wife and  three  adult  children,  have  ostracised  him
         because he has not been providing financial support over the years.
         Even if that be so, it does  not  show  that  he  does  not  retain
         social, cultural and family ties in Bangladesh. He arrived  in  the
         United Kingdom as an adult, and clearly he would have no difficulty
         at all in re-establishing his private life  in  Bangladesh  and  in
         reconciling with his children."

8.   The judge did not find that there was an interference with the  private
    or family life of the appellant which would have consequences for  him,
    his daughter and grandchild of such severity as to outweigh the  strong
    public  interest  considerations  that  had  been  identified  by   the
    respondent. The judge dismissed the appeal.

Grounds of appeal

9.   The grounds of appeal contend  that  the  judge  adopted  an  incorrect
    approach to Article 8. Reliance was place on the case of MM (Lebanon) v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 985, and  in
    particular Lord Justice Aikens' comments on the  approached  identified
    by Judge Sales (as he then was) in the case of R (on the application of
    Nagre) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2013]  EWHC  720
    (Admin) to considerations of Article 8 outside the  immigration  rules.
    The grounds contend that the judge failed to engage in  a  full  second
    stage assessment outside of the immigration rules and that he fell into
    error by stopping at a preliminary stage.

10.  The grounds further contend that the judge erred in law in his  failure
    to recognise family life between the appellant and his adult  daughter.
    It was claimed that the term used by the  judge,  -  "normal  emotional
    ties between adult relatives" -  was  language  used  in  the  case  of
    Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31,  but  this  restrictive  approach  was  no
    longer to be regarded as good law. Support for  this  proposition  came
    from the cases of  Ghissing  [2012]  UKUT  00161  (IAC)  and  Gurung  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 8.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal

11.  Mr Biggs built upon his written  grounds.  He  submitted  firstly  that
    there had been no adequate  consideration  of  Article  8  outside  the
    immigration rules. The judge was wrong to have said that there  was  no
    need to consider Article 8.  Mr Biggs accepted that the judge did go on
    to consider Article 8, albeit briefly. Mr  Biggs  submitted,  secondly,
    that the judge's approach to the existence of family life  between  the
    appellant and his daughter was unduly restrictive. The Court of  Appeal
    case of Gurung  required  a  very  careful  consideration  of  all  the
    evidence. The judge's brief rejection of the existence of  family  life
    did not, it was submitted,  disclose  the  required  level  of  careful
    consideration.

12.  Mr Biggs submitted that the Court of Appeal authority of  Singh  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 630 could not be considered inconsistently with  that  of  the
    Gurung approach. Singh could not be read as to cast doubt on  the  need
    for a carefully considered approach to the relevant  relationships.  Mr
    Biggs further submitted that where an individual goes through emotional
    trauma, such as being  a  victim  of  domestic  violence,  there  is  a
    heightened need for a careful consideration of the evidence.  Mr  Biggs
    finally submitted that  the  bold  assertion  at  paragraph  9  of  the
    determination that the appellant would be able to  reconcile  with  his
    family had no support at all and it was not clear  how  the  judge  had
    arrived at this conclusion.

13.  In reply  Mr  Kandola  submitted  that  even  if  the  judge  erred  in
    requiring an intermediate test he still went on to consider  Article  8
    substantively. With reference to paragraph 9 of the decision Mr Kandola
    submitted that the finding in respect of the absence of more  than  the
    normal emotional ties had to  be  considered  in  the  context  of  the
    earlier acceptance by the judge, in paragraph 6, that the appellant was
    the victim of domestic violence and had received  support  provided  by
    her father.  Mr Kandola submitted that it was  clear,  having  holistic
    regard to the decision, that the  judge  had  taken  into  account  all
    relevant circumstances and had conducted a careful analysis.

Discussion

14.  In the case of Singh and Khalid [2015] EWCA Civ 74 the Court of  Appeal
    considered  the  comments  by  Lord  Justice  Aikens  in  MM  (Lebanon)
    relating, in turn, to comments by Judge  Sales  (as  he  then  was)  in
    Nagre. Sales J considered the interplay  between  the  changes  in  the
    immigration rules brought about by HC 194 and Article 8.  At  paragraph
    29 Sales J stated,
         "Nonetheless, the new rules do provide better explicit coverage  of
         the factors identified in  case-law  as  relevant  to  analysis  of
         claims under Article 8 than was formerly the position, so  in  many
         cases the main points for consideration in relation  to  Article  8
         will be addressed by decision-makers applying the new rules. It  is
         only if, after doing that, there  remains  an  arguable  case  that
         there may be good grounds for granting leave to remain outside  the
         Rules by reference to Article 8  that  it  will  be  necessary  for
         Article  8  purposes  to  go  on  to  consider  whether  there  are
         compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised under the  new
         rules to require the grant of such leave."

15.  In MM (Lebanon) Mr Justice Aiken commented, in  respect  of  the  above
    quote,
         "I cannot see much utility in imposing this further,  intermediary,
         test. If the applicant cannot satisfy the Rule then there either is
         or there is not a further Article 8 claim. That  will  have  to  be
         determined by the relevant decision maker."

16.  In Singh and Khalid Lord Justice Underhill at paragraph 64 stated:
         "In  my  view  that  is  a  misreading  of  Lord  Justice   Aiken's
         observation.  He was not questioning the short point made by  Judge
         Sales. He was  simply  saying  that  it  was  unnecessary  for  the
         decision maker in approaching the second stage to  have  to  decide
         first whether it was arguable that there was a good Article 8 claim
         outside the Rules, that being what he called the intermediary test,
         and then, if he decided that it was arguable, to go  on  to  assess
         that claim. He should simply decide whether there was a good  claim
         outside the Rules or not. I am not sure that I  would  myself  have
         read Judge Sales as  intending  to  impose  any  such  intermediary
         requirement although I agree with Lord Justice Aikens  that  if  he
         was it represented an unnecessary refinement. But what  matters  is
         that there is nothing in Lord Justice Aiken's comments  which  cast
         doubt on Judge Sales's basic point that there is no need to conduct
         a full separate examination of Article 8 outside the  Rules  where,
         in the circumstances of a particular case, all the issues have been
         addressed in the consideration under the Rules."

17.  The First-tier Tribunal judge states at the end of paragraph 6:
         "I do not however consider that  these  features  are  sufficiently
         strong to justify a consideration of this appellant's claim outside
         the Immigration Rules."

18.  In light of the above authorities I accept that this  is  an  error  of
    approach. I must however then consider whether this error is  material.
    The judge does proceed, as was accepted by Mr Biggs, to  then  consider
    Article 8 despite what he said in paragraph 6. At paragraph 7  he  laid
    out the  requirements  of  Article  8  and  then  gave  it  substantive
    consideration in paragraph 8 and, in particular, paragraph 9.

19.  The judge's consideration of Article 8 outside  the  immigration  rules
    is brief. The question is whether it is impermissibly brief  by  reason
    of a failure to properly consider all of  the  available  evidence,  as
    indicated by the Court of Appeal in Gurung. The determination has to be
    read holistically. At the end of paragraph 6 the judge accepts that the
    appellant has played a supportive role during the difficulties that his
    daughter experienced in her marriage.  He  accepts  that  she  was  the
    victim of domestic violence. It is abundantly clear that the judge  was
    aware of the existence of domestic violence and that support  had  been
    provided by the appellant to his daughter. In  paragraph  9  the  judge
    states this:
         "The appellant's daughter  is  an  adult.  The  evidence  does  not
         establish that the  relationship  between  the  appellant  and  his
         daughter goes  beyond  the  normal  emotional  ties  between  adult
         relatives. There is no suggestion that his daughter is not  capable
         to care for herself  or  for  her  child  in  the  absence  of  the
         appellant."

20.  It is clear to me that the judge has considered  the  material  aspects
    of both the oral and documentary evidence that was before  him.  Having
    considered the bundle of documents provided to the First-tier  Tribunal
    and the record of the proceedings it is apparent that there was a  lack
    of independent or detailed evidence going to the strength and nature of
    the relationship between the appellant and his  daughter  and,  indeed,
    grandson. Other than assertions that they enjoyed a close  relationship
    and had strong bonds, there was no reliable or independent evidence  of
    anything, using the words of Sir Stanley Burnton in Singh, "beyond  the
    normal bonds of  affection".   There  were,  for  example,  no  medical
    reports or any  psychological  or  psychiatric  reports  detailing  the
    daughter's strong emotional  reliance  on  her  father.  There  was  no
    independent evidence describing the likely impact on  the  daughter  if
    the appellant were removed. There was no letter from  any  GP  to  that
    effect and no details of any treatment that the daughter was  receiving
    for what was claimed to be emotional trauma. There was nothing  in  the
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal to indicate that  the  daughter
    was incapable of functioning without the  appellant's  presence.  There
    was no evidence that the daughter would be  unable  to  access  support
    provided to victims of domestic violence or child care support  offered
    by local authorities or social services. There was no evidence from any
    friends of the appellant or his daughter commenting on the strength and
    nature of their relationship. The daughter clearly had accommodation by
    reference to the various letters contained in the appellant's bundle.

21.  In Singh the Court of Appeal stated (at paragraph 24),  "The  love  and
    affection between an adult and his parents will not of itself justify a
    finding of a family life. There has to be something more."   I  am  not
    satisfied that this  comment  is  in  any  way  inconsistent  with  the
    approach identified in  Gurung.  There  is  always  a  requirement  for
    careful consideration of all material evidence. In the  present  appeal
    there is however little in the way of reliable or independent  evidence
    going to the nature of the relationship between the appellant  and  his
    daughter other than their own unparticularised assertions.

22.  Having considered the evidence that was  presented  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal I am not therefore satisfied that there  "something  more"  in
    terms of the relationship between the appellant and his  daughter  such
    as to generate family life  sufficient  to  attract  the  operation  of
    Article 8.  In these circumstances I  am  satisfied  that  the  judge's
    brief assessment was legally adequate.

23.  The judge then went on to consider  the  private  life  aspect  of  the
    appellant's appeal. At paragraph 9, after noting the appellant's  claim
    to have been ostracised by his family in Bangladesh, the judge  stated,
    "Even if that be so, it does not show that he does not  retain  social,
    cultural and family ties in Bangladesh."

24.  The appellant was a 44 year old man at the date of the  hearing  before
    the First-tier Tribunal. He entered the United Kingdom in  2006.  There
    is nothing to indicate that he would have lost his cultural, linguistic
    or social ties with a country in which  he  spent  most  of  his  life,
    including his formative years. Although he was diagnosed  with  Type  2
    diabetes a letter from the East London  NHS  Trust  of  07  April  2014
    indicated the appellant was not on any medication.  Paragraph 11 of the
    appellant's  statement  suggested  he  was  fully  capable  of  seeking
    employment. There was little in the way of background  evidence,  other
    than a few brief character references, describing the extent and nature
    of any roots the appellant may have established in the United  Kingdom.
    In these circumstances, and despite the lack of support for his finding
    that the appellant could reconcile with his  children,  the  judge  was
    fully entitled to  conclude,  as  he  did  in  paragraph  9,  that  the
    appellant's removal would not breach his private life rights. I am  not
    therefore satisfied that the judge's assessment disclosed any  material
    error of law.

Notice of Decision

I dismiss the appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]    21 January 2016
Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


[pic]    21 January 2016
Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum

