
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/48710/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 9 July 2015                                |On 29 September 2015          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McGINTY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  Amit Shah
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In Person

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of  State  but  for
    convenience we refer to the parties as they were before the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 2. Thus, the appellant is a citizen of India born on 20 October 1975.   On
    21 September 2010 he made an application for leave to remain  on  human
    rights grounds, specifically with reference to Article 8 of  the  ECHR.
    That application was refused and a decision was made on 5 November 2013
    to remove him under Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

 3. His appeal against that decision came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Hopkins on 18 June 2014 whereby the appeal was allowed under Article  8
    of the ECHR. The appellant's immigration history can be  summarised  as
    follows.  He arrived in the UK  on  28  February  2000  using  a  false
    passport in the name  of  Vicky  Singh,  entering  as  a  visitor.   He
    returned to India on 28 May 2000 and came back to the UK on  11  August
    2000, on both occasions using the same  false  passport.   He  made  an
    asylum claim on 25 August 2000 which was refused.

 4. An application for leave to remain on the basis of  marriage  was  also
    refused, on 2 March 2003.  On 30 May 2005, having  returned  to  India,
    the appellant applied for entry clearance in the name  of  Vicky  Singh
    and using the same false South  African  passport.   After  an  initial
    refusal he was granted entry clearance, although it  is  not  clear  on
    what basis.  An application for indefinite leave to remain as a spouse,
    made on 20 December 2007, was granted, again the  appellant  using  the
    false name of Vicky Singh.

 5. An application for naturalisation was refused on the basis that he  had
    obtained leave by deception, that refusal being on 20 May 2009.   There
    then followed the application which is the subject of this appeal.

 6. On 4 October 2011 the appellant pleaded guilty in the  Crown  Court  at
    Leicester to obtaining leave by deception.  He received a  sentence  of
    nine months' imprisonment suspended for twelve months.  His  indefinite
    leave to remain was revoked, seemingly sometime in 2009.

    The findings of the First-tier Tribunal

 7. First-tier Tribunal Judge Hopkins accepted that the appellant  and  his
    wife are in a subsisting relationship.  Although not an express finding
    of fact, it is evident that he accepted that the appellant and his wife
    have four children.  He found that they all  live  together.   He  also
    accepted that the appellant plays a very active part in the  children's
    education.

 8. At [33] he referred  to  the  appellant's  convictions,  including  the
    conviction for obtaining leave by deception.  He also  found  that  the
    appellant had previously been convicted of fraudulent use of an  excise
    licence, driving whilst disqualified, and implicitly offences which had
    led up to the disqualification on 27 November 2008.

 9. With reference to the application of S-LTR.1.6  of  Appendix  FM  Judge
    Hopkins was satisfied that the appellant  did  not  qualify  under  the
    Immigration Rules, the respondent being justified  in  concluding  that
    his presence in the UK is not conducive to the public good.

10. Similarly, the appellant was not  able  to  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE, on the basis that he had ties with India, his  mother
    being there and the appellant having stayed with her when he was  there
    between 2004 and 2006.  He found that if forced to return he could stay
    with her again.

11. Having found that there were compelling circumstances not  sufficiently
    recognised under the Rules justifying a grant of leave to  remain,  the
    judge went on to consider Article 8.  He  found  that  the  appellant's
    wife and children have no experience  of  Indian  culture  and  do  not
    understand the language.  The children were all born in  the  UK.   The
    appellant's wife's relatives, including her mother who is very ill, are
    also all in the UK.  He found that three of the children are at  school
    and the eldest is about to move to secondary school.  It was  concluded
    that if the appellant is removed the rest of the family would be likely
    to remain in the UK and that there  were  insurmountable  obstacles  to
    family life continuing outside the UK.

12. There was a finding that the children are British  citizens,  who  have
    always  lived  in  the  UK  with  their  mother.   The  appellant   had
    demonstrated an active interest in their welfare.  In relation  to  the
    youngest child, being then only 2 years and 8 months old, her emotional
    needs are likely  to  be  largely  met  within  her  immediate  family,
    particularly her mother.  It was found that she is the one least likely
    to be affected if the appellant had to leave the family unit to  go  to
    India, or if the whole family were to move there.  It  was  also  found
    however, that being forced to bring up four children on her  own  would
    be a considerable burden on the appellant's wife, the  children's  ages
    ranging from 2 years and 8 months to 10 years.

13. In relation to the eldest child it was  concluded  that  his  education
    would be severely disrupted if he had to go and live in another country
    and try to fit into a different educational system,  without  knowledge
    of the language and culture.  The same was found  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's 8 year old daughter, albeit not to the same extent.

14. It was concluded that the best interests of the children were to remain
    in the UK with both parents.

    Submissions

15. On behalf of the respondent Mr Mills drew our attention to the decision
    in R v Ahmed Benabbas [2005] EWCA Crim 2113, in particular at  [41]  in
    terms of the public interest involved in passport offences.

16. It was conceded, however, that much of what is said in the Secretary of
    State's grounds amounts only to a disagreement with the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The  judge  had  factored  in  most  matters  and
    considered whether there  were  compelling  circumstances  outside  the
    Rules in terms of whether there was the need for  an  assessment  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR.

17. However, it was submitted that the judge had minimised  the  extent  of
    the appellant's criminal activity,  finding  that  the  fact  that  the
    appellant did not meet the suitability criteria was outweighed  by  his
    family  life.   As  was  noted  at  [33]  of  the  determination,   the
    appellant's immigration history included a lengthy period in  which  he
    held and used a false passport, including in order to obtain indefinite
    leave to remain and employment.  It was  submitted  that  at  [41]  the
    judge  had  in  effect  expressed  the  view  that  his  offending  and
    immigration history were not so serious as to justify removing him.  Mr
    Mills submitted that the Secretary of State's view  as  to  the  public
    interest is deserving of significant weight.  The First-tier Judge  did
    not properly recognise that fact and  that  it  would  require  a  very
    weighty family life to outweigh the public interest.

18. The appellant, being  unrepresented,  sought  to  explain  to  us  that
    although it was true that he had used a false passport for a long time,
    he had gone to the authorities on his own initiative.  He  pointed  out
    that the judge had recognised this at [45].

19. He referred to the closeness of his relationship with his children.  He
    pointed out that he had had no convictions in the past six years.

    Our assessment

20. Mr Mills did not seek to rely on the respondent's  grounds  before  the
    Upper Tribunal, accepting that in reality they amount to a disagreement
    with the judge's conclusions.  Nevertheless, to put  into  context  our
    ultimate conclusion in relation to the Secretary of State's  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal, we deal with the written grounds, albeit that  that
    can be done quite succinctly.

21. It is said in the grounds that the First-tier Judge erred in law by not
    having  regard  to  the  Immigration  Rules  and  that  the  subsequent
    proportionality assessment is thereby unsustainable.  That  ground  has
    no merit.  It is evident from the determination that the judge did have
    regard to the Rules, referring to them in detail and  noting  that  the
    appellant does not meet their requirements.  Under the consideration of
    Article 8 proper, at [44] it is again  noted  by  the  judge  that  the
    appellant is not able to meet the  requirements  of  the  Rules  either
    under Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE.

22. It is said that the First-tier Judge did not  identify  any  compelling
    circumstances not sufficiently recognised by the Rules.  Again,  we  do
    not agree.  At [37] he stated that he had to go on to consider  whether
    there are compelling circumstances not  sufficiently  recognised  under
    the Rules justifying the grant of leave to remain.  In  the  succeeding
    paragraphs is his assessment of that issue and that of Article 8 in its
    wider context.

23. The grounds contain a recitation of the  appellant's  poor  immigration
    history, including his use for many years of a false passport, being  a
    South African passport in a different name.  There is also reference to
    the nine months' sentence  of  imprisonment  which  was  suspended  for
    twelve months.  Again, all those matters are plainly taken into account
    in the judge's determination.

24. It is  said  in  the  grounds  that  the  appellant  had  deceived  the
    immigration authorities and had shown a blatant disregard for UK  laws.
    At [33] Judge Hopkins explored in detail the  appellant's  convictions,
    noting the most serious one  for  obtaining  leave  by  deception.   He
    plainly recognised its seriousness.  He concluded that the Secretary of
    State was justified in deciding that the appellant's presence in the UK
    was not conducive to the public good, finding that paragraph  S-LTR.1.6
    of Appendix FM applied.

25. At [36] there is recognition of the  appellant's  likely  deception  in
    obtaining employment, although there  was  no  evidence  of  continuing
    employment since his arrest in 2009.

26. As to the point made in the grounds about the appellant entering into a
    relationship  in  the  full  knowledge  that  he   had   deceived   the
    authorities, and that his wife knew  that  to  be  the  case,  this  is
    explicitly recognised by the judge at [43].

27. The point about the appellant  having  spent  his  formative  years  in
    India, again raised in the grounds, is also a matter that Judge Hopkins
    took  into  account  at  [34],  finding  that  the  appellant  had  not
    established that he has no ties with India,  explaining  what  ties  he
    has.

28. The narrow point advanced on behalf of the  respondent  before  us  was
    that the determination fails  to  recognise  the  significance  of  the
    public interest as against  the  appellant's  immigration  history  and
    passport offence.  Again, we do not agree.  At [41] Judge Hopkins  said
    this:

         "I must, however, give weight to the Secretary of State's view that
         the Appellant's presence in the UK is not conducive to  the  public
         good.  However, in taking that aspect  into  consideration,  it  is
         appropriate to assess the extent to which the  public  good  is  in
         fact damaged by his continuing presence here.  This is not  a  case
         in which the Secretary of State has chosen to  make  a  deportation
         order on the ground that the Appellant's deportation  is  conducive
         to the public good.  There is  no  evidence  that  the  Appellant's
         conduct has given rise to any legitimate grounds for concern  since
         the refusal of his application for naturalisation on 20th May 2009.
          His conviction for obtaining leave  by  deception  was  a  serious
         matter, since the Crown Court ordered a custodial sentence, but, on
         the other hand, it was not regarded as so serious that an immediate
         sentence of imprisonment was necessary,  since  it  felt  it  could
         suspend this.  The Appellant has not  committed  a  breach  of  the
         suspended sentence."

29. At [42] there is a reference to the decision in  Mumu  (paragraph  320;
    Article 8; scope) [2012] UKUT 00143 (IAC), noting that at [22] of  that
    decision the Tribunal said that  those  who  engage  or  who  might  be
    tempted to engage in dishonest attempts to deceive the  United  Kingdom
    authorities in relation to immigration control need to  be  aware  that
    such actions will have disadvantageous consequences for those  who  are
    the intended beneficiaries of the dishonest conduct.  He noted however,
    that that was an entry clearance case, rather than an  application  for
    leave to remain.  Furthermore, unlike the matter that  he  was  dealing
    with, the dishonesty related to the application with which  the  appeal
    was concerned.

30. At [43], after noting that the appellant's wife admitted that she  knew
    right from the beginning that the name that the appellant was using was
    false and that he had immigration problems, he stated that he could not
    have very much sympathy for her and that he had even less sympathy  for
    the appellant since it was his conduct that led to the refusal  of  the
    application under the suitability requirements.  He  then  went  on  to
    state, correctly in our view, that he was bound to recognise  that  the
    children are innocent in the situation.

31. At [44] he recognised that the grant of leave to remain  on  Article  8
    grounds when an applicant does not meet the requirements of the Article
    8 Rules is likely to require proof of exceptional circumstances, noting
    that  'exceptional'  does  not  mean  unusual  or  unique  but   rather
    circumstances in which refusal  would  result  in  unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences for the individual or their family, such that  refusal  of
    the application would not be proportionate.

32. Then, at [45], he concluded that if he were permitted to  look  at  the
    situation of the appellant and his  wife  in  isolation  he  would  not
    consider  that  the  consequences  for  them  could  be  said   to   be
    unjustifiably harsh.   Again  however,  he  repeated  that  he  had  to
    consider the children.  He also noted that there may  be  circumstances
    in which the interests of the  children  affected  by  a  decision  are
    outweighed by other factors.  That, in his judgement, was not the  case
    here.

33. In the same  paragraph  he  concluded  that  the  appellant's  conduct,
    "though serious enough to fall within paragraph S-LTR.1.6" was not such
    as to override  the  interests  of  the  children,  especially  as  the
    appellant had in more recent years acknowledged his past wrongdoing and
    has not continued to offend.

34. The reference to the children of  course,  is  to  the  fact  that  the
    appellant and his wife have four children, born on 21  August  2003,  9
    March 2006, 22 June 2008 and 6 October 2011, respectively.

35. As we have already indicated, the judge at [40] made an  assessment  of
    their situation, including that the eldest child  is  about  to  finish
    primary education and would soon be moving to a new  school,  that  his
    education would be severely disrupted if he  had  to  live  in  another
    country and to  try  and  fit  into  a  different  educational  system,
    language and culture.  He also made the same observation,  albeit  that
    it applied with less force, to their 8 year old daughter.

36. Having concluded that the best interests of the children were that they
    remain in the UK with both their parents, the  judge  was  entitled  to
    conclude  that  the  removal  of  the  appellant  would  amount  to   a
    disproportionate interference with the family life of all concerned.

37. We do not consider that Judge Hopkins left out of account any  material
    consideration, or took into account any  immaterial  consideration.  He
    undertook a balanced assessment of the facts resulting in a  conclusion
    which was open to him.

38. In these circumstances, we are not satisfied that he erred  in  law  in
    any of the respects advanced on behalf of the respondent.

    Decision

39. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law.  The decision to allow the appeal therefore
    stands.

