
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/48298/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 November 2014                          |On 2 December 2014            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON

                                   Between

                               MR SUFAID KHAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Sutton
For the Respondent:    Mr A Melvin


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant was born on 4 January 1991 and is a national of Pakistan.
     He applied for a residence  permit  as  confirmation  of  a  right  of
    residence in the United Kingdom but that application was  refused.   He
    appealed the decision and at an oral hearing in the First-tier Tribunal
    the Judge dismissed the appeal finding that the appellant's marriage to
    an EEA national who is exercising treaty rights in the  United  Kingdom
    is a marriage of convenience.

 2. On a renewed application  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  the  appellant  was
    granted leave to appeal the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge.
    The judge  granting  permission  said  that  only  one  ground  of  the
    application for permission to appeal has any  arguable  merit;  namely,
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge may have erred in  law  in  equating
    the test for a marriage of convenience with the  test  of  whether  the
    marriage was "a subsisting, supportive and  affectionate  relationship"
    (paragraph 26 of the  determination)  and/or  in  concluding  that  the
    marriage was one of convenience, although there was "a relationship  of
    sorts, even one involving sexual activities  on  occasions"  (paragraph
    25).

 3. The appellant and sponsor attended a pre-arranged marriage interview on
    24 October 2013.  In paragraph 21 of the determination the judge  notes
    that  it  is  the  respondent's  case  that  the  marriage  is  one  of
    convenience, that it  is  not  subsisting  or  genuine,  and  that  the
    marriage has been entered into simply for the  predominant  purpose  of
    securing residence rights.

 4. The basis for refusal is the inconsistent and conflicting answers given
    at the marriage interview which led the respondent to conclude that the
    marriage is one of convenience.  The  appellant,  on  the  other  hand,
    asserts that the marriage is genuine and subsisting and that he and the
    sponsor were and are living together as husband and wife  at  the  same
    address.

 5. Mr Sutton, representing the  appellant,  submitted  that  many  of  the
    points taken  against  the  appellant  and  sponsor  were  of  no  real
    significance.  It is accepted in the determination that the parties are
    living at the same address and, in essence, the decision amounts  to  a
    criticism of the marriage comparing it with the standard of what  might
    be considered an ideal relationship.

 6. Mr Melvin in his submissions said that although they may be  living  at
    the same address this does not mean  that  it  is  not  a  marriage  of
    convenience.  The judge took all matters in the round and made it clear
    enough that this is a marriage of convenience.

My Deliberations

 7. This is a balanced decision. At the commencement of  paragraph  22  the
    judge sets out those matters of corroboration and then  lists  a  large
    number of discrepancies between the evidence given by the appellant and
    that given by the sponsor when they were  asked  questions  on  several
    topics.    The   judge   was    entitled    to    find    that    these
    discrepancies/inconsistencies/unsatisfactory  features  which   emerged
    from the evidence have the adverse effect cumulatively and together  of
    undermining the core of the appellant's and sponsor's stories.

 8. Although one might agree with Mr Sutton's submissions that some of  the
    points are not of any great significance there  are  others  which  are
    more important as are revealed by  a  full  reading  of  paragraph  22.
    Furthermore, the judge had the benefit of hearing  from  both  parties.
    She found that the  oral  evidence  was  unsatisfactory  and  sometimes
    confused.

 9. As something of an aside, because it does not appear to have influenced
    the judge in a manner at all adverse to the appellant, it was clear  to
    neither representative at the hearing before  me  why  the  judge  made
    reference to a relationship between the appellant and sponsor involving
    sexual activities on occasions, because there does not appear  to  have
    been any reference to such activities in the evidence given  either  at
    interview or at the hearing.

10. The judge was entitled  to  conclude  as  she  did  on  the  matter  of
    credibility and to have decided that although the evidence  shows  that
    the appellant and sponsor are living at the same address it is probable
    that the sponsor is allowed to share accommodation with  the  appellant
    rent free and utility bill free except for the  BT  bills.   These  are
    minimal and this arrangement is in order to facilitate the application.



11. In paragraph 26 the judge weighs up the evidence and  finds  "I  accept
    the case as put by the respondent in the refusal  notice/letter".   The
    evidence did not persuade her that the appellant and sponsor have  been
    living together as man and wife or that it  is  a  genuine  subsisting,
    supportive and  affectionate  relationship  as  the  appellant  claimed
    existed.  Put another way the appellant claimed that he had  a  genuine
    subsisting, supportive and affectionate relationship with  the  sponsor
    but the judge, for reasons that she gave, did not find that to  be  so.
    It is patently clear therefore that bearing in mind that it was for the
    appellant to meet the requirements of the Regulations he was unable  to
    show that on the balance of probabilities his marriage was other than a
    marriage of convenience.

Notice of Decision

12. There has been no error displayed by the judge  such  as  requires  the
    decision to be revisited and the decision is upheld.

13. At to anonymity I find that there is no need in such a case  for  there
    to be an anonymity direction.



Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton


