
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/48471/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 10 February 2016                  |On 23 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            WINSTON GEORGE OTTEY
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Appellant in person.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.    The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal  but
in order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in  the
First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a
decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Webb, promulgated on  17  August  2015
which allowed the Appellant's appeal.

Background

3.    The Appellant was born on  16  October  1961  and  is  a  national  of
Jamaica.

4.    On 18 November 2014 the Secretary of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
application for discretionary leave to remain in the UK.

The Judge's Decision

5.     The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   First-tier
Tribunal  Judge  Webb  ("the  Judge")  allowed  the   appeal   against   the
Respondent's decision.

6.    Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 19 December 2015  Judge  Frankish
gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

    "2.    The application for permission to appeal asserts that the  Ft-TJ
    wrongly allows the  appellant  further  leave  under  the  respondent's
    policy because she mistakenly granted him such leave  previously;  such
    extension  is,  in  any  event,  discretionary,  not   mandatory;   the
    appellant's  circumstances  entitled  the  respondent  to   refuse   an
    extension under her discretion.

    3.     Essentially the decision holds the respondent  to  her  original
    mistake, a conclusion that is an arguable error of law"

The Hearing

7     (a)   Ms Everett, for the respondent, adopted the grounds  of  appeal,
and told me that the undisputed facts in this case  are  that  the  original
grant of discretionary leave to remain was made on the basis of  a  material
error of fact. The respondent was granted discretionary leave to  remain  on
the basis that the respondent mistakenly believed  that  the  appellant  was
the father of a British child, when in fact he is the  grandfather  of  that
British child. She told me that, in  effect,  the  Judge's  decision  simply
perpetuates that initial error.

    (b)    Ms Everett reminded me that the wording of the policy  was  that
discretionary relief would "....normally be granted" and that  there  is  no
obligation on the Secretary of State to grant leave. It is not  a  mandatory
grant of leave, it is a discretionary grant, and that discretion  lies  with
the secretary of state.

8.    Mr Ottey was without representation, so I  spoke  to  him  about  this
appeal. His position is quite clearly that the decision does not  contain  a
material error of law, and that he did nothing to  cause  or  contribute  to
the respondent's original error. He accepts that he is not the father  of  a
British child, but that he is the grandfather of a British child, and  tells
me that he wants leave to remain in the UK because all  of  his  family  are
here. He urged me to dismiss the appeal and allow the decision to stand.



Analysis

9.    It is beyond dispute that the foundation for  the  original  grant  of
discretionary  leave  to  remain  was  the  respondent's  belief  that   the
appellant's circumstances were different.  The appellant  accepts  (and  the
Judge found) that the original grant of discretionary leave was made on  the
basis that the appellant was the father, rather than the grandfather,  of  a
British citizen child. It is not disputed that  that  was  the  respondent's
own  mistake  and  that  the  appellant  did  nothing  to  contribute  to  a
misunderstanding; The appellant did not hold himself out to  be  the  father
of the British citizen child.

10.   In VM (Zambia) v SSHD (2009) EWCA Civ 521 the  Court  of  Appeal  said
that successive grants of discretionary leave did not  put  the  SSHD  in  a
position where she was required to show a change of circumstances  in  order
to refuse Indefinite Leave to Remain.

11.   At [19] & [20] the Judge correctly quotes from  the  respondent's  own
guidance. At [22] and [23] the Judge finds that because there has  not  been
a change in the appellant's circumstances the appellant's appeal succeeds.

12.   The difficulty with the Judge's reasoning is that his focus is on  one
part only of the respondent's guidance (set out at [20]  of  the  decision).
When the guidance is read as a whole it can be seen  that  the  respondent's
discretion is emphasised. There is no obligation on the respondent to  grant
discretionary leave to remain. The sentence which is quoted in part in  [22]
and [23] of the decision reads

    "If the circumstances remain the same and the criminality thresholds do
    not apply, a further period  of  three  years  DL  should  normally  be
    granted,  decision  makers  must  consider  whether   there   are   any
    circumstances that may warrant departure from the  standard  period  of
    leave."

13.   At [22] and [23] the decision of the Judge focuses  on  part  only  of
that sentence. The Judge's  reasoning  places  unwarranted  emphasis  on  an
examination of whether or not there has been a change of circumstances;  the
Judge closes his eyes to the discretion the Secretary of  State  is  clearly
empowered to exercise. The guidance does not contain  a  guarantee  that  if
there is not a change in circumstances discretionary leave will be  granted.
I therefore have to find that the decision  contains  a  material  error  of
law. As the decision contains a material error of law, I must set it aside.

14.   There is no great dispute about the facts in this  case.  I  therefore
find that there is sufficient material before me to enable me to  substitute
my own decision.

Findings of Fact

15.   The appellant arrived in the UK as a visitor in 2001. He has  remained
in the UK since then. Between 2001 and 2011 he was  an  overstayer.  On  1st
September 2011 the respondent granted the appellant discretionary  leave  to
remain outside immigration rules for three years.

16.   The respondent granted the appellant  discretionary  leave  to  remain
because the respondent believed that  the  appellant  is  the  father  of  a
British citizen child. That is wrong. The appellant is the grandfather of  a
British citizen child. That child's father is the appellant's son,  who  has
a similar name to the appellant.

17.   Before coming to the  UK  the  appellant  lived  with  his  mother  in
Jamaica. In the time that the appellant has been in the UK, the  appellant's
mother has removed to the USA.

18.   The appellant has three children, all of whom live in the UK. He  also
has five grandchildren in the UK. The appellant enjoys  close  relationships
with  his  children  and  grandchildren.  He  typically  looks   after   his
grandchildren while their parents work. The appellant no longer  has  either
relatives or property in Jamaica. The appellant  regularly  visits  each  of
his children. His former partner (the mother of his children) lives  in  the
UK, and has recently had treatment for breast cancer.

Conclusions

19.   At [18] of the  decision,  the  Judge  records  that  the  appellant's
former  solicitors  accepted  that   the   appellant   cannot   fulfil   the
requirements of appendix FM of the Immigration Rules. The  application  made
by the appellant is for leave to remain out with the rules and  so  contains
a concession that the  appellant  cannot  fulfil  the  requirements  of  the
immigration rules.

20.   In any event, the respondent  considered  appendix  FM  and  correctly
found that the only category the appellant could  fall  into  (in  terms  of
appendix FM) is leave to remain as a parent.  The  appellant  cannot  fulfil
the  requirements  of  paragraph  R-LTR  PT  1.1,  nor  can  he  fulfil  the
requirements of paragraph  E-LTRPT  2.2  because  none  of  the  appellant's
children is under 20 years of age.

21.   The appellant cannot satisfy paragraph 276ADE(1)(i)to(v) of the  rules
because of a combination of his age and the length of time that he has  been
in the UK.

22.    The  appellant  cannot  fulfil  the  requirements  of  paragraph  276
ADE(1)(vi) because there is  no  evidence  of  the  absence  of  social  and
cultural ties to Jamaica nor is there evidence of significant  obstacles  to
reintegration there

23.   The respondent granted discretionary leave to  remain  in  the  UK  in
September 2011.  Both  the  transitional  provisions  and  the  respondent's
guidance (issued on 24 June 2013) indicate that the appellant's case  should
be determined by reference to article 8 ECHR out-with the rules.

24.   I remind myself of the guidance contained within Razgar.  I  must  ask
the following questions

    (i)    Does family life, private life,  home  or  correspondence  exist
    within the meaning of Article 8

    (ii)   If so, has the right to respect for this been interfered with

    (iii)  If so, was the interference in accordance with the law

    (iv)   If so, was the interference in pursuit of one of the  legitimate
    aims set out in Article 8(2); and

    (v)    If so, is the interference proportionate to the pursuit  of  the
    legitimate aim?

25.   In Kugathas v SSHD (2003) INLR 170 the Court of Appeal said  that,  in
order to establish family life, it is necessary to  show  that  there  is  a
real committed or effective  support  or  relationship  between  the  family
members and the normal emotional ties between a  mother  and  an  adult  son
would not, without more, be enough. In Etti-Adegbola v SSHD (2009) EWCA  Civ
1319 the Court of Appeal concentrated on the last  part  of  that  test  and
confirmed that the Tribunal had applied the right test  in  finding  that  a
family's behaviour  was  "no  way  exceptional  or  beyond  the  norm".   In
JB(India) and Others v ECO, Bombay (2009) EWCA Civ 234 the Court  of  Appeal
reiterated that the approach in Kugathas must be applied to the question  of
whether family life for the purposes of Article 8 subsists  between  parents
and adult children.

26.   The weight of reliable evidence indicates that the  appellant's  adult
children are independent and have started families of their  own.  There  is
no reliable evidence of dependency  between  the  appellant  and  his  adult
children. The weight of reliable evidence indicates that  there  is  nothing
more than the normal emotional ties.  Family  life  within  the  meaning  of
article 8 ECHR does not exist for the appellant in the UK.

27.   The appellant assists with childcare for  all  of  his  grandchildren.
But the primary carers  each  of  his  grandchildren  are  those  children's
parents, not the appellant. The weight of reliable evidence  indicates  that
the appellant does not live with his grandchildren. Family life  within  the
meaning of article 8 ECHR does not  exist  between  the  appellant  and  his
grandchildren.

28.   Private life within article 8 ECHR might exist for  the  appellant  in
the UK. He has lived here for the last  15  years.  He  has,  in  the  past,
worked in the UK. He enjoys the company of his children  and  grandchildren.
He has his home in the UK.

29.   The effect of implementation of the  respondent's  decision  would  be
that the appellant would have to leave behind  the  regular  social  contact
that he has with his children and grandchildren. He would have to leave  his
home in the UK, and his prospect of finding employment UK will  come  to  an
end.

30.   Section 117 of the 2002 Act is a factor to be taken  into  account  in
determining proportionality.  I  appreciate  that  as  the  public  interest
provisions are now contained in primary legislation they  override  existing
case law, Section 117A(2) requires me to have regard to  the  considerations
listed in Sections 117B and 117C.  I am conscious of my  statutory  duty  to
take these factors into account when coming to my conclusions.   I  am  also
aware that Section 117A(3) imposes upon  me  the  duty  of  carrying  out  a
balancing exercise.

31.   The appellant speaks flawless English. In AM (S  117B)  Malawi  [2015]
UKUT 260 (IAC) the Tribunal held that an appellant can  obtain  no  positive
right to a grant of leave to remain from either s117B (2) or  (3),  whatever
the degree of his fluency in English,  or  the  strength  of  his  financial
resources. In Forman (ss 117A-C considerations) [2015] UKUT 00412  (IAC)  it
was held that the  public  interest  in  firm  immigration  control  is  not
diluted by the consideration that a person pursuing a claim under Article  8
ECHR has at no time been a  financial  burden  on  the  state  or  is  self-
sufficient or is likely to remain  so  indefinitely.   The  significance  of
these factors is that where they are not  present  the  public  interest  is
fortified.

32.    Effective  immigration  control  is  in  the  public  interest.   For
approximately two thirds of the appellant's time in the UK he did  not  have
the right to be in the  UK,  so  that  I  can  give  little  weight  to  the
inception,  creation  and  development  of  private  life.  Since  2011  the
appellant's immigration has been precarious (AM  (Malawi))  so  that  I  can
give little weight to the appellant's private life.

33.   I balance the respondent's interest in preserving fair  and  effective
immigration control to protect this country's fragile economy. In Nasim  and
others (Article 8) [2014] UKUT 25 (IAC) it was held that  the  judgments  of
the Supreme Court in Patel and Others v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department [2013] UKSC 72 serve to re-focus  attention  on  the  nature  and
purpose of Article 8 of the ECHR  and,  in  particular,  to  recognise  that
Article's limited utility in private life cases that are  far  removed  from
the protection of an individual's moral and physical integrity.

34.   Balancing all of these matters I have to find  that  the  respondent's
decision is not a disproportionate interference with the  appellant's  right
to respect for private life.

35.    I  therefore  find  that  the  respondent's   decision   is   not   a
disproportionate breach of any of the appellant's article 8 ECHR rights.

Conclusion

36.   I therefore have to find that  the  respondent's  decision  is  not  a
disproportionate breach of any rights  that  the  appellant  might  have  in
terms of Article 8 ECHR.

Decision

37    The decision promulgated on 17 August 2015 contains a  material  error
of law. I therefore set it aside.

38    I substitute the following decision.

39    The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration Rules.

40    The appeal is dismissed on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

41    There is no need for an anonymity direction.


Signed      15 February 2016
                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

