
[pic]
IAC-AH-sc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/48705/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Determination & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 15th February 2016                    |On 25th April 2016                  |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                          miss Yvonne Abrowka gyan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs H Gore (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms Brockleby-Weller (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Young, promulgated on 20th July 2015, following  a  hearing  at  Hatton
    Cross on 30th June 2015.  In the determination, the judge dismissed the
    appeal of Ms Yvonne Abrowka Gyan, whereupon the Appellant  subsequently
    applied for, and  was  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Grant of Permission

 2. Permission to appeal was granted in this matter by the  Upper  Tribunal
    on 2nd December 2015.  The Tribunal observed the basic  facts  of  this
    matter, namely, that the Appellant wanted to remain in the  UK  as  the
    family member or daughter of an Italian national,  in  order  to  claim
    permission to enter the UK on this basis.   It  was  alleged  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal erred by finding  that  the  Appellant  was  not  a
    direct descendant of her mother as an adopted child  within  Regulation
    7(1) of the EEA Regulations.  It was also  alleged  that  the  Tribunal
    erred by finding that the Appellant was not an extended family  member,
    given their own findings at paragraph 41 of the decision, and thus  the
    appeal failed to be allowed under Regulation 8 of the EEA  Regulations.



 3. The First-tier Tribunal also erred in finding that  the  Appellant  was
    not dependent on her mother because  the  EEA  national  received  some
    state benefits.  The test was simply whether the Appellant was provided
    with her essential living needs by the Sponsor.  The  Tribunal  granted
    permission on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal may have erred  on
    the basis that the Appellant was not a direct descendant of her  mother
    as an adopted child.  It also granted permission on the basis that  the
    Appellant was probably dependent on her mother because the EEA national
    received state benefits.

 4. On 5th January 2016, a Rule 24 response was entered by  the  Respondent
    to the effect that the judge had given adequate reasons in finding that
    receiving money alone does not amount to a dependency, as  reasoned  in
    paragraph 46 of the determination.  The Rule 24  response  also  states
    that the Appellant's arguments  are  simply  a  disagreement  with  the
    findings of the judge.

Submissions

 5. At the hearing before me on 15th February 2016, Mrs  Gore  argued  that
    the judge had fundamentally erred in not  applying  the  provisions  in
    Regulation 8 literally.  This is because  Regulation  8  contained  two
    separate bases for an extended family member to become a family  member
    of an EEA national.  The first was that such  a  person  is  "dependent
    upon the EEA national".  The second is that such a person "is a  member
    of his household".  Only one of these needs to be  proven.   The  judge
    had considered the question of whether the Appellant was dependent upon
    the EEA national.  The judge simply failed to consider whether she  was
    also a "member of his household".

 6. For her part, Ms Brockleby-Weller submitted that the judge  had  looked
    at the question of historical dependency and observed that this had not
    been met.  For  example,  at  paragraph  39  the  judge  observed  that
    dependency "in general would mean financial support to  meet  essential
    living requirements." (Paragraph 39).  The judge  cited  authority  for
    this.  However, as the judge explained (at paragraph 45)  the  Sponsor,
    Linda Osei, indicated that she had four children.  She did not know her
    husband's income.  She did not know whether he  supported  her  or  her
    children.  She was in receipt of tax credits.  She was  in  receipt  of
    child tax credits, housing benefit, working tax credit,  child  benefit
    and occupied a housing association property.  In the circumstances this
    would:

         "Give real doubt as to the ability of the Sponsor to provide  money
         for the Appellant for basic living needs in  Ghana.   The  lack  of
         evidence of money being sent prior to 2012/2013 and  evidence  only
         of sporadic payment does not aid the claim that the  Appellant  was
         dependent on the Sponsor." (Paragraph 45).

 7. Secondly, as far as the argument about the Appellant being a "member of
    his household" is concerned under Regulation 8, this  was  implausible.
    It is true that it was not explicitly addressed by the  judge,  but  it
    was never argued expressly  as  a  separate  ground  by  the  Appellant
    either.  At paragraph 43 the judge did,  nevertheless,  make  it  clear
    that, "in the first instance the Sponsor left Ghana for Italy when  the
    Appellant was very young (5 years old) and her return to Ghana has only
    been to visit the family rather than to  stay  for  extended  periods."
    (Paragraph 43).  In fact, as the judge explains, she had  indicated  in
    her interview that she had been to visit three times  since  coming  to
    the UK five years ago ...." (Paragraph 43).

 8. In these circumstances, it could hardly be said that the Appellant  was
    a member of the household of Linda Osei.  In the same way, at paragraph
    48 the judge makes it quite clear that he was not  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant could show on the balance  of  probabilities  "that  she  was
    dependent on the EEA national while she was resident in  Ghana".   This
    is because "there is insufficient evidence in my  view  to  demonstrate
    that position.  It seems more likely that the wider family  members  in
    Ghana (other aunts and grandparents) provided basic living requirements
    for the Appellant after Linda Osei left for Italy  when  the  Appellant
    was 5 and that continued.   So  the  Appellant  does  not  satisfy  the
    definition of an extended family member." (Paragraph 48).

 9. The judge similarly went on to dismiss the appeal on Article 8  grounds
    as well (paragraph 49).

10. In reply, Mrs Gore submitted that the Appellant had arrived in  the  UK
    illegally.  At the time of the decision she was dependent on her  aunt,
    Miss Linda Osei.  This is because she arrived in  the  UK  in  November
    2014.  She was apprehended by an Immigration Officer  at  the  port  of
    entry.  She was given temporary admission.   The  following  month,  in
    December 2014, the Secretary of State  made  a  decision  against  her.
    During that time, the Appellant was living with her  aunt  in  the  UK,
    Linda Osei, and so to all intents and purposes she was a dependant upon
    her aunt, being totally reliant upon her.

11. By the time that the appeal went to the judge  in  July  2015  she  was
    still living with her aunt, Linda Osei.  The judge did  find  that  the
    auntie, Linda Osei, had parental responsibility for the Appellant.  The
    judge found that the auntie had been looking after the Appellant  since
    the Appellant was 3 years of age, and  when  she  had  to  leave  Ghana
    herself, she made arrangements through other  aunts  and  grandparents,
    for the Appellant to be looked after.

12. Mrs Gore referred to  Macdonald's  Immigration  Law  &  Practice  which
    refers to being a member of a household as  "living  under  the  roof".
    She drew attention to the  Appellant's  witness  statement  because  at
    paragraph 4.5 and paragraph 9 of the aunt's witness statement,  it  was
    made clear that she was responsible  for  the  Appellant  for  all  her
    essential needs during her life.

13. The Appellant was not cross-examined on this  issue.   Credibility  was
    assumed.  It was wrong for the judge to have said at paragraph 48  that
    the Appellant was looked after by other aunts  and  grandparents  given
    that there was no cross-examination of the  aunt  when  she  maintained
    that she looked after  the  Appellant  in  her  witness  statement  and
    neither was her cross-examination of the Appellant.

No Error of Law

14. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My  reasons  are
    as follows.

15. First, the judge does direct himself appropriately both in terms of the
    law and in terms of the factual circumstances before him.  He considers
    whether the Appellant is dependent upon the EEA national.  He is  quite
    clear (at paragraph 42) that the  issue  of  concern  was  whether  the
    Appellant was dependent upon Linda Osei whilst in  Ghana.   The  judge,
    (notwithstanding what may or may not have  been  said  in  the  witness
    statement) is quite clear that, "the Sponsor left Ghana for Italy  when
    the Appellant was very young (5 years old) and the return to Ghana  has
    only been to  visit  the  family  rather  than  to  stay  for  extended
    periods." (Paragraph 43).

16. The judge  also  did  not  accept  that  the  Sponsor,  being  entirely
    dependent upon state assistance (see paragraph 45) was in a position to
    provide for the Appellant, especially given that she had four  children
    of her own.

17. The judge was clear that there were "real doubts as to the  ability  of
    the Sponsor to provide money for the Appellant for basic  living  needs
    in Ghana." (Paragraph 45).  Furthermore, at  paragraph  46,  the  judge
    observes that the Appellant at the time of the application "was aged 18
    and there is no evidence as to why she might still be dependent on  her
    aunt given that she had apparently completed her education and would be
    able to earn a living." (Paragraph 46).

18. As far as paragraph 48 was concerned, the judge was of  the  view  that
    the Appellant could not be a dependant on the EEA  national  while  she
    was resident in Ghana because "there is  insufficient  evidence  in  my
    view to demonstrate that position." (Paragraph 48), and the judge  gave
    ample reasons for this.

19. Second, insofar as the Appellant being a member  of  the  household  is
    concerned, it is implicit in the way in which the judges dealt with the
    matters already set out above, that the Appellant was not a  member  of
    the household.  In fact, it is quite clear (at paragraph 43)  that  the
    Sponsor left the Appellant when the Appellant was only 5 years of  age,
    to leave Ghana and to go to Italy, and then only  returned  for  family
    visits "rather than to stay for extended periods." (Paragraph 43).

20. The Appellant could not, on any reasonable view, have therefore been  a
    member of the household of the Sponsor.




Notice of Decision

21. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

22. No anonymity order is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 21st April 2016

