
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/48728/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31st October 2014                       |On 5th November 2014            |
|                                           |                                |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                          BHAVISH KUMAR SHIW-PURSAD


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Megha, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss R Petersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                             EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT


 1. The matter comes before me on grounds from the Secretary of  State  who
    complains  that  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   Prior
    promulgated on 19th August 2014 is vitiated by legal error in that when
    the judge allowed  the  appeal  to  the  limited  extent  that  it  was
    otherwise not in accordance with the law  for  failure  to  reveal  the
    policy, the subject of the reasons for refusal  letter,  there  was  in
    fact no procedural unfairness which could have made any  difference  to
    the outcome of the consideration of the Appellant's application.

 2. The judge at  [17]  noted  that  the  exercise  of  discretion  by  the
    Respondent must be exercised with procedural fairness if it  is  to  be
    exercised in accordance with the law.   The judge  further  noted  that
    the reasons for refusal set out matters  apparently  contained  in  her
    policy which  were  pertinent  to  the  decision  and  which  were  not
    available  to  the  Appellant,  either  in  the  preparation   of   his
    application, or in the appeal before the judge.

 3. Mr Megha argued that the  failure  to  provide  the  policy  relied  on
    demonstrated an absence of fairness in process which was sufficient  to
    justify the conclusion of the judge.

 4. Miss Petersen for the Respondent acknowledged that there was unfairness
    in the process adopted by the Respondent and indicated that whilst  she
    did not have instructions to, and so was not in a position to  withdraw
    the grounds of the application before me, she acknowledged  that  there
    was force in the fairness arguments  raised  as  determinative  by  the
    judge and was unable to assist  me  with  any  detailed  submission  in
    support of the grounds challenging the decision.

 5. It is trite law that issues of fairness  of  process  are  entitled  to
    consideration outside of issues of merit of the decision. In  light  of
    the submissions I am satisfied that the  judge's  decision  reveals  no
    material error of law requiring me to set it aside, and it stands.



Signed   E DAVIDGE                           Date 5th November 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge

