
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/48437/2013
                                                               IA/48442/2013
                                                               IA/48448/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 19 May 2015                       |On 18 June 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MURRAY


                                   Between

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          SYED AUSAF HAIDER (FIRST)
                            HAFSA AKTER (SECOND)
                              [A Minor] (THIRD)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   No-one


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary  of  State  however
    for convenience I shall now refer to the parties as  they  were  before
    the First-Tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellants were born on 10 August 1988, 1 January 1988 and 11  June
    2012 respectively.  They  are  citizens  of  Pakistan,  Bangladesh  and
    Pakistan respectively.  The first  appellant  is  the  husband  of  the
    second appellant and they are the parents of the third appellant.  They
    appealed against the decision of the respondent dated 1  November  2013
    refusing to grant them leave to remain in the United Kingdom under  the
    provisions  of  Appendix  FM  of  the  statement  of  changes  in   the
    Immigration Rules (HC395) (as amended) and under the Article  8  family
    life provisions of ECHR.  The appeals were heard by Judge of the First-
    Tier Tribunal Callender-Smith on 15 August 2014.  Their  appeals  under
    the Immigration Rules were dismissed and their appeals  in  respect  of
    Article 8 of ECHR were allowed, in a  determination  promulgated  on  2
    September 2014.

 3. An application for permission to appeal was lodged  by  the  respondent
    and was refused by Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal Mark Davies  on  11
    September 2014.  However permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge
    Storey on 30 December 2013.  He found that it was arguable that  First-
    Tier Tribunal Judge Callender-Smith's assessment that  the  appellants'
    circumstances were exceptional or compelling was  irrational  and  that
    the Judge had failed to apply  the  statutory  provisions  set  out  in
    Section 117A and B of Part 5A of the 2002 Act as  amended.   First-Tier
    Tribunal Judge Callender-Smith took into account the  difficulties  the
    inter-faith couple would face on return but the  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    found it not to be clear that the concerns he expressed in relation  to
    the Pakistan scenario had application to  the  Bangladesh  scenario  or
    that the Judge had given adequate consideration to the latter.

 4. On 20 February 2015 the appellants appeared before me and I found  that
    there was  a  material  error  of  law  in  the  First-Tier  Tribunal's
    determination for  the  reasons  stated  in  the  grounds.   The  Judge
    considered the expert report but did not consider the other side of the
    balancing exercise being the objective evidence  and  relevant  country
    guidance cases.  The Judge did not deal with Section 117  of  the  2002
    Act and the public interest question.  I found that the Judge has  used
    Article 8 as a general dispensing power  as  the  terms  of  the  Rules
    cannot be satisfied.  The Judge has found that the terms of  the  Rules
    cannot be met but this has not been properly taken into account in  the
    proportionality assessment in his determination and he  has  not  dealt
    with the fact that the immigration  status  of  neither  appellant  was
    other  than  temporary.    Neither  had  and  of  them   a   legitimate
    expectation of remaining in the United Kingdom.

 5. The First-Tier Judge found that the terms of the  Rules  could  not  be
    satisfied but he did not deal with internal relocation and did not deal
    with the part of the refusal letter which  suggests  that  the  parties
    apply for asylum.  The Judge gave inadequate reasons for  finding  that
    the appellants would have problems throughout Pakistan  and  Bangladesh
    because of their inter-faith issues.  The First-Tier  Judge  found  the
    circumstances for the appellants exceptional and  compelling  but  this
    finding is irrational as he did not apply the statutory provisions  set
    out in section 117A and B of the 2002 Act as amended.

 6. I directed a second stage hearing on all counts.  I  would  have  heard
    the second stage on 15 February 2015 but I was  told  that  the  second
    appellant would require a Bengali interpreter and  there  was  no  such
    interpreter at the hearing centre and  the  Presenting  Officer  stated
    that he wished to bring to the court the Country Guidance  cases  which
    are relevant and also the relevant objective evidence.

 7. This is the adjourned second stage hearing.

 8. None of the appellants appeared  at  the  hearing  centre,  nor  did  a
    representative appear on their behalf.  I was told that an  adjournment
    request had been faxed to the Tribunal on 18 May.  This was not on  the
    file.  I made enquiries and  eventually  the  adjournment  request  was
    found.  This had not been dealt with.  It was from Marks and Marks  who
    represent the appellants.  As the  adjournment  request  had  not  been
    replied to, I would  have  expected  a  lawyer  from  Marks  and  Marks
    Solicitors in Harrow to have appeared at the hearing  centre.   No  one
    appeared.  The adjournment request states that  the  second  appellant,
    who is 11 weeks pregnant, had slipped in the bath on 17  May  2015  and
    hit her abdomen.  She attended  the  Accident  and  Emergency  Unit  at
    hospital and was prescribed painkillers.  She has an  appointment  with
    her GP on 21 May 2015 for further checks and has been  advised  by  the
    doctor/nurse to rest and apply medication to her back until her follow-
    up appointment on 21 May 2015.  The fax asks  for  the  hearing  to  be
    adjourned.  There is an incident report from Partnership of East London
    Co-Ops (PELC) OOH Call on the second appellant as a walk-in patient  on
    17 May 2015.  This states that the second appellant had hit her abdomen
    but there were no medical issues.  The report confirms that the  second
    appellant is pregnant but it was found that she had no head injury,  no
    chest pain or breathing problems, no urinary problems  and  no  medical
    issues.  She was found to be walking comfortably and was  looking  well
    and her hydration was good.

 9. Based on this I found that she could have attended the  hearing  or  if
    she felt she was unable to do so at least  the  first  appellant  could
    have attended the hearing along with his solicitor.

10. In the circumstances I was not prepared to grant an  adjournment.   The
    Presenting  Officer  was  prepared  for  the  hearing.   No  additional
    evidence has been provided by  the  appellants  since  the  hearing  in
    February 2015.

11. I heard submissions from the Presenting Officer.   She  submitted  that
    she is relying on the refusal letter of 1 November 2013.  She submitted
    that this claim cannot  succeed  under  the  Rules.   What  has  to  be
    considered is an Article 8 assessment.

12. I was referred to the case of Singh & The Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2015] WLR(D) 66 paragraphs 60 to 66.  These paragraphs
    deal with failure to apply the two stage  approach,  i.e.  should  this
    claim be considered outside the Rules?  Paragraph 66 refers to the case
    of Nagri and states that the second stage can, in an appropriate  case,
    be satisfied by the decision maker concluding that any family  life  or
    private life issues raised by the claim have already been addressed, in
    which case there is no need to go through it all again.  The Presenting
    Officer submitted that this claim cannot meet the terms of the Rules as
    the appellants have always  only  been  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  a
    temporary basis and none of them are British.

13. The Presenting Officer submitted that the appellants are  stating  that
    there are compelling reasons for the appeal to be allowed  outside  the
    Rules and these reasons are that  the  appellants  cannot  relocate  in
    either Pakistan or Bangladesh because they have different faiths.   She
    submitted that the first two appellants both knew that they  were  only
    in the United Kingdom on a temporary basis  when  they  married.   They
    also knew that they each worshipped different sects of Islam when  they
    married.  They knew there was no guarantee that they would  be  granted
    further leave to remain in the United Kingdom, particularly relating to
    their family life, as they were both students, so any  family  life  in
    the United Kingdom must have been precarious and so little  weight  can
    be attached to this. They also knew their family  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom was precarious when they had the third appellant, their child.

14. I was referred to the case of SS Congo [2015] EWCA Civ 387 at paragraph
    44. This states that the proper approach should always be  to  identify
    in the first place the substantive content of the relevant  Immigration
    Rules, both to see if an appellant satisfies the conditions  laid  down
    in these Rules and to assess the force of  the  public  interest  given
    expression in these Rules which is relevant to the  balancing  exercise
    under Article 8, in deciding whether leave to remain should be  granted
    outside the substantive provisions set out in the Rules.  She submitted
    that  if  an  appellant  does  not  satisfy  the  requirements  of  the
    substantive part of the Rules, she may seek to maintain a claim  for  a
    grant of leave to remain outside  the  substantive  provisions  of  the
    Rules pursuant to Article 8.  This will only be considered if there  is
    a reasonable arguable case under Article 8 which has not  already  been
    sufficiently dealt with in consideration of the application  under  the
    substantive provision of the Rules.  She submitted that if this happens
    the individual interests of the appellant and others, whose  Article  8
    rights are in issue, should be balanced against  the  public  interest.
    She submitted therefore that if this claim is  considered  outside  the
    Rules, Section 117B of the 2002 Act has to be given weight.

15. The Presenting Officer submitted that it would be  reasonable  for  the
    three appellants to relocate  to  Pakistan.   I  was  referred  to  the
    Country Information and Guidance on Pakistan dated  in  February  2015.
    This refers to Shia Muslims and states that there are no discriminatory
    laws or government policies against Shias in Pakistan and there are  no
    legal restrictions on freedom of religion for Shias.   It  goes  on  to
    state that there is little societal discrimination that would  restrict
    Shias in their daily life and the Pakistani authorities are willing  to
    protect Shias.  In this report at 2.4.1 it is stated that there  are  a
    significant number of Shia communities across Pakistan  and  there  are
    options for Shia Muslims to relocate to other areas in Pakistan.

16. I was then referred to the Country Information and Guidance  Report  on
    Pakistan at 2.4.2 which states that  because  of  Pakistan's  size  and
    diversity internal relocation offers a  degree  of  anonymity  and  the
    opportunity for victims to seek refuge from discrimination or violence.
     It states that there are options available for members of most  ethnic
    and religious minorities to be able to relocate to  areas  of  relative
    safety elsewhere in Pakistan.  It refers to large urban  centres  being
    home to mixed ethnic and religious  communities  and  refers  to  State
    protection.

17. I was then referred to a report from the Refugee  Documentation  Centre
    which deals with research into inter-religious marriages between  Shias
    and Sunnis in Pakistan.

18. This states that inter-marriages between  Sunnis  and  Shias  are  less
    problematic in Pakistan than marriages between Muslims and  Christians.
    Sunni and Shia Muslims share the same faith and abide by the same  five
    pillars of Islam and there are no rules forcing a woman  to  adopt  her
    husband's particular branch of Islam.  The report goes on to state that
    children born in Sunni/Shia inter-marriages are normally raised  within
    the father's sect but there are cases where the children are brought up
    in the mother's sect.  This is therefore something that can be resolved
    by the parents.  There is no  legal  discrimination  against  a  couple
    where one party is Sunni and  one  party  is  Shia.  Society  does  not
    discriminate against them.   The  report  states  that  the  government
    recognises marriages of the same religion irrespective of what type  of
    Islam each party worships.

19. With regard to honour killings, the Presenting Officer  submitted  that
    if the appellants relocate away from their families it is unlikely that
    their families will know  they  have  returned  and  society  will  not
    discriminate against them if they internally relocate.

20. I was referred to the case of AW Pakistan [2011] UK UT 31  (IAC)  which
    states that there is a sufficiency of State protection  for  people  in
    the appellants' position.  This  refers  to  past  persecution  perhaps
    leading to future persecution  but  she  submitted  that  there  is  no
    evidence of past persecution against the first appellant in this  case.
    She submitted therefore that it would not  be  unreasonable  or  unduly
    harsh and there would be no insurmountable obstacles to the  appellants
    going to Pakistan to live.

21. The Presenting Officer then referred to the appellants' ability to stay
    in Bangladesh.  The Country Information and Guidance  Report  at  2.4.1
    states that there is freedom of movement throughout Bangladesh.   Women
    and minorities are not subject to any special controls and although  it
    states  that  single  women  can  have   difficulties   relocating   in
    Bangladesh, the second appellant will be with her husband and child  if
    they go there and so should have no difficulties.

22. The Presenting Officer submitted that  the  First-Tier  Judge  remarked
    that the first appellant will not be able to get a visa  in  Bangladesh
    but there is no evidence to show that he will be unable to get a spouse
    visa.  The evidence given at the First-Tier Hearing was that the  first
    appellant had not tried to get an international job  in  Bangladesh  to
    enable him to join his wife there but the Presenting Officer  submitted
    that if he did this then he is likely to be able to go to Bangladesh to
    join his wife because of his job.

23. With regard to the language barrier both appellants  have  English  and
    the first appellant  can  learn  Bengali.   Both  the  appellants  have
    qualifications from the United Kingdom and  she  submitted  that  there
    should be no difficulties for this family relocating in Bangladesh.

24. The Presenting Officer submitted that the evidence she has supplied  is
    in the public domain and this has to  be  weighed  against  the  expert
    report which is the only objective evidence considered  by  the  First-
    Tier Judge when making his decision.

25. She submitted that Section  117B  applies  to  qualifying  partners  or
    children and that neither of the first two appellants  is  a  qualified
    partner and the child is not a qualified child.

26. The appellants have always been in the United Kingdom  on  a  temporary
    basis and she submitted that it would be  in  the  public  interest  to
    remove them from the United Kingdom because  of  this.   She  submitted
    that the best interests of the child must be to be  with  his  parents.
    The child is only three years old and his parents can choose what  type
    of religion they wish to bring him up in.  I was asked to  dismiss  the
    appeal.

Determination

27. The burden of proof is on the appellants and the standard of  proof  is
    the balance of probabilities.

28. I have considered all  the  evidence  before  me,  the  subjective  and
    objective evidence, some of which may not be specifically  referred  to
    herein and the submissions of the Presenting Officer.

29. The appellants'  applications  cannot  succeed  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The first two appellants have only been in the  United  Kingdom
    on a temporary basis and neither of them has ever  had  any  legitimate
    expectation of being able to remain in the United Kingdom.  Neither  of
    the first two appellants is British.  What I have to  consider  is  the
    Article 8 aspect of  the  Rules  and  whether  this  claim  has  to  be
    considered outside the Rules.

30. I have to consider Sections 117A to D of Part 5A of  the  2002  Act  in
    dealing with proportionality.  As the first two appellants only have  a
    temporary stay in the United Kingdom their situation here is precarious
    and was precarious when they got married and they were aware  of  this.
    There has never been any guarantee that further leave to  remain  would
    be granted to either party.  They  were  both  students  and  as  their
    private and family life in the UK was precarious little weight  can  be
    attached to it.

31. Because this is the  case,  when  the  parties'  situation  is  weighed
    against public interest, public  interest  must  succeed  when  weighed
    against the appellants' rights.

32. The appellants' case is that there are compelling reasons for  them  to
    be granted leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  outside  the  Rules.
    They state that they cannot relocate to Pakistan or Bangladesh  because
    one of them is a Sunni Muslim and the other is  a  Shia  Muslim.   They
    were also aware of this when they married.

33. I have considered the expert report on  file  along  with  the  Country
    Guidance cases and the objective evidence.  Based on the COI report the
    fact that the first appellant is a Shia Muslim and the second appellant
    is a Sunni  Muslim  does  not  stop  them  returning  to  Pakistan  and
    relocating internally when they get there if they  are  afraid  of  the
    first appellant's family.  I considered in  particular  the  report  on
    Sunni and Shia Muslims which has been provided by the Respondent.  This
    states that the appellants are of the  same  faith,  being  Islam,  and
    worship the same five pillars of Islam.   On  return  to  Pakistan  the
    first appellant's wife would not require to adopt her husband's  branch
    of Islam.  A couple can decide whether their children are to be brought
    up as Sunni or Shia and there is no legal discrimination  against  them
    in Pakistan because of their inter-faith.  The government  in  Pakistan
    recognises marriage of the same religion irrespective of which type  of
    Islam they each worship.  The COI Report also states that there  is  no
    societal discrimination against an inter  religious  marriage  of  this
    type.

34. The appellants have stated that there is a  possibility  of  an  honour
    killing if they return to Pakistan or Bangladesh. I see no  reason  why
    they  cannot  relocate  away  from  the  first  appellant's  family  in
    Pakistan.  In any case his parents seem to live in Saudi Arabia.   They
    appellants will be entitled to State protection.  The  first  appellant
    has never suffered persecution in  Pakistan.   The  objective  evidence
    states that there will be a sufficiency of protection in Pakistan.

35. Although the expert report refers to difficulties, this  report  cannot
    be considered on its own and when  it  is  considered  along  with  the
    Country Guidance cases and the  objective  evidence  I  find  that  the
    appellants can go to live in Pakistan as a family.

36. I have also noted the COI report  on  Bangladesh  and  the  freedom  of
    movement that there is in Bangladesh.   Again  the  objective  evidence
    indicates that the appellants can both return to Bangladesh with  their
    child.  The first appellant does not appear to have tried to get a  job
    there but if he tries and is successful  in  this,  then  there  is  no
    reason why he cannot join his wife there.  The fact that  he  does  not
    speak Bengali is not a sufficient reason for him being unable to go  to
    live in Bangladesh.  The first and second appellants both speak English
    and are well educated.  When  this  is  weighed  against  the  problems
    referred to in the expert  report,  I  find  there  are  no  compelling
    circumstances which would stop the appellants being removed as a family
    to Bangladesh.

37. The terms of the Immigration Rules cannot be met and  when  the  claims
    are considered outside the Rules, Section 117 and "the public  interest
    question" have to be weighed against the rights of the appellants.   In
    this case it must be in the public interest to  remove  the  appellants
    from the United Kingdom as they have always been here  on  a  temporary
    basis.  Effective immigration has to be upheld in the UK.

38. With regard to the best interests of the child, I find  that  the  best
    interests of the child is to be with his parents.  The  child  is  only
    three years old and his parents can choose what  religion  he  follows.
    They can leave the United Kingdom and go to live in either Pakistan  or
    Bangladesh.  The fact that the terms of the Immigration Rules cannot be
    satisfied must go against the appellants' claim in the  proportionality
    assessment.

39.  Under  EX1  there  are  no  insurmountable  obstacles  preventing  the
    continuation of family life outside the UK.

Decision

40. I dismiss the appeals in respect of the Immigration Rules.

41. I dismiss the appeals under Article 8 of ECHR.

42. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date

Designated Judge Murray
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
