
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/48804/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham ET                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 March 2016                              |On 18 March 2016              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                            MR NAVEED ASHRAF KHAN
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Hussain, solicitor, Syeds Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Shergill promulgated on  5  March  2015,  in  which  he  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Nicholson
    on 12 May 2015.

Anonymity

 3. No direction has been made previously, and there is no reason  for  one
    now

Background

 4. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on  22  November  2009,  in
    possession of entry clearance as a spouse, valid until 28 January 2012.
    On 28 January 2012, he made an in time application for leave to  remain
    as the spouse of a settled person. That application was rejected  on  9
    February 2012 as  no  fee  was  paid.  The  same  application  was  re-
    submitted, out of time, on 7 September 2012 and was refused on 21 March
    2013, with no right of appeal. A judicial review  brought  on  16  July
    2013 was refused on 22 May 2014. On 9 July 2014, the appellant  applied
    for indefinite leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules.

 5. The Secretary of State refused the application on 25 November  2014  on
    the basis that the appellant failed  to  satisfy  the  requirements  of
    paragraph A280B as well as Appendix FM, particularly under the  partner
    route. It was noted that the appellant could not meet paragraph 287(vi)
    as  he  had  submitted  only  an  ESOL  Entry  Level   1   certificate.
    Furthermore, while it was accepted that the appellant had a genuine and
    subsisting relationship with his wife, the reasons he provided for  his
    spouse not wishing to leave the United Kingdom were not  considered  to
    amount to insurmountable obstacles. Consideration was also given to the
    appellant's private life under paragraph 276ADE of the Rules as well as
    the absence of exceptional circumstances, with the Secretary  of  State
    concluding that the appellant did not qualify for a grant of leave.

 6. The appellant appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  grounds  of
    appeal asserted that the respondent had not considered a grant of leave
    outside the Rules. It  was  said  that  the  appellant  had  become  an
    overstayer  owing  to  an  error  on   the   part   of   his   previous
    representatives and that he otherwise  met  all  the  requirements  for
    leave to remain as a spouse. It was also argued that  the  respondent's
    decision was not in accordance with the law.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 7. The appellant alone gave evidence before the FTTJ, it being  said  that
    his wife had taken her mother to hospital at the time of  the  hearing.
    No application was made for an adjournment.

 8. The FTTJ was not satisfied that the appellant met the  requirements  of
    paragraph 287(i) of the Rules  in  relation  to  English  language  and
    knowledge of life in the United Kingdom. Nor did the FTTJ  accept  that
    the wife's  refusal  to  go  to  Pakistan  amounted  to  insurmountable
    obstacles.

 9. In considering the appellant's Article 8 claim outside the  Rules,  the
    FTTJ  found  that  any  interference  in  his  family  life   was   not
    disproportionate on the evidence before him.

The grounds of appeal

10. The grounds of appeal submitted that the FTTJ had overlooked the public
    interest requirement in section 117B of the 2002 Act; that the contents
    therein favoured the appellant and  that  the  FTTJ  had  undertaken  a
    freewheeling Article 8 assessment.

11. Permission to appeal was granted on  the  basis  that  it  was  unclear
    whether the FTTJ was aware  of  the  statutory  obligation  imposed  by
    section 117B and permission was granted on this ground. Permission  was
    not refused on any remaining grounds.

12. The Secretary of State's response of 22 May  2015  indicated  that  the
    appeal was opposed. It was argued that the FTTJ had taken into  account
    the principle points in section 117B, which were not  determinative  of
    the appeal in any event. The  facts  of  the  case  were  described  as
    mundane; the appellant could not meet the  Rules  and  advanced  little
    evidence to demonstrate any compelling circumstances outside  them.  An
    error of law was said to be immaterial.

The error of law hearing

13. Mr Khan relied on the decisions of AM (S117B)  Malawi  [2015]  UKUT0260
    (IAC) and and Forman (ss117A-C considerations) [2015] UKUT 00412 (IAC).
    He argued that section 117B of the 2002 Act had not  been  consider  in
    any manner and had not been mentioned at all. The  error  was  material
    because had the FTTJ considered it, there could have been  a  different
    outcome. The appellant had entered the United Kingdom lawfully and  had
    become an overstayer owing to one factor alone;  he  did  not  pay  the
    correct fee on a previous application. Were it not for this issue,  the
    appellant would have had indefinite leave to remain given that the  old
    maintenance  requirements  applied  and  the  Secretary  of  State  was
    satisfied as to the relationship between the appellant and his wife.

14. Mr Khan appreciated that there was  a  lack  of  evidence  relating  to
    several matters before the FTTJ, however he argued that on the basis of
    the evidence that was before the Tribunal, the  appeal  ought  to  have
    been allowed. The appellant had paid thousands of pounds in  fees  over
    the years and the FTTJ ought to have found that he would have  intended
    to pay the fee in 2012. The Rules were not there to catch out those who
    make a minor mistake and the FTTJ  should  have  assessed  whether  the
    appellant could have met the requirements for further leave  to  remain
    in 2012. Mr Khan indicated that were an error of law  found,  he  would
    wish to proceed by way of submissions only and there  was  a  realistic
    chance of success.

15. Mr Mills agreed that it would be an error of law for the FTTJ to ignore
    section 117B in form and substance. The respondent's case was that  the
    relevant points set out  in  the  said  section  were  considered.  The
    grounds were those  frequently  raised  in  the  Secretary  of  State's
    appeals and it was hard to see how the errors said to  have  been  made
    were material to the outcome.

16. Mr Mills addressed each of the factors set  out  in  section  117B  and
    argued that they outcome of any consideration of  those  factors  would
    not result in a reduction of the public interest concerns or  for  more
    weight to be attached to the appellant's circumstances.

17.  Mr Mills submitted that a near-miss argument was being advanced on the
    appellant's behalf, but that the appellant  was  not  entitled  to  any
    credit for almost meeting the Rules  in  2012.  Before  the  FTTJ,  the
    appellant had been portrayed as an innocent victim  of  poor  advisors,
    whereas Mr Khan was saying otherwise today. Regardless,  the  FTTJ  had
    addressed this matter in the decision, referring to the fact that there
    was no evidence of the culpability of the previous representatives  and
    that there were no documents before  the  FTTJ  which  related  to  his
    unsuccessful judicial review of an earlier  decision  to  refuse  leave
    with no right of appeal.

18. In reply, Mr Khan denied that he was making a  near-miss  argument  for
    Article 8. The issue of the wrong fee was one to be considered  in  the
    proportionality exercise. It was only a technical failure and  even  if
    the appellant was to blame, this was a matter the FTTJ was required  to
    assess. Otherwise, Mr Khan re-argued the appeal, stating  that  it  was
    not reasonable for the appellant's wife to relocate owing to her family
    and work but that the FTTJ had concluded that it was not unduly harsh.

Decision on error of law

19. At the end of the hearing, I announced that I found no  material  error
    of law in the FTTJ's decision.  My reasons are as follows.

20. In AM (Malawi), headnote (1) states, "The statutory  duty  to  consider
    the matters set out in s117B of  the  2002  Act  is  satisfied  if  the
    Tribunal's decision shows that it has had regard to such parts of it as
    are relevant."

21. Also relevant from AM is headnote (2), where it ways "an Appellant  can
    obtain no positive right to a grant of  leave  to  remain  from  either
    s117B (2) or (3) whatever the degree of his fluency in English, or  the
    strength of his financial resources."

22. Mr Khan is correct in stating that the FTTJ made no direct reference to
    s117B. However, I find that the FTTJ had regard to the public  interest
    in immigration control at [36], the ability, or  rather  inability,  of
    the appellant to speak English at [16}, and  that  he  was  financially
    independent owing to his wife's employment at a  McDonald's  restaurant
    at [33]. Furthermore at [14], the FTTJ took into consideration the fact
    that the appellant had lawful leave until 28 January 2012.

23. The FTTJ also had regard to matters not directly mentioned  in  section
    117B of the Act, including the lack of documentary  evidence  regarding
    the appellant's complaint about his previous representative;  the  lack
    of medical evidence regarding his mother-in-law alleged ill-health  and
    the lack of evidence to support the  contents  of  his  wife's  witness
    statement as to her unwillingness to travel to Pakistan.



24. I consider the issues, to  which  I  have  referred  in  the  preceding
    paragraph, to be far more relevant to the outcome of  the  appeal  than
    those set out in section 117B, however no  challenge  is  made  to  the
    FTTJ's conclusion at [30] that the appellant's wife could reasonably be
    expected to accompany the appellant to Pakistan.

25. It is apparent from Forman and AM that the matters raised in the  first
    five sub-paragraphs of section 117B show when the  public  interest  is
    increased as opposed to decreased.

26. An ability to speak English is therefore a neutral  factor  and  not  a
    positive factor in the appellant's favour. In any event, the  appellant
    was found by the FTTJ not to meet the English language  requirement  in
    the Rules and I was referred to no evidence to support the  claim  made
    in Mr Khan's submissions  that  the  appellant  spoke  English  to  any
    standard. Accordingly, had the FTTJ considered this matter with  direct
    reference to section 117B(2), he would  have  considered  it  to  be  a
    further  reason  to  increase  the  weight  to  be  accorded   to   the
    respondent's case.

27. Financial independence is also a neutral factor and  I  do  not  accept
    that had the FTTJ made reference to section 117B(3) that he would  have
    reached a different overall conclusion. Accordingly, any error would be
    immaterial.

28. While it would have been  preferable  if  the  FTTJ  had  more  clearly
    demonstrated that he had regard to the matters set out in section  117B
    of the 2002 Act, the decision shows that  he  considered  the  relevant
    matters, including those not specifically referred to in the Act. There
    is, therefore, no material error of law in his decision.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is upheld.




Signed                                       Date: 5 March 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

