

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                     Appeal
Number IA/49777/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House
                        Determination Promulgated
On 10th June 2014                                               On 25th
June 2014
Prepared 10th June 2014

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

                                KULDIP SINGH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant: Ms G Brown (counsel, instructed by Farani Javed Taylor
solicitors)
For the Respondent: Mr E Tufan (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant arrived in the UK in May 1995 and on the 9th of May 1995
   made a claim for asylum. The application was refused, the Refusal Letter
   was served with Notice IS.151A. The Appellant did not attend his appeal
   and the appeal was dismissed. The Appellant made further submissions in
   2007 and July 2012 and on the 6th of July 2012 had made an application
   for ILR.

2. The appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Walker at Hatton Cross
   on the 19th of March 2014. The appeal was dismissed for the reasons given
   in a determination dated the 21st of March 2014. The Appellant sought
   permission to appeal in grounds of application of the 2nd of April 2014.
   Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Landes on the 6th of
   May 2014. The Secretary of State's response under rule 24 is dated the
   21st of May 2014.

3. The Appellant's claim was that he had arrived in the UK in May 1995 and
   having made an asylum claim which was refused and the appeal dismissed
   had remained in the UK since then. Further representations had been made
   in 2001 and 2012 and an ILR application submitted on the 6th of July
   2012. The application was refused on the basis that the Appellant did not
   have 10 years lawful residence, he had been served with form IS 151A in
   October 1996 and could not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules
   as he had not lived in the UK for 20 years.

4. The Appellant's appeal was dismissed in a determination running to 43
   paragraphs over 13 pages. At paragraph 5 the Judge set out the burden and
   standard of proof and stated that the Appellant had to show that he met
   the requirements of paragraph 276B, Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE of
   the Immigration Rules, ECHR and article 8 considerations are at
   paragraphs 6 to 10. Having summarised the Refusal Letter, the Grounds of
   Appeal, the hearing, oral evidence and submissions the Judge's findings
   begin at paragraph 23.

5. The Appellant's evidence was analysed at paragraphs 25 and 26. He was
   described as vague and unconvincing and from the summary in the
   determination his evidence was lacking in detail, even when pressed. The
   evidence of Multan Singh was said to be equally vague, there were
   differences between their evidence and again a lack of detail. The
   evidence of Jaswinder Singh was found to be more credible.

6. The documentation was considered in paragraph 30 where it was found that
   the Appellant had been served with Notice IS 151A as claimed by the Home
   Office. The complaints he made about his previous representatives were
   rejected in paragraph 31. The GP's letter confirmed that the Appellant
   was registered from 1996 to 2012.

7. At findings on the Appellant's residence are set out at paragraph 33. In
   that paragraph the Judge stated "There has been no credible evidence of
   the Appellant's residence in the UK for the full period he has claimed.
   The only evidence that has any certainty is that he was in the UK during
   1995 and 1996 and then also in 1998 when he was arrested. Since then the
   only subsequent and credible evidence has been that of Mr Jaswinder Singh
   who says he first met the Appellant in 2002 or 2003..."

8. Having rejected the Appellant's claim under the Immigration Rules the
   Judge went on to consider article 8. It was noted that the Appellant had
   no family in the UK and at paragraph 37 the Judge noted that his private
   life was limited insofar as the evidence provided was devoid of detail.
   The Judge noted the evidence of his life in the UK and the fact that he
   spoke with his friends in Punjabi and that his English was limited. Given
   the limited nature of his private life the Judge found that the
   Appellant's removal would not have the effect of engaging article 8.

9. Notwithstanding the finding in paragraph 38 that article 8 would not be
   engaged by his removal. In considering the proportionality of the
   Appellant's removal the Judge noted that the bulk of the Appellant's time
   in the UK was without leave and subject to removal directions. It was
   noted that the Appellant's 2 friends who had given evidence were from
   India and returned there for visits. Having received significant health
   treatment the Appellant's condition was not such that he could not be
   returned and there was no evidence to show he would not receive the
   treatment required in India.

10. The first ground of appeal is that the Judge erred in applying the
   wrong standard of proof. Despite the self-direction in paragraph 5 it is
   submitted that in paragraph 33 the Judge applied a higher and
   inappropriate standard. This is centred on the use of the word
   "certainty".

11. If that alone were the main analysis of the evidence provided there
   might have been some merit in the argument. However, the evidence from
   the Appellant and the witnesses was analysed in detail and at some length
   in paragraphs 25 to 31. There is no suggestion that the analysis in those
   paragraphs is flawed by an inappropriate approach to the facts or
   documentation. The evidence of the Appellant and Multan Singh was found
   to be vague and the quotes in paragraphs 26 and 27 and the summary in
   paragraph 28 bear that out, there is no suggestion that the quotes or
   summary are inaccurate.

12. The Appellant had had more than sufficient time to prepare the case and
   had had the advantage of legal assistance. The absence of details that
   might have been expected was clearly troubling for the Judge and the
   vagueness of the evidence from the only witnesses called was bound to
   influence the findings made.

13. Paragraph 33 is a summary of the findings made by the Judge based on
   the preceding analysis of the evidence that had been submitted and it has
   to be read in the context of the findings made. I read that paragraph as
   a finding that the Judge found that the Appellant had not discharged the
   burden of proof and had, therefore, not shown that he had been in the UK
   continuously as he had claimed.

14. That does not entail a positive finding that the Appellant was
   somewhere else, simply a finding that he had not shown that he was
   continuously in the UK. As the Judge had noted in paragraph 5 the burden
   of proof was on the Appellant and he had failed to discharge it. The use
   of the term "certainty" cannot sensibly be read as the Judge applying an
   inappropriate standard of proof and the determination read properly and
   overall displays no error in this regard.

15. Given the issue relating to the service of Notice IS151A the Appellant
   could not show more than about a year and half's qualifying residence
   under the Immigration Rules and so it was clear that the application
   under the Immigration Rules was bound to fail. Paragraph 33 shows that,
   at best, the evidence that discharged the burden of proof showed that the
   Appellant was in the UK in 1995 and 1996 and then in 2002/2003. For the
   purposes of article 8 it appears, although it is not expressed, that his
   presence is treated as being shown to be from 2002 onwards.

16. The second ground of appeal is that the Judge failed to make a lawful
   article 8 assessment. It is submitted that the Judge minimised the
   importance of the Appellant's private life assuming that his
   relationships within the Sikh community were transferable to India.

17. The evidence relating to the Appellant's private life in the UK was not
   impressive. As I have noted above the summary in paragraphs 26 to 28 is
   not challenged as being inaccurate. The first part of paragraph 26 is
   particularly unhelpful to the Appellant's case, as was paragraph 27, and
   it was noted that when pressed there was little detail forthcoming. The
   Judge cannot be criticised for not treating as significant evidence that
   was devoid of meaningful content.

18. The evidence, vague as it was, was to the effect that the Appellant has
   no family life in the UK and has a private life in the UK centred around
   the Temple but as the Judge noted at paragraph 37 the evidence was devoid
   of detail. The hearing was the Appellant's opportunity to provide
   evidence that would have justified a finding that his circumstances in
   the UK were such at although he did not meet the requirements of the
   Immigration Rules his removal would be unjustifiably harsh. There is no
   suggestion that the Judge's summary of the evidence was inaccurate and
   the evidence summarised shows that there was no basis on which such a
   finding could have been made.

19. At the hearing I raised whether there was any point to be taken there
   was any issue in relation to the Immigration Rules that ought to form the
   backdrop to the consideration of the Appellant's case. This would turn on
   whether the case of Edgehill or Halemudeen was correct. It was accepted
   that the service of the form IS151A on the Appellant, which had the
   effect of stopping the clock and so the Appellant could not meet the time
   required. The findings made that the Appellant had not shown that he had
   been in the UK continuously were open to the Judge and were clearly
   relevant to the article 8 assessment made.

20. The Appellant has a poor immigration history followed by limited
   evidence of a private life. The Judge cannot be said to have erred in his
   approach to the length of time that the Appellant has been in the UK or
   in respect of the Appellant's life in the UK and the proportionality of
   his removal.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I make no
order.

Fee Award

In dismissing this appeal I make no fee award.

Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 24th June 2014


