
 [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: ia495592014
     ia495602014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 10 May 2016                            |On 23 May 2016                   |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

                                    [o o]
                                    [D O]
                       (anonymity direction NOT Made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms C. Hulse, Counsel instructed by A & A Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. By way of a decision promulgated on 26 February 2016, the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal was set aside to be remade.
 2. At the resumed hearing I heard oral evidence from the first  Appellant,
    and submissions from both  representatives.   I  was  provided  with  a
    skeleton argument by the Ms Hulse.  I reserved my decision which I  set
    out below with my reasons.


 3. It was submitted  by  Ms  Hulse  that  the  second  Appellant  met  the
    requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv).   Consequently  the   first
    Appellant  should  be  granted  leave  under  Article  8  outside   the
    immigration rules with reference to section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.


Credibility


 4. I found the first Appellant to be an honest and  credible  witness  who
    answered all questions put to her and was not evasive.  I find that the
    first Appellant's evidence can be relied on.  She  gave  evidence  that
    her mother had had to travel to Nigeria following the unexpected  death
    of her mother's sister.  She said that her sister had tried to get  the
    day off work to attend the hearing but  had  not  been  able  to.   Her
    brother is doing his final exams at Buckingham University.   I  do  not
    attach any weight to the fact that neither  of  the  first  Appellant's
    siblings were at the hearing, especially given that  it  has  not  been
    submitted that the Appellants' right to remain is based on  any  family
    life with the first Appellant's siblings.


Immigration rules

 5. The second Appellant's date of birth is [ ]  2007.   I  therefore  find
    that at the date of the Respondent's decision, 20 November 2014, he was
    already seven years old.  As at the date of the  remaking  he  is  just
    over a month away from his ninth birthday.  He has  therefore  met  the
    first requirement of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) which is that he  must  be
    under the age of 18 and have lived continuously in the  United  Kingdom
    for at least seven years.  Additionally he must show that it would  not
    be reasonable to expect him to leave the United Kingdom.


 6. In assessing whether it is reasonable to expect the second Appellant to
    leave the United Kingdom, I have taken into account his best interests.
     I have taken into account the cases of ZH Tanzania [2011] UKSC 4,  and
    EV Philippines [2014] EWCA Civ 874.  Paragraph  35  of  EV  Philippines
    provides:


         "A decision as to what is in the best interests  of  children  will
         depend on a number of factors such as (a) their age; (b) the length
         of time that they have been here; (c) how long they  have  been  in
         education; (c) what stage their education has reached; (d) to  what
         extent they have become distanced from the country to which  it  is
         proposed that they return; (e) how renewable their connection  with
         it may be; (f) to what extent they will have linguistic, medical or
         other difficulties in adapting to life in that country; and (g) the
         extent to which the  course  proposed  will  interfere  with  their
         family  life  or  their  rights  (if  they  have  any)  as  British
         citizens."


 7. I find that the second Appellant was born in the United  Kingdom.   His
    mother, the first Appellant, has  been  in  the  United  Kingdom  since
    August 2003.  She was 16 years old when she came to the United  Kingdom
    to do her A levels.  She was studying at university at the time of  the
    second Appellant's birth.  The circumstances surrounding the  pregnancy
    and birth of the second Appellant  are  relevant  in  establishing  the
    reasonableness of his leaving the United Kingdom.  In summary,  I  find
    that when the first Appellant became pregnant, her  father  in  Nigeria
    was not happy and wanted her to have an abortion.  Her mother supported
    the first Appellant in her wish to continue  with  the  pregnancy,  and
    came to the United Kingdom from Nigeria in order to support her.  As  a
    result  of  the  first  Appellant's  mother  choosing  to  support  her
    daughter, the first Appellant's father has nothing more to do with  his
    wife, the first Appellant or his other two children.


 8. I find that the first Appellant returned to Nigeria following the birth
    of the second Appellant in order to try and heal the rift  between  her
    father and the rest of the family, but was not able to do so.   I  find
    that the family in the United Kingdom do not have any contact with  the
    first Appellant's father.  They receive no financial support from  him.




 9. As the first Appellant was  studying  at  university  when  the  second
    Appellant was born, the second Appellant was cared  for  by  the  first
    Appellant's mother, his grandmother.  I find that the  first  Appellant
    finished her university study in September 2010 and therefore, for  the
    first three years of his life, the  second  Appellant  was  brought  up
    primarily by his grandmother while his mother continued her studies.


10. I find that the second Appellant has lived  with  his  grandmother,  as
    well as his maternal aunt and uncle, since his birth.  I find that  his
    aunt works in Chester but returns to the family home every weekend from
    Friday to Sunday.  His grandmother, aunt  and  uncle  are  all  British
    citizens who  have  settled  in  the  United  Kingdom.   Owing  to  the
    circumstances surrounding the second Appellant's birth, the  fact  that
    he was brought up by his grandmother while  his  mother  continued  her
    studies, and the circumstances of the family  rift,  I  find  that  the
    second Appellant has a closer relationship with  his  grandmother  than
    would normally be the case.  I find that it is in his best interests to
    maintain this relationship.


11. I find that the relationship that the  first  Appellant  has  with  her
    mother, given the history of the family rift, and given that she  is  a
    single mother to the second Appellant, is stronger than  would  usually
    be the case between a mother and her adult daughter.  I find  that  the
    second Appellant's  immediate  family  unit  consists  of  his  mother,
    grandmother, aunt and uncle.


12. In terms of contact with Nigeria, I have found above  that  the  second
    Appellant's grandfather has no contact with the family.   I  find  that
    the second Appellant's maternal great-grandmother lives in Nigeria.   I
    find that his grandmother had one sister who has just died, and she had
    no children.  I find that there is no family in Nigeria, apart from the
    second Appellant's great grandmother, with whom the Appellants  are  in
    contact.


13. I find that the second Appellant has no relationship with his father.


14.  With  reference  to  the  factors  set  out  in  paragraph  35  of  EV
    Philippines, I find that the second Appellant is almost nine years  old
    and has lived in the United Kingdom for all of his life.  He  has  been
    at primary school here since he was four years old.  I find that he has
    never been to Nigeria.  I find that, owing to the family rift,  he  has
    no contact with Nigeria.  His only connection with Nigeria  is  through
    his mother.  I find that his mother has returned to Nigeria once  since
    his birth when she tried to heal the family rift.  She was unsuccessful
    and her father has nothing to do with his wife or children as a result.
     The second Appellant speaks English.  There is no evidence that he has
    any medical conditions.  He is not a British citizen.


15.  I  find,  taking  into  account  the  evidence  above,  including  the
    exceptional circumstances surrounding the family rift, and  the  closer
    than  usual  relationship  that  the  second  Appellant  has  with  his
    grandmother who was his main carer up until the age of three,  as  well
    as the fact that the second  Appellant  has  no  real  connection  with
    Nigeria, that it is in his best  interests  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom and to maintain the relationships with his close family in  the
    United Kingdom, as well as continuity of education.


16. I have found that it is in the best interests of the  second  Appellant
    remain in the United Kingdom.   In  assessing  whether  or  not  it  is
    reasonable to expect him to leave the United Kingdom, I have taken into
    account the immigration history of his mother, the first Appellant.


17. I find that the first Appellant came to the United Kingdom in  2003  in
    order to study A-levels.  On completion of her  A-levels  she  went  to
    Loughborough University, changing to Brighton University following  the
    birth of the second Appellant.  I find that she  applied  in  time  for
    leave to remain as a Tier 4 (Post study) Migrant in July 2011 when  her
    leave to remain as a student expired.  It is at  this  point  that  her
    immigration history becomes less straightforward.  Her evidence is that
    she received  no  information  from  the  Home  Office  regarding  this
    application until 18 February 2012, despite chasing the Home Office for
    information.  The application was rejected for failure to  provide  the
    correct level of funds.  The first Appellant renewed the application on
    22 February 2012.   In  the  skeleton  argument  it  states  that  this
    application is still outstanding, although  in  the  first  Appellant's
    witness statement she said that it was refused on  22  September  2012.
    In any event, I find that until this  point  the  first  Appellant  had
    either leave to remain or an application pending with the Home  Office.




18. At the hearing the first Appellant  said  that  following  the  refusal
    received in February 2012, her solicitors remitted the old  application
    with postal orders for payment.  In her witness statement she said that
    her legal representatives chased  the  Home  Office  as  there  was  no
    response, and for this reason she submitted a family and  private  life
    application in July 2014.  At the hearing she said  that  she  did  not
    know what had happened during the two years between September 2012  and
    July 2014.  The July 2014 application was refused without  a  right  of
    appeal in September 2014.  On 25 November 2014, form IS151A was  served
    on the Appellants generating a right of appeal.


19. I find on the balance of probabilities that  the  first  Appellant  has
    tried to rectify her immigration status  following  the  rejection  and
    refusal of the application as a Tier 1 (Post study) Migrant.  I  accept
    that there was a period of two years  where  it  is  unclear  from  the
    evidence what was happening in terms of attempts to rectify her status,
    but I find that for the majority of the time she has been in the United
    Kingdom with valid leave to remain.


20. I have also taken into  account  the  financial  circumstances  of  the
    Appellants.  I find that the first Appellant was supported  financially
    by her parents when she came to the United Kingdom to  study.   I  find
    that, following the family rift, the Appellants have  been  financially
    supported by the first Appellant's mother.  I find that  they  live  in
    the family home  which  is  owned  by  the  first  Appellant's  mother.
    Evidence was provided that they have paid for private healthcare in the
    United Kingdom.


21. I find, taking into account all of the evidence, and my finding that it
    is in the best interests of the  second  Appellant  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom, that it is not reasonable to expect him  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom.  Accordingly I find on  the  balance  of  probabilities
    that  the  second  Appellant  meets  the  requirements   of   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv).


22. It was not submitted  before  me  that  the  first  Appellant  met  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), and I find on the  balance  of
    probabilities that the second Appellant cannot meet the requirements of
    the immigration rules.


Article 8 outside the immigration rules


23. I have considered the first Appellant's appeal under Article 8  outside
    of the immigration rules in accordance with the steps set out in Razgar
    [2004] UKHL 27.  I find that  she  has  family  life  with  the  second
    Appellant and I have found  that  he  meets  the  requirements  of  the
    immigration rules.  I find it is in his best interests to  remain  with
    his mother, and I therefore find that the decision would interfere with
    this family life.  For the  sake  of  completeness,  given  the  family
    history as set out above, and the support that  the  first  Appellant's
    mother has given to her, I find that the first Appellant's relationship
    with her mother goes above and beyond the bonds  usually  to  be  found
    between a mother and her adult daughter, and that the  first  Appellant
    has a family life with her mother for the purposes of Article 8.


24. Continuing the steps set out  in  Razgar,  I  find  that  the  proposed
    interference would be in accordance with the law, as  being  a  regular
    immigration decision taken by UKBA in accordance with  the  immigration
    rules.  In terms of proportionality, the Tribunal has to strike a  fair
    balance between the rights of the individual and the interests  of  the
    community.  The public interest in this case  is  the  preservation  of
    orderly and fair immigration control in the interests of all  citizens.
    Maintaining the integrity of the immigration rules is self-evidently  a
    very important public interest.  In practice, this will  usually  trump
    the  qualified  rights  of  the  individual,  unless   the   level   of
    interference is very significant.  I find that in this case, the  level
    of  interference  would  be  significant  and  that  it  would  not  be
    proportionate.


25. In carrying out the  proportionality  assessment,  I  have  taken  into
    account the factors set out in section 117B of the 2002 Act insofar  as
    they are relevant.  Section 117B(1) provides that  the  maintenance  of
    effective immigration controls is in the public interest.  I  find  the
    first Appellant can speak English (section 117B(2)).  I find  that  she
    is financially supported by her mother in the United  Kingdom  (section
    117B(3)).  She has a degree in Social Science, and said at the  hearing
    that this qualification would  enable  her  to  get  employment  fairly
    easily.  Sections 117B(4) and (5) are not relevant.


26. The most relevant part of section 117B is subsection (6) which provides
    as follows:

         "In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-
             (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and
             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
             the United Kingdom."


       The second Appellant is a "qualifying child" as defined  in  section
       117D.


   27. I have set out above, in relation  to  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv),  my
       finding that it is not reasonable to expect the second Appellant  to
       leave the United Kingdom (paragraphs [6] to [21]).  I therefore find
       that, as set out in section 117B(6), the public  interest  does  not
       require the removal  of  the  first  Appellant.   Accordingly,  when
       carrying out the balancing exercise required in the  proportionality
       assessment under Article 8, I find that the balance  comes  down  in
       favour of the first Appellant.  I find that she  has  shown  on  the
       balance of probabilities, at the  date  of  the  hearing,  that  the
       decision is a breach of her rights to a family life under Article  8
       ECHR.


Decision


   28. The appeal of the second Appellant is allowed under the  immigration
       rules, paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).


   29. The appeal of  the  first  Appellant  is  allowed  on  human  rights
       grounds, Article 8.


No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date 21 May 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

