
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/49626/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 March 2015                     |On 23 March 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                             KANLAPAS LIMPHANIT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Bazini, Counsel, instructed by E2WUK Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr M Shilliday, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appeal before me is against the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Kirvan who dismissed the appeal against the Secretary of  State's
    decision refusing to grant further  leave  for  reasons  given  in  his
    determination dated 24 March 2014. The appellant who is a  national  of
    Thailand had made a Tier 4 Student application.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor on 24
    June 2014 on a renewed application following a refusal of permission to
    appeal by the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The issue in the case relates to whether the respondent was correct  to
    conclude in her decision dated 23 September 2013 that no CAS  had  been
    assigned to the appellant.  It had  been  accepted  that  she  had  not
    submitted a CAS with her application but she had obtained one some  two
    months hereafter.   The  judge  had  dismissed  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules without a hearing on the basis that the CAS  had  not
    been submitted at the time of application.

 4. Mr Shilliday conceded that the judge had erred in  not  addressing  the
    issue raised by the respondent's incorrect checking prior to  decision.
    He conceded the appeal on the basis that the matter should be  remitted
    to the Secretary of State for a further decision.  Such an approach was
    acceptable to Mr Bazini and the parties set out their  agreement  in  a
    consent order.

 5. Accordingly I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  with
    the consent of the parties.   I  remake  the  decision  as  invited  by
    allowing the appeal on the basis that the decision  of  the  respondent
    was not in accordance with the law.  As a consequence  the  application
    by the appellant remains pending before the Secretary of State.

 6. On this basis the appeal by the appellant is allowed.



Signed        Date 17 March 2015

[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

