
[pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/49593/2014
                                                               IA/49596/2014
                                                               IA/49604/2014
                                                               IA/49608/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15th January 2016                 |On 17th February 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                    Ms Winifred Ahenkan - first appellant
                Mr Emmanuel Nana appiagyei - second appellant
                            k a - third appellant
                           j a - fourth appellant
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Doyle, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are citizens of Ghana.  The first Appellant was born  on
    23rd July 1988.  The second Appellant who was born  on  29th  September
    1981 is her partner and the third and fourth Appellants are their minor
    children.  The first  Appellant  applied  in  March  2004  for  an  EEA
    residence document as a non-EEA dependant and this was issued and valid
    until 20th May 2009.  An application by the first Appellant for an  EEA
    residence card was refused on two subsequent applications  and  on  3rd
    June 2013 a further application was made by  the  first  Appellant  for
    leave to remain on the basis of her family and private  life  with  the
    second to fourth Appellants.  This was refused on 16th  July  2013  and
    following a reconsideration of the application the original decision to
    refuse was maintained by Notice of Refusal dated 20th October 2014.

 2. The Appellants appealed and the appeal came  before  Immigration  Judge
    Majid  at  Taylor  House  on  12th  June  2015.   In  a   determination
    promulgated on 17th June 2015 the Appellants' appeal was allowed  under
    Article 8 of the European Convention of Human Rights.

 3. On 1st July 2015 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds to Appeal to the
    Upper Tribunal.  On  15th  September  2015  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Davies granted permission to appeal.   Judge  Davies  stated  that  the
    decision was wholly inadequate and that  the  judge  appeared  to  have
    totally ignored "the legal requirements stipulated by immigration  law"
    that he makes reference to in paragraph 22 of  his  decision.   Further
    the judge had not addressed his mind to Article 8  whatsoever  and  has
    made no reference to the public  interest  considerations  set  out  in
    Section 117B of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.
    Further the judge fails, he contends, to make it clear what law  he  is
    applying or on what evidence he has made his findings.  It is  on  that
    basis that the appeal comes before me to determine whether or not there
    is a material error of law in the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.  A lengthy Rule 24 response appears to have been lodged  by  the
    Appellants' solicitors.  I note that this is an appeal by the Secretary
    of State but for  the  purpose  of  continuity  throughout  the  appeal
    process Ms Ahenkan and  her  family  are  referred  to  herein  as  the
    Appellants and the Secretary of State is the Respondent.

Submissions/Discussion

 4. I am considerably assisted in this matter by the concessions made  both
    by Mr Doyle and by  the  Appellants'  instructed  solicitors  in  their
    detailed Rule 24 response.  It is accepted that the  Appellants  cannot
    succeed in their appeals under the provisions of  Appendix  FM.   I  am
    referred to paragraphs 25 and 26 of the Rule 24 response.  They  invite
    the Tribunal that if it is not in agreement  with  the  submissions  to
    consideration of Article 8  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  then  the
    Tribunal is invited to consider remitting the matter back to the First-
    tier Tribunal to be heard afresh.

The Law

 5.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

 6. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

 7. I concur with the views expressed by both  legal  representatives  that
    there can be no dispute that the judge at the First-tier  Tribunal  has
    materially erred in law in allowing  the  Respondent's  appeal  by  not
    first considering their cases thoroughly through the provisions of  the
    relevant  Immigration  Rules  and  then  under  Section  117B  of   the
    Immigration Act.  The decision  lacks  any  constructive  analysis  and
    quite simply fails to address the  relevant  necessary  considerations.
    In such circumstances it is quite clear that the  errors  are  material
    and I endorse the view that the appropriate step is to remit the matter
    back to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing and directions  relating
    thereto are given below.

Decision

 8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law
    and is set aside.  Directions for the re-hearing  of  this  matter  are
    given below.

      1) A finding is made that there is a material  error  of  law  in  the
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.   The  decision  is  set
         aside and none of the findings of fact are to stand.

      2) The matter is remitted back to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  re-
         hearing of the Appellants' appeal under Article 8 of  the  European
         Convention on Human Rights.

      3) The matter be remitted to Taylor House to be re-heard on the  first
         available date 28 days hence with an ELH of two hours.

      4) That the re-hearing of the appeal be before any  Immigration  Judge
         other than Dr Majid.

      5) That there be leave to either party to serve and file an up-to-date
         bundle of evidence upon which they intend to rely at  the  Tribunal
         at least fourteen days prior to the restored hearing.

      6) That it is recorded that no interpreter is required.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

