
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/49174/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 18th June 2014                               |On 01 July 2014            |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD

                                   Between

                              Mr muhibur rahman
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Badar, Legal Representative instructed by
                    Farani.Javid. Taylor, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms L Kenny, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh whose appeal to be allowed to
    remain in the  United  Kingdom  on  the  basis  of  his  fourteen  year
    continuous long residence here was  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Fox in a determination promulgated on 27th March 2014.

 2. Grounds of application were lodged on the  basis  that  the  judge  was
    wrong to raise an allegation of deception which the Respondent had  not
    raised in the refusal letter.  In particular the judge had mentioned at
    paragraph 42 that it "is more likely than not that  the  appellant  has
    procured false documents to support his attempt to migrate to the  UK".
    There was no evidence to support the judge's findings that  the  letter
    by Shadwell Groceries was  a  false  document.   The  judge  stated  at
    paragraph 49 that he did not accept other documents on the  same  basis
    and it was said to be an error of law for the judge to  find  that  the
    documentary evidence was false.

 3. Secondly, there was documentary evidence which the  judge  should  have
    taken  into  consideration  in  deciding  the  appeal.    Finally   the
    respondent  had  acted  against  the  principles  of  fairness  by  not
    considering the evidence before her.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Landes  who
    noted that it

         "is right that the judge could of course have dismissed the  appeal
         on the basis that the documents were unreliable and he  would  have
         given much the same reasons for finding  that  the  documents  were
         unreliable.  However it was arguable that if he  erred  in  law  in
         those paragraphs that error infected  the  rest  of  his  evidence.
         Ground 2 appears much  thinner  insofar  as  it  submits  that  the
         Respondent had acted against principles of fairness."

 5. Before me Mr Badar for the Appellant lodged the  case  of  Shen  (paper
    appeal; proving  dishonesty)  [2014]  UKUT  00236  (IAC)  in  that  the
    starting point should  be  as  in  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Adedoyin
    (formally AA (Nigeria) v SSHD) [2010] EWCA Civ 773 that  the  reference
    to "false" means "dishonestly".

 6. Mr Badar stated that the judge's use of the  word  false  rendered  the
    whole decision unsafe.  In particular the death certificate at page  39
    of the Appellant's bundle should not have been found to  have  been  an
    unreliable document.  In addition document 11 was a  crucial  piece  of
    evidence as the terms of that document proved the Appellant's case.   I
    was asked to allow the appeal and thereafter the matter should  proceed
    to a re-hearing or alternatively a review on the papers.

 7. For the Home Office Ms Kenny said that the point was a narrow one.  The
    determination as a whole, read in context, showed that  the  judge  had
    provided good reasons why he did not believe the Appellant and had gone
    on to dismiss the appeal.  He had considered the evidence in the round.
     He had taken on board  a  considerable  amount  of  oral  and  written
    evidence.  He had taken great care to consider all of it together.   He
    had explained very well why he was dismissing the  appeal.   There  was
    nothing wrong in the use of the word "false".  There was  no  error  in
    law and the decision should stand.

 8. I reserved my decision.





Conclusions

 9. I should say that Ground 2 of the application (relating to  unfairness)
    was not argued before me no doubt because  such  an  argument  was  not
    sustainable and it is therefore not necessary to say any more about it.

10. The judge's determination extended to ten pages and 68 paragraphs.   He
    found that the Appellant was not a  credible  witness  referring  to  a
    previous determination (paragraph 38).  He noted that the Appellant was
    unable to provide an explanation for the inconsistent evidence relating
    to his alleged journey to the UK in 1997.  The  Appellant  relied  upon
    documentary evidence to demonstrate a journey to the UK which  did  not
    occur according to his own recollection (paragraph 39).   In  the  next
    paragraph the judge had noted that the Appellant said he did travel via
    Dubai but could not recall this at the hearing.  The judge  noted  this
    conflicted with alternative evidence that the Appellant  travelled  via
    Dhaka.  The judge reminded himself that the Appellant also relied  upon
    an unfortunate memory to address discrepancies at the earlier appeal as
    recorded in the determination.  He pointed out that the  witnesses  led
    on the Appellant's behalf provided inconsistent  evidence  relating  to
    his domestic residence in the UK (paragraph 44) and for  reasons  given
    noted  that  the  inconsistencies  damaged  the  credibility   of   the
    Appellant, and the witnesses Ripa and Abdul.

11. The judge went on to say that  the  Appellant  and  the  witnesses  had
    provided evidence inconsistent with evidence provided  at  the  earlier
    appeal hearing - details are given (paragraph 48).

12. The judge commented that no reliable  evidence  had  been  provided  to
    demonstrate that the Appellant's family members in Bangladesh had  died
    "since the determination was promulgated or other explanation  for  the
    evaporation of family and socio-economic ties to Bangladesh  since  the
    last appeal hearing."  In  paragraph  52  he  observed  that  the  bank
    statements do not  assist  the  Appellant.   He  noted  that  the  bank
    statements demonstrated a transaction history beyond the modern stipend
    he claimed to be in receipt of.

13. He clearly considered the large bundle  lodged  by  the  Appellant  and
    noted that the documentary evidence demonstrated his presence here from
    2003  at  best.   He  observed  there  was  no  reliable  evidence   to
    demonstrate why the Appellant should choose to reside in  the  UK  from
    1997 but only open a bank account and register for medical services  in
    2003.  In essence the judge was saying that  the  documentary  evidence
    relied on by the  Appellant  was  unreliable  adopting  the  well-known
    approach in Tanveer Ahmed v SSHD [2002] UKIAT  00439.   Had  the  judge
    simply said that the documents were unreliable it can  safely  be  said
    that no appeal point would have arisen at all given that  there  is  no
    challenge to his other numerous and detailed findings that the evidence
    of the witnesses contained material discrepancies.

14. The judge gave a number of clear and coherent reasons for  not  finding
    the Appellant credible which reasons are not impugned in the grounds of
    application.  These were reasoned  findings  by  the  judge  and  quite
    sufficient to justify the dismissal of the appeal.

15. It follows there is no material error of law in  the  judge's  findings
    and the determination   must therefore stand.



Decision

16. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

17. I do not set aside the decision.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald


