
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/49308/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |                   Decision & Reasons |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 15 December 2015                   |                   On 12 January 2016 |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MURRAY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     R K
                        (Anonymity has been directed)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No representation


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of State.   However
    for convenience I shall now refer to the parties as  they  were  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of India born on 30 July 1976.  He  appealed
    against the decision of the respondent dated 19 November 2014  refusing
    to grant him permanent residence in the United Kingdom.   He  was  last
    admitted to the United Kingdom as the family member of an EEA  national
    until 2 October 2014.  The appeal was heard by Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal P J I Hollingworth on 8 June 2015 and the appeal  was  allowed
    in a  decision  promulgated  on  22  June  2015.   An  application  for
    permission to appeal was lodged and permission was allowed by Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Keane on  7  September  2015.   The  permission
    states that the First-tier Judge failed to give reasons or any adequate
    reasons for finding that the appellant and his EEA national spouse  had
    given truthful evidence.  The permission  states  that  the  First-tier
    Judge did not refer to the regulations and it was  unclear  whether  he
    bore the regulations in mind in deciding and more over in allowing  the
    appeal.  The permission states that  the  grounds  of  appeal  disclose
    arguable errors of law but for which the outcome of  the  appeal  might
    have been different.

 3. There is no Rule 24 response.

The Hearing

 4. The Presenting Officer submitted that the respondent is withdrawing her
    appeal.

 5. The Presenting Officer informed me that he had been in touch  with  the
    appellant's representative and they are satisfied with this outcome.

 6. I told the Presenting Officer that I accept the  situation  under  Rule
    17(1)(a) of the Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules 2008.

 7. I consent to the withdrawal of the appeal by the Secretary of State.

 8. Anonymity has been directed.




Signed                                  Date



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Murray



