

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/49570/2013
                                                               IA/49576/2013
                                                               IA/49581/2013
                                                               IA/49586/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 13 May 2014                                |On 3 July 2014               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                                 MR H M A H
                                                               1st Appellant
                                   MRS S A
                                                              2nd  Appellant
                                  MISS A H
                                                              3rd  Appellant
                                 MASTER A H
                                                               4th Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants: Mr S M Marfat, Newcastle Legal Centre
For the Respondent: Mrs H Rackstraw, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1) Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Cope dismissed these appeals  against
      refusals to vary leave on the grounds of private and family life.  The
      Appellants are a family of four and are all nationals  of  Bangladesh.
      The first and second Appellants are married  to  each  other  and  the
      third and fourth Appellants are their children, born in Bangladesh  in
      August 2001 and December 2004.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

   2) The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal records that the first  Appellant
      came to the UK as a student in July 2005 and the rest  of  the  family
      joined him as his dependants in March 2007.  They were  granted  leave
      for successive periods until this was curtailed with  effect  from  29
      December 2012.  This was shortly after the family applied for leave to
      remain on family and private life grounds.

   3) The judge found that the Appellants would not succeed  under  Appendix
      FM or paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.  The judge went on to
      consider the appeal  under  Article  8,  having  regard  to  the  best
      interests of the children.  The judge noted that it was the  intention
      of the Respondent to remove all four Appellants together as  a  family
      unit.  They had no other relatives in the UK and there would therefore
      be no breach of family life arising from the refusal decisions.   This
      point was conceded by the Appellants' representative at the hearing.

   4) The judge was satisfied that the Appellants  had  established  private
      life in the UK.  So far as the  children  were  concerned,  the  judge
      accepted that it  was  possible  that  they  might  receive  a  better
      standard of education in the UK than in Bangladesh.   The  judge  also
      accepted that their first language, in which they  were  most  fluent,
      was likely to be English, although the judge did not accept that  they
      had no understanding of Bengali.  The judge referred  to  evidence  of
      "English medium schools" in Bangladesh which followed a  British-style
      curriculum.  The judge further noted that both the  first  and  second
      Appellants were educated to first-degree level  in  Bangladesh,  where
      the second Appellant also  completed  a  Masters  degree.   The  first
      Appellant undertook a Masters degree  programme  in  the  UK  and  was
      awarded an LLM.  This indicated a considerable degree of  ability  and
      fluency in English which, judging from the timings of his studies,  he
      must have acquired in Bangladesh.

   5) The judge did not hear  evidence  from  the  children  but  took  into
      account that they had expressed a wish to stay in the UK.  The parents
      gave evidence about the good progress  the  children  were  making  at
      school and within the community in the UK.  The judge found that given
      the ages of the children they would  be  able  to  adapt  to  life  in
      Bangladesh.  It was not infrequent for  children  to  change  schools,
      either within this country or by going abroad.  The  judge  recognised
      that a period of seven years was an appropriate period for considering
      that a child had developed strong private life ties to the UK but,  as
      pointed out by Blake J in Azimi-Moayed [2013] UKUT  00197,  the  seven
      year period might have greater relevance and effect from  the  age  of
      about four onwards rather than from birth.

   6) Furthermore, the seven year period could be outweighed  by  compelling
      reasons to the contrary.  The seven year period was not a  rigid  rule
      but was to be considered in context  and  the  circumstances  of  each
      case.  This was recognised  in  the  Immigration  Rules  in  paragraph
      276ADE and in paragraph EX.1 of Appendix  FM,  where  the  seven  year
      period was qualified by  the  need  to  show  that  it  would  not  be
      reasonable to expect the child to  leave  the  UK.   The  judge  found
      himself unable  to  accept  assertions,  for  example,  in  the  first
      Appellant's supplementary statement, to the effect  that  because  the
      children were aged 12 and 9 they were at a  very  sensitive  stage  of
      their education  and  the  disruption  to  their  schooling  would  be
      devastating for them if they were required to  return  to  Bangladesh.
      The judge had earlier observed, at paragraph 31 of the  determination,
      that the area of Newcastle in which the Appellants were living "...has
      a relatively large Bengali  speaking  population  with  a  Bangladeshi
      cultural background."

   7) The judge observed, at paragraph 84 of  the  determination,  that  the
      children would be returning to Bangladesh with their parents and would
      be returning to their cultural routes and background in the country of
      their birth.

   8) The judge further observed that the first and second Appellants  still
      have relatives in Bangladesh.  The evidence of the first Appellant was
      that although his parents have died he has brothers and sisters there.
       The second Appellant has a father and step-mother there.   The  judge
      said it could not be assumed without evidence to that effect that  the
      first and second Appellants would  not  be  able  to  obtain  work  in
      Bangladesh.  The first Appellant acknowledged  in  his  evidence  that
      when he came to this country  he  envisaged  returning  to  Bangladesh
      after his studies were  completed.   The  judge  considered  that  the
      family should remain together.  He was not satisfied that the children
      would not get an equivalent level of schooling in  Bangladesh.   While
      the state-funded education system in Bangladesh  might  have  problems
      there was a functioning private education system.  Although there were
      factors  indicating  that  the  third  and   fourth   Appellants,   in
      particular, should not be required to leave the UK, overall these were
      outweighed by other factors.  The  private  life  established  by  the
      Appellants in the UK was not such as to make it  disproportionate  for
      them to be required to go to Bangladesh.  The view of  the  Respondent
      was that there  was  a  public  interest  in  the  enforcement  of  an
      effective and efficient immigration control and in maintaining  public
      confidence in such system.  The judge accepted  that  this  should  be
      given very considerable weight.  The periods of private  life  enjoyed
      by the Appellants in the UK  were  not  long  enough  to  require  the
      protection of Article 8 for the first and  second  Appellants.   There
      was little evidence, apart from that relating to the education of  the
      third and  fourth  Appellants,  to  illustrate  what  the  Appellants'
      private life and community ties actually were.  The Appellants did not
      qualify to remain under the Immigration Rules.

Application for permission to appeal

   9) It was contended in the application for permission to appeal that  the
      judge was wrong at paragraph 31 to rely on his own  knowledge  to  the
      effect that the area where the Appellants were living has a relatively
      large Bengali speaking community.  This undermined the impartial  role
      of the judge and it was wrong of the judge to apply his own  knowledge
      in support of the Respondent and against the Appellants.

  10) It was further submitted that at the time of the  hearing  before  the
      First-tier Tribunal the two children had been living  in  the  UK  for
      only two weeks short of seven years.  This was relevant  to  Paragraph
      276ADE(iv).  This provision benefits a child under the age of  18  who
      has lived continuously in the UK for at least  seven  years  where  it
      would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the  UK.   The
      Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  should   have   considered   the
      implication  of  this  and  exercised  discretion  in  favour  of  the
      Appellants.  The presence of the Appellants in the UK would not  be  a
      threat to the economic well-being of the UK as the  whole  family  had
      been in the UK for at least seven years and had never relied on public
      funds in anyway.

  11) It was further submitted that the judge had  not  properly  considered
      the best interests of the children.  The judge seemed to have accepted
      that the best interests of the children would be to remain in  the  UK
      but still  decided  the  appeal  against  the  Appellants,  which  was
      contradictory.  In terms of Azimi-Moayed the third Appellant had  come
      to the UK when he was five years of age and there would  be  a  strong
      impact upon him if he had to leave the UK and continue his studies  in
      Bangladesh.  It was further submitted there was a presumption  in  law
      that after seven years residence it would not be reasonable to  expect
      a child to leave the UK.

  12) Permission was granted on the basis that there was an  arguable  error
      of law for the judge to have used his own knowledge of the Appellants'
      home area in Newcastle and of the local culture  and  language  spoken
      there.

Submissions

  13) At the hearing before me Mr Marfat pointed out that it was accepted by
      the Respondent that private life was established.  The Judge  did  not
      have proper regard to the best interests of  the  children,  including
      their well-being and upbringing.  By now the children had been  living
      in the UK for seven years.  The judge did not  properly  consider  how
      this would affect the situation if they returned to  Bangladesh.   The
      youngest child had never been to school in Bangladesh and he  did  not
      know the alphabet in Bengali.  The children did not know  the  culture
      in Bangladesh and they  did  not  know  their  relatives  there.   The
      education system in Bangladesh was different and was based on children
      memorising at their desks, not on exploring and  learning  how  to  do
      things.  There was further documentary evidence to  be  considered  on
      English-speaking schools in Bangladesh.  There was a  question  as  to
      whether the Appellants would have sufficient resources to  enable  the
      children to attend an English-speaking school.  English  was  now  the
      children's first language.

  14) Mr Marfat referred to the use of the  judge's  personal  knowledge  in
      favour of the Respondent, as he expressed  it.   Mr  Marfat  did  not,
      however state that the judge's  description  of  the  area  where  the
      Appellants lived was wrong.  He submitted instead  that  this  was  an
      area where  there  was  a  mixed  community  of  not  only  people  of
      Bangladeshi origin but also people of Pakistani  origin,  as  well  as
      Bulgarians and Romanians.  The children were at school  from  9-3  and
      then they were at home rather than out in the community.  The  parents
      of the children had encouraged them to  use  English  as  their  first
      language so that they would do well in their education.  It would take
      a long time to  adapt  to  the  Bengali  language.   The  grammar  was
      complicated and it would be difficult for the  children  to  carry  on
      their education.  The third Appellant was at the  stage  of  selecting
      subjects for GCSEs.

  15) I asked Mr Marfat if he had any submissions to make in  terms  of  the
      decision of the Supreme  Court  in  Zoumbas  [2013]  UKSC  74  but  he
      declined to do it.  He relied instead on Azimi-Moayed.

  16) For the Respondent Mrs Rackstraw relied on a rule 24  notice  dated  3
      April 2014.  This stated that although the judge  may  have  erred  in
      referring to his own local knowledge this was not shown to  have  been
      factually incorrect so as to constitute a material error of law.   The
      judge should as a matter of procedural fairness have indicated that he
      had such knowledge and given both parties to the appeal the option  to
      address him on this point but in not  doing  so  there  was  still  no
      material error of law.

  17) The rule 24 notice further stated that the judge was right to conclude
      that the Appellants did not meet the terms of  Paragraph  276ADE  and,
      even if  the  children  had  seven  years'  residence,  this  was  not
      determinative.  The relevant consideration was whether on the basis of
      this length of residency it would be reasonable to expect the children
      to leave the  UK.   The  judge  had  clearly  concluded  that  it  was
      reasonable and in the best interest for  the  children  to  return  to
      Bangladesh with their parents.

  18)  In  her  oral  submission  Mrs  Rackstraw  submitted  that  in   some
      circumstances a judge should not refer to their own  knowledge.   Here
      the  local  knowledge  was  shared  with  the  Appellants  and   their
      representative.  The judge was stating a fact and this was not a piece
      of obscure knowledge which would have had to be put to the parties.

  19) Mrs Rackstraw submitted that the first Appellant had come to the UK as
      a student and the second Appellant as  his  dependant.   They  had  no
      expectation of automatic settlement.  It was clear the  family  wanted
      to remain because they perceived the education system as being better.
       The judge had written  a  very  careful  determination  in  which  he
      considered all the aspects of the case.

  20) In response Mr Marfat submitted that the Appellants  had  not  applied
      for settlement but for further leave to remain, where they would still
      be under certain restrictions.  The important issue was the welfare of
      the children.  The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal had  accepted  the
      family  had  private  life  in  the  UK  but  had  not  given   proper
      consideration to the impact on the children of returning to Bangladesh
      and did not consider what would befall them if they were  not  in  the
      environment in which they had lived for the last seven years.  Failure
      to consider these matters was an error of law.  There had been a  lack
      of regard for the welfare of the children.  If an  error  of  law  was
      found then there should be a further oral hearing  unless  the  appeal
      could be re-made in favour of the Appellants without such a hearing.

  21) At the conclusion of  the  hearing  I  reserved  my  decision  on  the
      question of whether there was an error of law in the decision  of  the
      Judge of the First-tier Tribunal in consequence of which it should  be
      set aside and re-made.

Discussion

  22) The principal issue on which permission to appeal was granted was  the
      reference by the judge to his own knowledge  of  the  area  where  the
      Appellants live in Newcastle.  This appears at  paragraph  31  of  the
      determination, where the judge is making  his  findings,  rather  than
      later in the determination, where he gives  his  reasons.   The  judge
      made his observation in relation to a claim by the  first  and  second
      Appellants in a statement dated 17 December  2012  that  the  children
      spoke only English and that  their  education  had  been  only  in  an
      English language medium.  In  cross-examination  the  first  Appellant
      conceded that the third Appellant  had  spoken  Bengali  as  his  main
      language in Bangladesh.  The first Appellant had said further  in  his
      oral evidence that he and the second Appellant would use a mixture  of
      English and Bengali when talking between themselves.  This  issue  was
      raised in the context of whether the children could speak Bengali  and
      if so to what extent.  It  was  not  disputed  that  English  was  the
      children's first language.  As well as observing that  the  Appellants
      lived in an area with a relatively large Bengali-speaking  population,
      the judge further observed that the second Appellant was noted  within
      the South Asian community in the West End of Newcastle,  according  to
      the evidence, for her henna work and as a threading beautician.   This
      suggested to the judge that at least part of the social  and  cultural
      life of the family was likely to be based  in  the  Bengali  or  wider
      South Asian community in Newcastle.

  23) The judge's observation about the area in which the family  lived  was
      made in the context of the evidence as to the children's understanding
      of the Bengali language and, to a lesser extent, their  knowledge  and
      understanding of the culture of Bangladesh.   The  conclusion  of  the
      judge, expressed at paragraph 69,  was  that  while  English  was  the
      children's  first  language  he  did  not  accept  that  they  had  no
      understanding of Bengali.  This was a finding the judge  was  entitled
      to make on the evidence.  The judge further stated, at  paragraph  81,
      that he would not seek to disregard any difficulties that would  arise
      to the children  from  adapting  "to  a  different  cultural,  social,
      religious and (largely) language, environment and  society"  but  that
      children were frequently expected to undergo such changes  and  had  a
      considerable degree of adaptability - the more so where they would  be
      accompanied by both of their parents and returning to the  country  of
      the parents' background and where their  wider  family  lived.   Again
      these were findings that the judge was entitled to make.

  24) The core of the objection by the Appellants to the judge's use of  his
      own knowledge of the area where they lived was the idea  that  he  was
      favouring the Respondent and not acting impartially.  As  pointed  out
      by  Mrs  Rackstraw,  it  was  not  contended  that   the   judge   was
      fundamentally incorrect in his observation, although Mr Marfat  sought
      to qualify it by stating that people from  other  ethnic  or  national
      minorities lived in the area also.

  25) If this was a matter which the judge felt he ought to raise, it  would
      have been better if he had raised it at the hearing  and  allowed  the
      parties to comment upon it.   I  do  not  consider,  however,  in  the
      context in which the judge made this observation that its  effect  was
      so prejudicial or unfair towards the Appellant  as  to  amount  to  an
      error of law.  This was in effect  a  passing  observation  which  was
      fully in accordance with the evidence  that  emerged  at  the  hearing
      about the Appellants' links to the Bengali or South Asian community in
      Newcastle and the extent to which the Bengali language was used in the
      family  home.   In  its  context  the  judge's  observation   had   no
      significant effect on the outcome of the appeal.   This  is  shown  by
      part of the  judge's  reasoning,  at  paragraphs  81  and  82  of  the
      determination, which was that even if the  children  could  not  speak
      Bengali and even if they were returning to a very  different  cultural
      environment in Bangladesh, they were at an age  where  they  could  be
      expected to adapt and, furthermore, they would have the  advantage  of
      accompanying their parents who were familiar  with  the  language  and
      culture.  These are reasons which  support  the  judge's  decision  in
      relation to proportionality and which the judge was entitled  to  take
      into account.

  26) Indeed, it is clear from the judge's reasoning that the best interests
      of  the  children  played  a  major  part   in   the   assessment   of
      proportionality under Article 8.  It was submitted in the  application
      for permission to appeal that, having found that the best interests of
      the children were to remain in the UK, the judge  reached  a  contrary
      conclusion in dismissing the appeals.  This is not, however, the tenor
      of the judge's reasoning.  The judge stated at paragraph  101  of  the
      determination that it was in the best interests  of  the  children  to
      remain with their parents, even if that meant they had  to  leave  the
      UK.  The judge recognised in the balancing  exercise  that  advantages
      would be enjoyed by the children were they to remain in the UK but did
      not  consider  the  loss  of  these  benefits  outweighed  the  public
      interest.

  27) The question arose as to whether the children would be able  to  carry
      on their education in English language  schools  in  Bangladesh.   The
      judge rightly noted at paragraph 72 that it had not been explained why
      such schools would not be available to the children so that they could
      continue their education in a broadly similar way.   I  understood  Mr
      Marfat to indicate at the hearing before me  that  there  would  be  a
      question of whether the parents had sufficient  resources  to  finance
      English language education in Bangladesh but this  was  not  an  issue
      before the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal.  Mr Marfat also sought to
      submit additional evidence on problems, including the use of  corporal
      punishment, at an English language school in Bangladesh.

  28) Although Mrs Rackstraw pointed out that no decision had been  made  to
      admit additional evidence, I would regard this  evidence  as  of  very
      little potential significance to the outcome of the  appeal.   In  any
      education system  it  is  possible  to  highlight  specific  problems,
      particularly in an individual school, but  these  do  not  necessarily
      characterise either the system as a whole or even particular parts  of
      the system.

  29) A more significant issue from the Appellants' point of  view  was  the
      submission made by Mr Marfat that at the date of  the  hearing  before
      the First-tier Tribunal the children were  only  two  weeks  short  of
      seven  years'  residence  in  the  UK.   There   are,   however,   two
      observations that I make in response to this.  The first is to  accept
      the submission made by Mrs Rackstraw to the effect that the completion
      of seven years' residence by a child  under  18  does  not  raise  any
      presumption under paragraph 276ADE to the effect that it would not  be
      reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.  The effect  of  seven
      years' residence is no more than to raise the further issue of whether
      it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.   This
      is a separate question which,  where  it  arises,  requires  full  and
      proper consideration.  Indeed, in the case  of  two  parents  and  two
      children all leaving together at around the  time  the  children  have
      completed seven years residence in the UK it may be quite difficult to
      show that it would not be reasonable to expect the children  to  leave
      the UK.

  30) Secondly, the essential point so far as the question  of  whether  the
      judge made an error of law is that at the  date  of  the  hearing  the
      children had not completed seven years continuous residence in the UK.
       Although they were only short of this period by two weeks, there  is,
      as was pointed out in the decision  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  Patel
      [2013] UKSC 72, no principle of  a  "near-miss"  in  relation  to  the
      application of Article 8.  The approach the judge took was the  proper
      one, which was to consider the best interests of the children as  part
      of the private life established by the family in the UK and weigh that
      against the public interest.  The judge did  not  err  by  failing  to
      apply the seven year test in Paragraph 276ADE.

  31) Although given the opportunity to do so, Mr Marfat did not address  me
      on the decision of the Supreme Court in Zoumbas.  I mention this  case
      because of certain similarities between its  facts  and  circumstances
      and those of the present appeals.  The case involved two  parents  and
      three children.  The father had entered the UK illegally,  unlike  the
      father  in  the  present  appeals.   The  children  were  not  British
      citizens.  Before the Supreme Court it was argued that  the  Secretary
      of State had failed to have  regard  to  the  best  interests  of  the
      children as a primary consideration; that the  findings  made  by  the
      Secretary of State in relation to the best interests of  the  children
      were irrational, in particular in assuming that the parents  would  be
      removed; and thirdly,  that  the  Secretary  of  State  was  wrong  to
      conclude  that  further  representations  did  not  have  a  realistic
      prospect of success before an immigration judge.  (This latter  ground
      is of no  relevance  to  the  present  appeals.)   The  Supreme  Court
      accepted that it would be possible to  conclude,  other  things  being
      equal, that it would be in the children's best interests  to  stay  in
      the UK.  The court rejected the criticism of the making of decision as
      to the best interests of the  children  on  the  assumption  that  the
      parents would be removed.  It was legitimate for the decision-maker to
      ask first whether it would be proportionate to remove the  parents  if
      they had no children and then, in considering the  best  interests  of
      the children in the proportionality exercise, ask whether their  well-
      being altered that provisional balance.

  32) This approach is in essence the approach taken by  the  Judge  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal in these appeals.  It was found that it would  not
      be disproportionate for the parents to be  removed  and,  even  taking
      into account the advantages the children might retain by remaining  in
      the UK, the balance of proportionality was not altered by  removal  of
      the family unit as a whole.  The best interests of the children were a
      primary consideration but not a paramount one.

  33) I have considered the arguments raised by the Appellants in seeking to
      identify an error of law in the Determination  by  the  Judge  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal.  For the reasons I have given I do  not  consider
      that any error of law has been identified such as would  lead  to  the
      decision being set aside.  Any criticism that might  be  made  of  the
      judge relates to matters which did not have any significant effect  on
      the judge's reasoning or on the outcome of the appeals.

Conclusions

  34) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      the making of an error on the point of law.

  35) I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

  36) I continue the order for anonymity made by the Judge of the First-tier
      Tribunal.  The judge made a direction to this effect  to  protect  the
      identity of the children and I will maintain this in  force  (pursuant
      to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).





Signed                                             Date

Judge of the Upper Tribunal


