
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and  Asylum  Chamber)      Appeal  Numbers:  IA/49761/2014  and
IA/49762/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard  at  Field  House,  London                                Decision   &
Reasons Promulgated
On the 1st  April  2016                                                   On
the 19th April 2016

Before:
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY
Between:
                        (1) MR HARJEET SINGH DHILLON
                        (2) MISS DIPREET KAUR DHILLON
                       (Anonymity Direction not made)
                                                                   Claimants
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                             Appellant in the Upper Tribunal
Representation:
For the Claimants: Mr Makor (Counsel)
For the Secretary of  State:  Ms  Everett  (Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Wylie, promulgated on the 18th September 2015,  in
      which she allowed the  Claimants'  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of
      State's decision to refuse them Leave to Remain in the United  Kingdom
      as dependents of a Points-Based System Migrant and  to  issue  removal
      directions against them under Section 47 of  the  Immigration,  Asylum
      and Nationality Act 2006, on the grounds that the  decision  that  was
      reached was in breach of the Claimants' human rights under Article 8.

   2. Within the Grounds of Appeal it is argued by the  Secretary  of  State
      that the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to consider whether  or  not
      there were any compelling reasons as to why the Article 8 claim  ought
      to have been considered outside  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   It  is
      argued that the Judge failed to properly consider Sections 117A and  B
      of the Immigration Act 2014 and that  the  Judge  failed  to  properly
      weigh the fact that the  Claimants'  and  their  Sponsor's  leave  was
      precarious and that little weight  ought  to  have  been  given  to  a
      private  life  that  was  established  at  a  time  when  a   person's
      Immigration Status was precarious.  It  is  argued  further  that  the
      Judge failed to adequately consider Section 117B(6) and as to  whether
      it was unreasonable to expect the child to leave the  United  Kingdom.
      It is argued that the finding that it  would  be  disruptive  for  the
      child to resume education in India was irrational given  that  neither
      parent had  Indefinite  Leave  to  Remain  and  neither  were  British
      Citizens and the Sponsor was only in the UK on a temporary basis.   It
      is further argued that the Judge failed to properly consider that  the
      Sponsor's course was not provided by a Higher Education Institute  and
      that therefore she was not entitled to have her dependents with her in
      the UK and that this was a matter of choice by the  Sponsor  and  that
      the Judge failed to consider that the Sponsor and her dependents could
      return to India and make the appropriate entry clearance  application.
      It is said that the Judge failed to have proper regard to  the  public
      interest.

   3. Within the Grant of Permission to Appeal,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Frankish, on the 8th February 2016, summarised the Grounds  of  Appeal
      and found that "with no reference to compelling  circumstances  before
      embarking on a  freestanding  Article  8  assessment  and  very  brief
      reference  to  public  interest  presumptions   including   precarious
      circumstances in Section 117 [32-33], it is arguable that an error  of
      law has arisen".

   4.  The Claimants' solicitors sought to produce a bundle  for  the  Upper
      Tribunal attached to a letter dated the  30th  March  2016,  which  in
      effect formed the Claimants' Rule  24  reply,  although  not  formally
      entitled as such.  However, I have clearly considered the contents  of
      that letter in full, in reaching my decision  in  this  case  and  the
      attached case of R (on the Application of Zhang) v Secretary of  State
      for the Home Department [2013] EWHC 891 (Admin).  However, I have  not
      considered the further documentation sought to be adduced  in  respect
      of the Sponsor's status, which was not before the First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge and in respect of which there was no nation given as to why such
      information was not provided to the First-tier Tribunal  Judge,  white
      should be taken into account at the appeal hearing  before  the  Upper
      Tribunal when it amounted to "fresh evidence."Nor  have  I  considered
      the unreported cases of the First-tier Tribunal which Mr Makor  sought
      to rely upon, as these are unreported  cases  and  reference  to  them
      should not be made in  such  circumstances  as  they  are  not  either
      binding or persuasive authority in respect of the  issues  before  the
      Upper Tribunal.

   5. In her oral submissions before the Upper Tribunal  Ms  Everett  relied
      upon the Grounds of Appeal.  She agreed that the Sponsor did  in  fact
      have limited status, as at the date of the decision before  First-tier
      Tribunal  Judge  Wylie.   She  also  conceded   that   following   the
      clarification of the law by the Court of Appeal in the case of Singh &
      Khalid v The Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2015]  EWCA
      Civ 74, that the Tribunal should not be  considering  an  intermediate
      test as to whether or not there were compelling  circumstances  before
      considering a claim outside of the Immigration Rules for the  purposes
      of  Article  8,  but  that  there  would  have   to   be   "compelling
      circumstances" not dealt with under the Immigration Rules, for a human
      rights claim to  be  found  to  be  disproportionate  outside  of  the
      Immigration Rules, which  had  not  succeeded  under  the  Immigration
      Rules.  She therefore conceded that there was no merit  to  the  first
      ground of appeal that the Judge had failed to consider the question of
      "compelling circumstances" before  going  on  to  consider  Article  8
      outside of the Rules, but she still argued that there did need  to  be
      compelling circumstances, although she conceded that the Judge did not
      need to specifically use the phrase  "compelling  circumstances"  when
      considering   proportionality,   if   there   were   such   compelling
      circumstances which were not recognised under the Immigration Rules.

   6. Ms Everett further conceded that the Judge had  referred  specifically
      to the fact that the Claimants' status  was  precarious  and  conceded
      that the consideration of the Claimants' family life was not  affected
      by their status as being "precarious"  for  the  purposes  of  Section
      117B.  She further submitted  that  the  argument  raised  within  the
      Grounds of Appeal in  respect  of  the  Judge's  failure  to  consider
      Section 117B(6) in terms of whether it was unreasonable to expect  the
      child to leave the UK, was in her words "a neutral  point",  and  will
      not be determinative of the appeal.   She  did,  however,  argue  that
      Article 8 should not be used as a means of  avoiding  compliance  with
      the Immigration Rules and argued that the Rules had been found  to  be
      proportionate for the purpose of Article 8.  She argued that the  fact
      that the Claimants would not succeed if they went back to  India,  and
      applied under the Rules, was determinative of the case.

   7. In his submissions on behalf of the Claimants, Mr Makor referred me to
      the arguments raised within his  solicitor's  letter  dated  the  30th
      March 2016, which in effect constituted the Claimants' Rule 24  reply.
      He sought to rely upon the same.  He further argued that  the  Judge's
      findings at  [15]  of  the  decision  were  important  in  that  these
      Claimants always  had  Leave  to  Remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  as
      dependents of the Sponsor, concurrent with her leave,  and  he  argued
      that it was important that the  Sponsor,  Mrs  Dhillon  had  Leave  to
      Remain in the UK until the 16th April 2017, as  a  Tier  IV  (General)
      Student.  She argued  that  the  Judge  had  properly  considered  the
      question as to whether or not the Claimants met  the  requirements  of
      the Immigration Rules, before going on to consider Article 8, and that
      the Judge had properly considered  Section  117  of  the  Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, as inserted by  the  Immigration  Act
      2014, and the fact that the Claimants' status was precarious and  that
      they were able to speak English and were financially independent.

   8.  He argued that there were compelling circumstances not recognised  by
      the Immigration Rules, and that the findings made by  the  Judge  were
      open to her, and  that  the  Grounds  of  Appeal  simply  amounted  to
      disagreement with the decision on the part of the Secretary of  State.
      He sought to rely upon the case of R (Zhang) v Secretary of State  for
      the Home Department [2013] EWHC 891 (Admin), which  he  argued  was  a
      very similar factual situation to that encountered by the Claimants.

   My Findings on Error of Law and Materiality

   9. Although Mr Makor sought to place reliance upon  the  decision  of  Mr
      Justice Turner in the case of  R  (on  the  Application  of  Zhang)  v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWHC 891 (Admin),  I
      do not consider that I am assisted by that case in  the  circumstances
      of this appeal.  The case of Zhang was decided by Mr Justice Turner on
      the basis of the old wording of Rule 319C(h)(i) which stated that  "an
      Applicant who is applying for Leave to Remain must have, or have  last
      been granted, leave (i) as the  partner  of  a  relevant  Points-Based
      System Migrant".  In that case the Claimant's previous grant of  leave
      had been as a Tier 2 (General) Migrant rather than as a  partner,  and
      thereby under the old wording of the  Rules  she  was  precluded  from
      applying from within the UK and had to return to China  to  apply  for
      entry clearance.   However,  as  a  result  of  the  Zhang  case,  the
      Immigration Rules were changed in 2013, to enable  dependents  in  the
      points-based system to apply for Leave to Remain in the  country  from
      within the UK providing the requirements of the newly amended  wording
      of the Rule under  Rule  319(c)  were  complied  with.   However,  the
      decisions made by the Secretary of State in this case  in  respect  of
      the two Claimants, related to the new wording of paragraph 319 and the
      fact that the Sponsor, Mrs Dhillon  was  not  a  government  sponsored
      student and that she was studying on a Level 7 course where the course
      was not being provided by a Higher Education Institute, such that  the
      Secretary of State found that the requirements  of  the  Rules  to  be
      granted Leave to Remain as the dependents  of  a  Points-Based  System
      Migrant were not met.

  10. In respect of the first ground of appeal, namely that  the  Judge  had
      failed to consider whether or not there were any compelling reasons as
      to why Article 8 ought to be considered outside of the  Rules,  before
      engaging with the assessment of  Article  8  outside  the  Immigration
      Rules, as was quite properly considered by Ms Everett on behalf of the
      Secretary of State, following the clarification  of  the  law  by  the
      Court of Appeal in the case of Singh & Khalid v Secretary of State for
      the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 74, the Tribunal does not need  to
      conduct  an  intermediate  test  as  to  whether  or  not  there   are
      "compelling circumstances" before conducting the Article 8  assessment
      outside of the Immigration Rules, and the Court is entitled to  go  on
      to consider the claim outside of the Immigration Rules,  if  the  case
      has not fully been dealt with under the Immigration Rules,  but  there
      do have to be compelling circumstances not recognised under the  Rules
      for the human rights claim to be considered  disproportionate  to  the
      legitimate public aim sought to be achieved.   The  ground  of  appeal
      thereby seeking to argue that the Judge had not carried  out  such  an
      intermediate test, as properly conceded by Ms Everett, therefore lacks
      merit.

  11. In respect of the second ground of appeal that  the  Judge  failed  to
      properly consider Section 117A and B of the Immigration Act  2014  and
      failed to properly weigh  the  fact  that  the  Claimants'  and  their
      Sponsor's leave was precarious and that little weight should be  given
      to a private life that is  established  at  a  time  when  a  person's
      immigration status is precarious, First-tier Tribunal Judge  Wylie  at
      [33] specifically noted that "the First Claimant has always had  leave
      to be in the United Kingdom and the  Second  Claimant  has  had  leave
      since January 2011.  Their Leave to Remain in the United  Kingdom  has
      always been limited, and to that extent their  Immigration  Status  is
      precarious; however they have always complied with Immigration Rules".



  12. The Judge has therefore properly noted  that  they  only  had  limited
      leave and their status was precarious, and taken this into account  in
      the balancing exercise.  He has thereby  properly  complied  with  his
      duty in taking this into account however,  in  any  event,  under  the
      provisions of Section 117B(5) it is stated that "little weight  should
      be given to a private life established by a person at a time when  the
      person's Immigration Status is precarious".  Not only  has  the  Judge
      taken this into account, but the Judge was considering  not  only  the
      Claimants' private lives, but  also  their  family  lives,  and  under
      Section 117B(4) little weight is only to be given  to  a  relationship
      formed with a qualifying partner for the purposes of family  life,  if
      that relationship is established at a time when the person is  in  the
      UK unlawfully.   The  fact  that  the  status  of  the  Claimants  was
      therefore precarious did not affect the weight to be  given  to  their
      family life within the UK, but in  any  event,  the  Judge  has  taken
      account of the precarious nature of their status, given the Claimants'
      limited leave.  There is no material error in this regard.

  13. In respect of  the  argument  that  the  Judge  failed  to  adequately
      consider Section 117B(6) as to whether it  would  be  unreasonable  to
      expect the child to leave the UK, the Judge  did  not  find  that  the
      public interests did not require the  Claimants'  removal  because  of
      their being a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  a  qualifying
      child and because it would not be reasonable to expect their child  to
      leave the UK for the purposes of Section 117B(6).  That  was  not  the
      basis upon which the Judge made findings.  Nor, is that a  requirement
      in circumstances when there is not a "qualifying child" in determining
      whether or not removal would be disproportionate.  The Second Claimant
      was born on the 18th August 2010, and therefore  was  only  aged  four
      years old as at the date of the decision on  the  1st  December  2014.
      She was not a British citizen, nor had she  lived  in  the  UK  for  a
      continuous period of seven years or  more,  and  therefore  the  Judge
      properly  did  not  consider  the  Article  8  case  outside  of   the
      Immigration Rules on the basis of Section 117B(6).  That was  not  the
      basis  of  his  findings.   Section  117B(6)  does  not  preclude  the
      consideration of the question as to whether or not a person's  removal
      would be disproportionate to the legitimate public aim  sought  to  be
      achieved, if the child is under the age of  seven  years  old,  it  is
      simply the fact that under Section 117B(6):

      "In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the  public
      interest does not require the person's removal where -

      (a)  the person has a genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship
      with the qualifying child, and

      (b)  it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to  leave  the
      United Kingdom.".

      14.   As that scenario did not apply in this case, the Judge  properly
      did not make his findings  on  that  basis.   That  ground  of  appeal
      therefore has no relevance.

  15. In respect of the ground of appeal that the Judge failed  to  properly
      consider that the Sponsor's  course  was  not  provided  by  a  Higher
      Education Institute and that therefore she was not  entitled  to  have
      her dependents with her in the UK, and  that  this  was  a  matter  of
      choice by the Sponsor, the First-tier Tribunal Judge at  [2]  properly
      noted the Claimant's immigration history and the fact that  the  First
      Claimant had entered the United Kingdom on the 11th August 2009 as the
      dependent partner of Baljinder Kaur Dhillon and initially been granted
      valid leave until 30th November 2010, and that thereafter been granted
      Leave to Remain as a Tier 4 (General) Dependent  until  the  31st  May
      2011 and thereafter granted Further  Leave  to  Remain  as  a  Tier  4
      (General) Dependent until the 30th January 2012 and that on  the  29th
      August 2012 he had been granted Leave to Remain as a Tier 1  Dependent
      partner until the 29th August 2014, and at [4] noted he had found that
      the Second Claimant had been born in the United Kingdom and  that  she
      too had been granted Leave to Remain initially as a Tier  4  (General)
      Dependent and thereafter on the 29th August 2012, she had been granted
      Leave to Remain as a Tier 1 Dependent  child  until  the  29th  August
      2014.




  16. The Judge therefore properly bore in mind that this  was  not  a  case
      where the Claimants were presently seeking to come into  the  UK  from
      abroad, but had lawfully been in the UK with  the  Sponsor  concurrent
      with her leave, and that the Second Claimant had spent all of her life
      in the UK.  The Judge properly  noted  and  found  at  [22]  that  the
      provisions of paragraph 319C(1) could not be met by the First Claimant
      because the Sponsor was not a Government sponsored  student  and  that
      her course was not provided by a Higher Education Institute  and  that
      identical conditions had to be met in terms  of  the  Second  Claimant
      under  Section  319H,  and  that  therefore  the  provisions  of   the
      Immigration Rules were not met.   The  Judge  has  therefore  properly
      taken into account the fact that the Sponsor's course was not provided
      by a Higher Education Institute and that as a result the  requirements
      of the Immigration Rules were not met and the Judge clearly bore  that
      in mind when considering the  Article  8  assessment  outside  of  the
      Immigration Rules as he was required to do.

  17. The argument that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  failed  to  consider
      that the Sponsor and her dependents could return to India and make the
      appropriate entry clearance application, again misses the  point  that
      as a result of the Claimants not satisfying the Immigration Rules as a
      result of  the  Sponsor's  course  not  being  provided  by  a  Higher
      Education Institute, they would not have met the requirements  of  the
      Immigration  Rules,  were  they  to  return  to  India  and  make   an
      application from abroad.  The argument the Judge failed to  take  into
      account the possibility of them returning to India  to  make  such  an
      application, therefore has no merit, in that had the Claimants  sought
      to return to India to make an application, that application would have
      failed.  The Judge therefore did have to consider whether or  not  the
      Claimants' family and private  life  in  the  UK  would  be  adversely
      affected as a result of the decision to remove and as  to  whether  or
      not there were compelling circumstances  outside  of  the  Immigration
      Rules that would  make  removal  disproportionate  to  the  legitimate
      public aim sought to be achieved.

  18. The Judge  when  considering  the  Article  8  claim  outside  of  the
      Immigration  Rules  has  clearly  taken  into  account  all   of   the
      requirements of Section 117A and B, and has found that  the  Claimants
      can speak English at [33] and that the  maintenance  of  an  effective
      immigration control is in the public interest and that the family  had
      been able to support themselves financially throughout the entire time
      they had been in the UK.  He was also entitled in the circumstances of
      this case to find that there were circumstances which would amount  to
      compelling circumstances not  recognised  by  the  Immigration  Rules,
      given the fact that the Claimants enjoyed family life in the  UK  with
      their Sponsor and that the First Claimant had been here for six  years
      and that the Sponsor was engaged in a course of study and had Leave to
      Remain until 2007; that the Second Claimant  was  at  school  and  the
      family were emotionally reliant upon each other and that the Claimants
      had been in the UK previously throughout with  leave  concurrent  with
      that of the Sponsor.

  19.  The  Judge  was  also  entitled  to  conclude  that   it   would   be
      disproportionate to the legitimate public aim sought to be achieved in
      the circumstances of this case, given the background, for the  Sponsor
      either to be forced to give up her studies to return to India with the
      Claimants, or for the Claimants to be separated from the  Sponsor,  if
      she were to choose to continue her course, in circumstances where  the
      Sponsor had been granted leave to continue study in the UK until 2017.



  20.  The Judge had clearly taken into account the best  interests  of  the
      child at [36] and the fact that it was in her  best  interests  to  be
      living in the care of both parents and that it would be disruptive  to
      her were she to be separated from her mother and required to  transfer
      to a different education system in India [36].  The Judge has  however
      taken account of the fact that they only had limited  leave,  but  has
      considered the individual circumstances of this case and found at [37]
      that it would not be proportionate to remove the  Claimants  from  the
      United Kingdom while Mrs Dhillon remains here continuing her course of
      professional study.  The findings of the Judge were not irrational  as
      claimed  within  the  Grounds  of  Appeal,  and  these  findings  were
      perfectly open to  the  Judge  on  the  evidence  before  him  in  the
      particular circumstances of this case.

  21. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Wylie  therefore  does  not
      reveal any material error of law and the decision is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Wylie  does  not  contain  any
material error of law and is maintained.  The Secretary  of  State's  appeal
is dismissed.

Signed

[pic]
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal McGinty                             Dated
3rd April 2016
