

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/49711/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                    |Determination Promulgated|
|On 13 November 2014                    |On 21 November 2014      |
|                                       |                         |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     CH
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Johnstone (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    None


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant ('the SSHD') appeals against  a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Gurung-Thapa dated 8 July 2014 in which the respondent's
    appeal was allowed under Article 8 of the ECHR.




 2. I have made an anonymity direction  because  this  decision  refers  to
    confidential matters relevant to the respondent's young son.




Background



 3. The background to this case can be summarised for the purposes of  this
    appeal.  The respondent entered  the  UK  as  a  visitor  in  2000  and
    overstayed.  Her son was born in 2011 and is a British citizen.   Judge
    Gurung-Thapa took into account that the son is a British  citizen,  and
    therefore an EEA citizen.  She concluded that he would not be compelled
    to leave the UK if the respondent is removed [26].  The Judge  rejected
    the respondent's evidence that his father would not be able to care for
    him.  The Judge however went on to consider and found  that  Article  8
    would be breached by the respondent's removal [37].


Procedural history

 4. The SSHD appealed against this decision on the  basis  that  the  Judge
    failed to consider whether or not  there  were  compelling  reasons  to
    support her view that Article 8 would be breached, when  it  was  plain
    that the respondent could not  meet  the  relevant  Immigration  Rules.
    When  granting  permission  on  10  September  2014  Designated   Judge
    Macdonald observed that it was arguable that the Judge  had  failed  to
    approach Article 8 on the basis of the correct legal framework.


 5.  The  matter  now  comes  before  me  to  decide  whether  or  not  the
    determination contains an error of law.


Error of law

 6. Having heard from the respondent and Ms Johnstone, I  accept  that  the
    Judge has erred in law.  Judge Gurung-Thapa accepted that  because  the
    respondent's son is a British citizen it automatically follows that  he
    cannot be expected to relocate to Jamaica [37].   This  seems  to  have
    been the focus of her reasons for allowing the appeal under Article  8.
    Whilst a British citizen cannot be compelled to leave the UK, the Judge
    was obliged to consider  whether  in  all  the  circumstances  of  this
    particular case it was reasonable to expect him to do so in  order  for
    family life to continue with his primary carer, his mother.   The Judge
    has failed to make this assessment and has erred  in  law  in  assuming
    that family life between the respondent and her son cannot  take  place
    in Jamaica.


Re-making the decision

 7. I explained to the respondent that I would now proceed to  re-hear  the
    appeal.  She told me all the reasons why her son should not be expected
    to relocate to Jamaica and why she should be permitted to remain in the
    UK in order to care for her British citizen son in the country  of  his
    birth and nationality.  The respondent explained that she had  been  in
    the UK since she was 17 and therefore nearly 15 years.  She had  little
    or no contacts in Jamaica and her life would be one of  destitution  in
    Jamaica, which would not be in her son's best interests.


Decision under the Rules

 8. Judge Gurung-Thapa did not consider the Immigration  Rules  within  her
    determination but the parties accepted that the respondent  is  a  long
    standing overstayer and cannot meet the requirements of the Immigration
    Rules.


Consideration of Article 8 within the Rules

 9. I note that under EX.1 of Appendix FM the respondent may argue that she
    should not be removed from the UK  because  her  son  is  under  18,  a
    British citizen and it would be unreasonable for  him  to  relocate  to
    Jamaica.  I do not accept that it would  be  unreasonable  for  him  to
    relocate.  The respondent and her son are  currently  living  in  local
    authority accommodation with local authority  financial  support  under
    the Children Act 1989.  Whilst the state is providing them  with  basic
    support, such conditions are temporary.  The fact that  the  respondent
    is dependent upon the local authority in this  way  suggests  that  she
    does not have strong family, employment or friendship links.  The child
    has only very recently started school and is very young.  It is in  his
    best interests to remain with his mother and in my  view  he  is  young
    enough to adapt to life in Jamaica.  I do not accept that they will  be
    destitute  and  without  accommodation  in   Jamaica.    Although   the
    respondent does not have immediate family in Jamaica, she told me  that
    she has cousins.  She also told me that her father has  a  job  in  the
    Lake District as a joiner.  He could  help  her  with  basic  start  up
    costs.  In any event the respondent could obtain a job in Jamaica.  She
    told me she has experience in waitressing, cleaning  and  hairdressing.
    She was in my view overly pessimistic about getting a job  in  Jamaica.
    I do not accept that the respondent will be destitute in Jamaica as she
    claims.  She will be entitled to work there and has links  there.   She
    has not had permission to work in the  UK  until  recently  (given  her
    application to remain as the dependent of an EEA citizen).  I find that
    the respondent will be able to adequately care for her son  in  Jamaica
    and it would be reasonable to expect him to relocate  to  Jamaica  with
    her.


Consideration of Article 8 outside the Rules

10. As the respondent cannot show that the immigration  rules  can  be  met
    this identifies and gives weight to the SSHD's case that she should  be
    removed.  This part of the rules cannot be  described  as  a  'complete
    code' as in the  case  of  deportation  and  in  such  circumstances  I
    consider the five step Razgar [2014] UKHL 27 bearing in mind  that  the
    best interests of the respondent's British citizen child are a  primary
    consideration and should form an integral part of  the  proportionality
    assessment under Article 8 - see ZH Tanzania [2011] UKSC 4 and  Zoumbas
    [2013] UKSC 74.  I accept that the child must not be blamed for matters
    which he is not responsible.  The child is very young although  he  was
    born in the UK and is a British citizen.  His father is settled in  the
    UK and he has other relatives in  the  UK.   He  has  recently  started
    school.  I accept on balance that it is in his best interests to remain
    in the UK, and for his mother to be with him.  I must also consider the
    factors set out in section 117B  of  the  Nationality  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.  The respondent speaks English but is not  financially
    independent.  She formed her relationship with her ex partner when  she
    was in the UK unlawfully.  She has been in the UK for a lengthy  period
    but much of that time has  been  spent  unlawfully.   Her  child  is  a
    qualifying child as he is a British citizen but in my view it would  be
    reasonable to expect him to relocate to Jamaica for the reasons I  have
    already outlined.  In my view it is undoubtedly in the public  interest
    that the respondent is removed from the UK.  The cumulative  effect  of
    the countervailing considerations I have identified are such that it is
    proportionate for the respondent to be removed.


11. The respondent will have to decide whether to take her child  with  her
    but in my judgment in all the circumstances of the  case  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect him to relocate with his mother.


Decision

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  of  law.   I
    set it aside and I re-make the decision by dismissing the  respondent's
    appeal.


FEE AWARD

13. As I have dismissed the appeal the respondent is not  entitled  to  any
    fee award.




Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
19 November 2014

