
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal numbers: IA/49619/2013
                                                               IA/49629/2013
                                                               IA/49640/2013
                                                               IA/49659/2013
                                                               IA/49665/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 12 February 2015                  |On 16 February 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN


                                   Between

                                 MISS J C R
                                MISS M F C R
                                  MR J C R
                                  MR E C A
                                  MRS C R T
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:
    For the Appellants:    Mr P Thoree a solicitor from Thoree & Co
    For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow a Senior Home Office Presenting
    Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of  Columbia.  Their  dates  of  birth  are
    respectively, J 27 May 1997, M 2 November 1995, Master J 12 March 2008,
    E 15 April 1974 and C December 1974. E and C are husband and  wife  and
    the parents of the other appellants.  I  will  refer  to  them  as  the
    husband and the wife and to their two daughters as J and  M  and  their
    son as Master J.

 2. The husband claimed to have entered the UK on 26  November  2000  as  a
    visitor. When his visitor visa expired he overstayed. The wife  claimed
    to have entered the UK on 26 May 2002 with J and M. Master J  was  born
    in the UK on 12 March 2008. Except for any initial period of leave as a
    visitor all of the appellants have remained in this country illegally.

 3. The appellants made an application to remain in the UK on  25  November
    2008 which was refused on 4 December 2009. That decision was maintained
    after reconsideration on 22 June 2010.  On  24  May  2012  the  husband
    submitted an application for leave to remain with the other members  of
    the family as his dependants. This was refused on 15 January 2013  with
    no right of appeal. The appellants sought judicial review quashing  the
    decision  and  granting  them  an  in  country  right  of  appeal.  The
    application for judicial review was resolved by a consent  order  dated
    13 August 2013  by  which  the  respondent  agreed  to  reconsider  the
    decision and make a fresh decision on  the  application  for  leave  to
    remain on Article 8 grounds within three months of the order. This  was
    followed by the  decisions  of  22  November  2013  against  which  the
    appellants appealed to the First-Tier Tribunal.

 4. On 20 March 2014 First-Tier Tribunal Judge Davidson ("Judge  Davidson")
    heard the appellants' appeals. By a  determination  promulgated  on  19
    June 2014 all the appeals  were  allowed  on  Article  8  human  rights
    grounds. The respondent applied  for  and  was  granted  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal arguing that Judge Davidson had  erred  in
    law. That appeal came before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G  Macdonald
    ("Judge Macdonald") on 3 September 2014. He found that  Judge  Davidson
    had erred in law and set aside the decision directing that there should
    be a further hearing.

 5. The appeals came before me on 11 December 2014 when I  gave  directions
    for the submission of documents and skeleton arguments. I also directed
    that  the  findings  of  credibility  and   fact   contained   in   the
    determination of Judge Davidson should be preserved.

 6. It is in these circumstances that the appeals come before me.  Although
    there was a direction that one should be produced there is no  skeleton
    argument from the respondent. I have a skeleton argument from Mr Thoree
    who has also submitted a  supplementary  bundle  of  evidence  for  the
    appellants (bundle D). I now have four bundles from the appellants  (A,
    B, C, and D) the first  three  of  which  were  submitted  for  earlier
    hearings.

 7. Mr  Thoree's  skeleton  is  largely  based  on  the  premise  that  the
    Immigration Rules which should be applied are those in force before the
    amended Immigration Rules which came into effect on 9  July  2012.  The
    grounds also seek to argue that  there  is  no  error  of  law  in  the
    determination of Judge  Davidson  and  that  this  decision  should  be
    upheld. I indicated to the representatives that it seemed to me that on
    this rehearing I should apply the provisions of the  Immigration  Rules
    which came into effect on 28 July 2014 and the provisions of s  117  of
    the Immigration Act 2014 ("the 2014 Act") which came into effect on the
    same date. I provided them with copies of YM (Uganda)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ  1292  as  authority  for
    this proposition.

 8. I heard evidence from J and M  who  adopted  their  witness  statements
    contained in Bundle  D.  They  gave  evidence  in  chief,  were  cross-
    examined, and I asked some questions for clarification. Their  evidence
    is set out in my record of proceedings.

 9. Mr Tarlow relied on the reasons for refusal letter of 6 November  2013.
    It was undeniable that J and M had done well in their  education.  They
    had aspirations and expectations of  a  life  here.  They  had  a  good
    private life and a family life with their sibling and parents. However,
    if they were removed to Columbia they would  be  removed  together  and
    would stay together as a family. No member of the family  was  able  to
    meet the requirements of Appendix FM of the current Immigration  Rules.
    In the circumstances the  appeals  stood  or  fell  on  the  Article  8
    Strasbourg jurisprudence with reference to s 117 and in particular 117B
    of the 2014 Act.

10. Mr Tarlow submitted that sections 117B 4 and 5 applied. I  should  give
    little weight to the fact that M and J  had  done  well.  None  of  the
    children were British citizens or qualifying children. M was  now  over
    18. Applying the Razgar tests the appeal turned on the final  question,
    proportionality, in the light of the provisions of the 2014 Act.

11. Mr Tarlow submitted that M and J were bright and capable and would have
    the ability to adapt to life in  Columbia.  Their  chosen  professions,
    accountancy and cabin crew, were  to  a  large  extent  internationally
    transferable. It was accepted that they would  need  to  re-educate  to
    some extent. Currently, they were in limbo because  their  studies  had
    been brought to an end because of their lack of immigration status.

12. Mr Thoree submitted that there was no indication  that  the  respondent
    had looked at the bundle of documents submitted  with  the  application
    and had failed to consider the best interests of the children  under  s
    55 of the Borders Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009  ("s  55").  He
    relied on JO and Others (section 55 duty) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 517 (IAC)
    (1 December 2014). The  documents  submitted  to  the  respondent  were
    listed in his firm's letter of 25 April 2012. I asked Mr Thoree whether
    there was sufficient consideration of the s 55 issues  in  the  section
    entitled "section 55 consideration"  at  page  4  of  the  reasons  for
    refusal letter dated 6 November 2013 and if not what  factors  had  not
    been considered. He submitted that more consideration should have  been
    given to the childrens' wishes and feelings, although he was unable  to
    point me to any evidence about this which was before the respondent. He
    added that there was insufficient consideration of the question of  the
    childrens' education. In relation to this aspect he asked me  to  remit
    the appeals to the respondent as not in accordance with the law and for
    further consideration.

13. Mr Thoree submitted that the M and J could succeed under Appendix FM. J
    met the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(4). M met the requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE(5). He accepted that none of  these  provisions  could
    benefit the husband or the wife.

14. In relation to section 117 of the 2014 Act, Mr  Thoree  submitted  that
    all the family spoke English. He accepted that the  husband  had  never
    paid tax or National Insurance and  that  the  children  had  had  free
    education. They had also  benefited  from  some  NHS  treatment.  Under
    117B(5) the husband had come here in 2008. He  submitted  that  117B(6)
    could benefit J and Master J. It would be unreasonable  to  expect  the
    family to relocate to Columbia. The children would have to start  their
    education all over again and this would not be in their best  interests
    even taking into account the  interests  of  immigration  control.  The
    overriding objective under the new legislation  was  to  deter  foreign
    criminals. None of the appellants came  within  this  category.  I  was
    asked to allow all their appeals.

15. Mr Tarlow did not reply. I reserved my determination.

16. I can find no merit in Mr Thoree's  submission  that  the  respondent's
    decision was not in accordance with the law because there was no proper
    consideration of the s 55 best interests of the children.  He  was  not
    able to point to any particular  aspect  of  the  evidence  before  the
    respondent which had not been considered when  this  was  addressed  on
    page 4 of the reasons for refusal letter dated 6 November 2013  I  find
    that  the  respondent  did  give  proper  consideration  to  the  s  55
    requirements.

17. In the light  of  YM  (Uganda)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2014] EWCA Civ 1292 in particular paragraphs 38  and  39  I
    find that, notwithstanding the provisions which were in  force  at  the
    dates of the application, the decision and  the  hearing  before  Judge
    Davidson, I must apply the Immigration Rules which came into effect  on
    28 July 2014 and the 2014 Act.

18. Judge Davidson's findings of fact, which are preserved, are largely set
    out in paragraphs 19 and 20 of the determination. Paragraph 19 contains
    nothing material in addition to what I have already recorded  save  for
    the conclusion that the  appellants  have  been  here  since  2002.  In
    paragraph 20 he said;

          "20. Although the parents have a  lamentable  immigration  record,
         having come to the UK 12 years ago and  seemingly  just  overstayed
         and worked illegally in clear contravention of the UK's Immigration
         Rules, I accept that they are broadly honest, hard-working  people,
         who came from a blighted country to the UK because (the  husband's)
         brothers were already living here. They claim not to  have  claimed
         or used public funds, but that is not entirely  true  because  they
         have had a child on the  NHS  while  here,  and  their  two  oldest
         children have been educated in the UK at public  expense.  Strictly
         speaking they were not entitled to any of these benefits. There  is
         no evidence of  either  of  the  parents  paying  tax  or  National
         Insurance at any time..."

19. I find that the evidence which I heard from M  and  J  confirmed  Judge
    Davidson's view of them. Both are intelligent, perceptive and well able
    to express themselves clearly in English with a wide vocabulary.  J  is
    now 17 and M 19. The situation has changed to the extent that  both  of
    them have now had their studies curtailed. They believe  and  I  accept
    that this is probably because their lack of immigration status has been
    discovered and it has been  decided  that  they  are  not  entitled  to
    further education.

20. J was on a two-year BTEC course which, had had she not been excluded in
    December 2014, would have finished in June 2015. She hopes for a career
    as airline cabin crew. She believes that if she went  to  Columbia  and
    tried to pursue her career she would have to redo much of her education
    and then go to university. This would have  to  be  paid  for  and  her
    parents could not afford it. Her Spanish was not fluent but,  I  deduce
    from her answers, is competent and would need brushing up.  She  passed
    eight or nine GCSEs and subsequently a BTEC business course  which  she
    passed with "double grade merit merit". The repetition  of  "merit"  is
    not a typographical error.

21. M finished her  BTEC  course  before  she  was  excluded  from  further
    education. She  passed  with  distinctions,  merits  and  some  passes.
    Without immodesty she agreed that she had done "pretty well". Following
    the completion of her BTEC course she wanted to  go  to  university  or
    some other suitable accountancy training and  had  applied  to  several
    universities before discovering that, because of her  lack  of  status,
    she would not be offered a place. She  would  not  be  able  to  go  to
    university or continue state funded education  in  the  UK  unless  she
    achieved legal status here. Her assessment  of  her  ability  to  speak
    Spanish was similar to J's. She wanted to become a financial accountant
    and believed that if she went back to Columbia she would have  to  redo
    much of her studies. The accountancy training system was  different  to
    that in the UK. Like J she  thought  that  she  would  need  to  go  to
    university in Columbia but her parents would  not  be  able  to  afford
    this.

22. At the hearing before Judge Macdonald Mr Thoree accepted  that  at  the
    date of the hearing before Judge Davidson the requirements in paragraph
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules included a provision that M and F would
    need to establish that it would not be reasonable  to  expect  them  to
    leave the UK. At that stage Mr Thoree  accepted  that  they  could  not
    succeed under the Article 8 provisions in  the  Immigration  Rules  and
    could only succeed outside the Rules. Before me Mr Thoree repeated  the
    argument that M and F could succeed under paragraph 276ADE. I find that
    the provisions of  paragraph  276ADE  no  longer  apply  and  that  the
    appellants can only succeed on Article 8 human rights  grounds  outside
    the Immigration Rules.

23. The provisions of the Immigration Act 2014 set  out  where  the  public
    interest lies in paragraphs 117A, 117B, 117C and 117D as follows;

         117A Application of this Part

             (1) This Part applies where a court or tribunal is required to
             determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-

                  (a) breaches a person's right to respect for  private  and
                  family life under Article 8, and

                  (b) as a result would be unlawful under section 6  of  the
                  Human Rights Act 1998.

             (2) In considering the public interest question, the court  or
             tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

                  (a) in all cases, to the considerations listed in  section
                  117B, and

                  (b)  in  cases  concerning  the  deportation  of   foreign
                  criminals, to the considerations listed in section 117C.

             (3) In subsection (2), "the public  interest  question"  means
             the question of whether an interference with a person's  right
             to respect for private and  family  life  is  justified  under
             Article 8(2).

         117B Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in  all
         cases

             (1) The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in
             the public interest.

             (2) It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English-

                  (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                  (b) are better able to integrate into society.

             (3) It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-

                  (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

                  (b) are better able to integrate into society.

             (4) Little weight should be given to-

                  (a) a private life, or

                  (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,  that
                  is established by a person at a time when the person is in
                  the United Kingdom unlawfully.

             (5)  Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a   private   life
             established  by  a  person  at  a  time  when   the   person's
             immigration status is precarious.

             (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,
             the public interest does  not  require  the  person's  removal
             where-

                  (a) the person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

                  (b) it would not be reasonable  to  expect  the  child  to
                  leave the United Kingdom.

         117C  Article  8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
         foreign criminals

             (1) The deportation of foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
             interest.

             (2) The more  serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
             criminal, the greater is the public interest in deportation of
             the criminal.

             (3) In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has  not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless  Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.

             (4) Exception 1 applies where-

                  (a) C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for
                  most of C's life,

                  (b) C is socially and culturally integrated in the  United
                  Kingdom, and

                  (c) there would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  C's
                  integration into the country to which C is proposed to  be
                  deported.

             (5) Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh.

             (6) In the case of a foreign criminal who has  been  sentenced
             to a period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public
             interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2.

             (7) The considerations in subsections (1) to  (6)  are  to  be
             taken into account where a court or tribunal is considering  a
             decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent  that
             the reason for the decision was the offence  or  offences  for
             which the criminal has been convicted.

         117D Interpretation of this Part

             (1) In this Part-

                  "Article 8" means Article 8 of the European Convention  on
                  Human Rights;

                  "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age  of
                  18 and who-

                      (a) is a British citizen, or

                      (b) has lived in the United Kingdom for a  continuous
                      period of seven years or more;

                  "qualifying partner" means a partner who-

                      (a) is a British citizen, or

                      (b) who is settled in the United Kingdom (within  the
                      meaning of the Immigration Act  1971  -  see  section
                      33(2A) of that Act).

             (2) In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-

                  (a) who is not a British citizen,

                  (b) who has been convicted in the  United  Kingdom  of  an
                  offence, and

                  (c) who-

                      (i) has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of
                      at least 12 months,

                      (ii) has been convicted of an offence that has caused
                      serious harm, or

                      (iii) is a persistent offender.

             (3) For the purposes of subsection (2)(b), a person subject to
             an order under-

                  (a) section 5 of the  Criminal  Procedure  (Insanity)  Act
                  1964 (insanity etc),

                  (b) section 57 of the Criminal  Procedure  (Scotland)  Act
                  1995 (insanity etc), or

                  (c) Article 50A of the Mental  Health  (Northern  Ireland)
                  Order 1986 (insanity etc),

             has not been convicted of an offence.

             (4) In  this  Part,  references  to  a  person  who  has  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of a certain  length  of
             time-

                  (a) do not include a person who has received  a  suspended
                  sentence (unless a  court  subsequently  orders  that  the
                  sentence or any part of it (of whatever length) is to take
                  effect);

                  (b) do not include a person who has been  sentenced  to  a
                  period of imprisonment of that  length  of  time  only  by
                  virtue  of  being  sentenced  to   consecutive   sentences
                  amounting in aggregate to that length of time;

                  (c) include a person who is  sentenced  to  detention,  or
                  ordered or directed to  be  detained,  in  an  institution
                  other than a prison (including, in particular, a  hospital
                  or an institution for young offenders) for that length  of
                  time; and

                  (d) include a person who is sentenced to  imprisonment  or
                  detention, or ordered or directed to be detained,  for  an
                  indeterminate period, provided that it  may  last  for  at
                  least that length of time.

             (5) If any question arises for the purposes of this Part as to
             whether a person is a British citizen, it is  for  the  person
             asserting that fact to prove it."

24. I must apply sections 117A and 117B in the light of the  interpretation
    section 117D. I find that the children speak excellent English and  the
    husband and wife probably speak competent English. I give little weight
    to the private lives of the  appellants.  Except  for  minimal  periods
    after arrival they have at all times been  in  the  UK  unlawfully  and
    their immigration status has been precarious. Because the provisions of
    117B(6)(a) and (b) are cumulative they can only benefit the husband and
    the wife, being the persons who have a genuine and subsisting  parental
    relationship with the children and only then if it would be  reasonable
    to expect any of the children to leave the UK. This  provision  applies
    only to  a  "qualifying  child".  None  of  the  children  are  British
    citizens. Only one of them, J, is a qualifying child. She is  under  18
    and has lived in the UK for a continuous  period  of  more  than  seven
    years. M is over 18 and Master J has not been here long enough  because
    he is not yet seven.

25. I find that the appellants have a family life together. There would  be
    no breach of their Article  8  family  life  human  rights  if,  as  is
    proposed, they are removed to Columbia together. Whilst it is said that
    they have relatives  in  the  UK  it  has  not  been  argued  that  the
    appellants have family lives with them.

26. It is not necessary to strictly apply a two stage test as advocated  in
    Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) Pakistan [2013] UKUT
    640 (IAT).  I  can  conflate  these  and  consider  whether  there  are
    compelling  circumstances  not  sufficiently   recognised   under   the
    Immigration Rules for granting leave to remain outside the  Immigration
    Rules. In considering whether there are compelling circumstances I must
    take into account all the relevant evidence whilst giving effect to the
    provisions of section 117 of the 2014 Act.

27. I apply the tests in the opinion of Lord Bingham in Razgar, R  (on  the
    application of) v. Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2004]
    UKHL 27. In relation to the appellants' private lives  the  first  four
    questions are answered in  the  affirmative  leaving  the  question  of
    whether the proposed interference is proportionate  to  the  legitimate
    public end sought to be achieved?

28. I find that the husband and the  wife  must  have  established  private
    lives in this country although they have provided  little  evidence  of
    this. Except for a very short period when they first arrived they  have
    always been here illegally and well aware of this. Their  position  has
    always been  precarious.  The  husband  and  wife  admitted  that  they
    remained here knowing that they  were  not  entitled  to  because  they
    wanted to obtain a better future  and  a  better  education  for  their
    children. Whilst this is a laudable ambition for parents  to  have  for
    their children it shows a flagrant disregard for the immigration system
    and the public interest. The husband was well aware  that  he  was  not
    entitled to work as is reflected by the fact that he  worked  illegally
    for cash in hand. Neither the husband nor the wife have paid any tax or
    National Insurance. They have obtained the  benefit  of  education  for
    their children to which they were not entitled. They have obtained  the
    benefit of some NHS treatment to which they were also not entitled.  If
    I was considering the position of the husband and  wife  on  their  own
    without their children I would have no hesitation in concluding that it
    would be a proportionate interference with their Article 8 private life
    rights to remove them to Columbia.

29. Master J is now nearly 7 and attending primary school.  I  have  little
    evidence about his private life but  I  accept  that  he  does  have  a
    private life in the UK. He cannot be blamed for what his  parents  have
    done. I find that the main focus in his life is  probably  his  family.
    One of his sisters said that Spanish was  spoken  at  home.  His  first
    language may well be English but I find that if he went to Columbia  he
    would soon be able to communicate in Spanish, attend  school  and  make
    new friends.

30. M and J have established a private life  here.  There  are  letters  of
    support from close friends. However, I find that the main focus  is  on
    the life of the family. They are a close-knit family. It is clear  that
    they have made the most of and derived considerable benefit from  their
    education in the UK. They are, as I have said, intelligent,  perceptive
    and well able to express themselves clearly in English.  Their  command
    of Spanish may be rusty but would soon become fluent in Columbia.  Both
    have completed their secondary education here. What they  would  prefer
    and hope to do is to go on and complete  their  tertiary  education  in
    this country. J would like to complete her BTEC and go on to university
    before getting a job as aircraft cabin crew  whilst  M  would  like  to
    achieve an accountancy qualification either at University or by another
    suitable route. I  accept  that  return  to  Columbia  will  delay  the
    achievement of  their  ambitions  and  that  some  retraining  will  be
    required but with their abilities and the  qualifications  obtained  in
    this country I find that they will progress and make the most of  their
    talents, even if the family cannot afford to pay  for  them  to  go  to
    university. Clearly they do not want to go back to Columbia  and  would
    be upset if they had to go there. The consequences of having to  return
    would be mitigated if, as is proposed, they return as a united family.

31. Whilst I accept that the best interests of the  children  would  be  to
    remain in this  country  and  that  these  interests  are  a  paramount
    consideration the consequences of their having to  return  to  Columbia
    are not so bad and the difference not so great that the public interest
    in returning them is overcome.

32. Judge Davidson said that the appellants came from a "blighted country".
    There is no evidence to show and I do not accept that they would be  at
    risk in any way on return to Columbia. Whilst they might  not  be  well
    off it has not been argued that they would be destitute.

33.  Balancing  the  public  interest  in  the  maintenance  of   effective
    immigration control particularly in the light of the  provisions  of  s
    117 of the 2014 Act against all the factors which militate in favour of
    the appellants I find that it would  be  a  proportionate  interference
    with their Article 8 human rights to remove them to Columbia.  Had  the
    provisions of paragraph 276ADE applied it would have been in reasonable
    to expect all of them, including the children, to leave the UK.

34. Whilst I have not been asked to make an anonymity direction and I note
    that Judge Davidson did not do so I consider that an anonymity
    direction is necessary in order to protect the interests of the
    children. I make an order under rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or publication
    of any matter likely to lead members of the public to identify any of
    the appellants.

35. The decision of Judge Davidson has been set aside. I remake the
    decision and dismiss the appellants' appeals under the Immigration
    Rules and on Article 8 human rights grounds.






    .............................................
    Signed        Date 13 February 2015


    Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden
