

                                    [pic]
IAC-HW-AM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/49410/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 17th February 2016                    |On 15th March 2016                  |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                    m a a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Savage, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Ofei-Kwatia, Counsel for JS Solicitors, London


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of  State,  however
    for convenience I shall now refer to the parties as  they  were  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 2nd September 1980.   He
    appealed against  the  Respondent's  decision  of  21st  November  2014
    refusing to grant  him  indefinite  leave  to  remain  under  the  long
    residence provisions contained in the Immigration Rules and against his
    removal from the United Kingdom.  His appeal was heard by Judge of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Malone on 13th June 2015.  He  allowed  the  appeal
    but only to the extent that he remitted it back to the  Respondent  for
    her further proper consideration as  he  found  that  the  Respondent's
    decision was not in accordance with the law.

 3. An application for permission to appeal was submitted to the First-tier
    Tribunal and on 14th October 2015 permission was refused  by  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Cox.  An application for permission  to  appeal
    was lodged with the Upper Tribunal and permission was granted by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Smith on 2nd November 2015.  The permission states  that
    the judge arguably erred in failing to  appreciate  that  even  if  the
    Appellant's former solicitors were to blame for not  making  a  further
    application within 28 days of the refusal of  the  first,  rather  than
    lodging a judicial review, this incorrect step made  no  difference  to
    the outcome of the Respondent's decision because  the  Appellant  would
    still not have been in the United Kingdom lawfully after 23rd June 2014
    so he could not complete ten years'  continuous  residence  until  10th
    December 2014.  Even if his application had been made  within  28  days
    from when his last leave expired on 23rd June  2014  any  period  after
    21st November 2014, which was  the  date  the  Respondent  refused  the
    Appellant's application, could not count towards  a  period  of  lawful
    residence, so the Appellant could not complete a period of ten years.

 4. There is no Rule 24 response.

 5. The Presenting Officer submitted that he is relying on the grounds.  He
    submitted that he accepts that there are errors in the  refusal  letter
    but this Appellant's appeal rights were exhausted on 23rd June 2016 and
    his application for indefinite leave to remain was made in August 2014.
     He came to the United Kingdom on 10th December 2004 so  the  ten  year
    period expires on 10th December 2014. In these circumstances the  terms
    of the Immigration Rules cannot be satisfied for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain.

 6. The Presenting Officer submitted that the First-tier  Judge's  decision
    lacks coherence but he submitted that the reasons for refusal are  made
    clear in the refusal letter at page 3  and  there  is  no  merit  in  a
    remittal to the  Home  Office.  The  Rules  cannot  be  satisfied.   He
    submitted that any discretion available has already been applied so the
    First-tier Judge's decision is flawed.  He asked me to set it aside.

 7. Counsel for the Appellant submitted that the  judge  did  look  at  the
    claim correctly.  She  submitted  that  the  judge  was  aware  of  the
    situation at 23rd June 2014 and I was referred to paragraphs 14 to  19,
    20, 21 and 23 of the decision.  She submitted that the judge considered
    everything and refers in  particular  to  the  errors  in  the  refusal
    letter.  She submitted that the judge did  not  fail  to  consider  the
    removal of the Appellant but found that the Respondent's decision could
    not stand because it lacks clarity and coherence.  She  submitted  that
    the judge referred the matter back to the  Respondent  because  of  the
    Respondent's lack of anxious scrutiny when making her decision  and  so
    found that the decision was  not  in  accordance  with  the  law.   She
    submitted that the fairest way to deal with this is for the  Respondent
    to reconsider and provide a new refusal letter  as  there  are  matters
    which the Respondent has not considered.

 8. She submitted that it is clear that the judge was aware of the problems
    the  Appellant  had  because   of   errors   made   by   his   previous
    representatives.

 9. Counsel referred me to  page  3  of  the  refusal  letter  relating  to
    discretion and submitted that matters were put to the First-tier  Judge
    which were not dealt with in the refusal  letter  and  because  of  the
    errors in the refusal letter discretion was not exercised properly.

10. She submitted that the Respondent cannot say that all relevant  matters
    have been properly considered when the Respondent made her decision.

11. Counsel submitted that the judge has dealt with all  of  these  matters
    and considered paragraph 276B of the Rules.

12. Counsel submitted that when Article 8 is considered these matters  will
    weigh heavily in favour of the Appellant in any balancing exercise.

13. I was referred to paragraph 13 of the decision  in  which  the  refusal
    letter is referred to  and  whether  the  exercise  of  discretion  was
    appropriate  as  the  application  could  not  demonstrate  ten  years'
    continuous lawful residence.  She submitted  that  the  decision  shows
    exactly why the refusal letter was not in accordance with the law.

14. I was asked to find that there is no error of  law  in  the  First-tier
    Judge's decision and that the claim should  be  referred  back  to  the
    Respondent  for  reconsideration.   She  also  pointed  out  that   the
    Respondent was unrepresented at the hearing.

15. She submitted  that  the  permission  granted  by  the  Upper  Tribunal
    concerns matters which were outwith the decision.  The Upper Tier Judge
    focuses on the ten year timescale and the fact that the  Appellant  did
    not have 3C leave when he applied for settlement.  She  submitted  that
    the matters referred to in the permission were outside the remit of the
    First-tier Judge and that there is no error of law  in  the  First-tier
    Judge's decision.





Decision and Reasons

16. On 8th  August  2014  the  Appellant  applied  to  the  Respondent  for
    indefinite  leave  to  remain  under  the  long  residence   provisions
    contained in the Immigration Rules.  There are errors  in  the  refusal
    letter and the Respondent refused the  application  but  regardless  of
    these errors the Appellant's appeal rights  became  exhausted  on  23rd
    June 2014.  His application of 7th August 2014 was  therefore  45  days
    out of time.  Paragraph 276B(v) cannot be  satisfied.   The  Respondent
    dealt with discretion in her decision.  She  states  that  as  Judicial
    Review does not extend 3c leave and the appellant did  not  submit  any
    further applications  within  28  days  it  is  considered  it  is  not
    appropriate to exercise discretion in the Appellant's application.

17. It  is  clear  that  the  Appellant  received  wrong  advice  from  the
    solicitors advising him at that  time.   It  is  also  clear  that  the
    Appellant in this case is appealing against a removal decision and  not
    an out of time long residency application.  For  a  person's  leave  to
    continue under 3c while an application is pending the  application  for
    variation has to be submitted before the leave expires.  That  did  not
    happen here. In this case the legal challenge cannot be overcome by the
    faults in the refusal letter.  As the Appellant's leave ended  on  23rd
    June 2014 the ILR application on  7th  August  2014  was  made  by  the
    Appellant as an overstayer.

18.  The Appellant's solicitors are to  blame  for  not  making  a  further
    application within 28 days of refusal of the first  application  rather
    than lodging a  judicial  review  but  the  incorrect  advice  made  no
    difference to the outcome of the claim because the Appellant was not in
    the United Kingdom lawfully after 23rd June 2014.  The ten years was up
    on 10th December 2014.  The Respondent  refused  the  Appellant's  next
    application on 21st November 2014 so even if the application  had  been
    made within 28 days from the date when his last leave expired  on  23rd
    June 2014 any period after 21st November 2014 could not count towards a
    period of lawful residence and he could not complete a  period  of  ten
    years. In these circumstances the Respondent would not  have  exercised
    her discretion any differently.

19. The judge did not consider  Article  8  in  his  decision  but  as  the
    Appellant's leave was based on his studies while he  has  been  in  the
    United Kingdom the appeal could not have succeeded based on his private
    life.  With regard to family life the Appellant's wife has no right  to
    remain in the United Kingdom although she has not  received  a  removal
    notice. The terms of Article 8 under  the  Rules  cannot  be  satisfied
    under Paragraph 276ADE as he has not been  in  here  for  a  sufficient
    period or under Appendix FM when public interest is  considered.  There
    is nothing compelling in this case which could lead to the claim  being
    considered outside the Rules.

20. As this Appellant's application cannot  succeed  there  is  a  material
    error of law in the First-tier Tribunal's decision.





Notice of Decision

21. As there is a material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision promulgated on 23rd June 2015 it must be set aside.

22. Because of the facts of this case it is not possible for the  Appellant
    to succeed in his application under the Rules  and  there  is  no  good
    arguable case for considering the application outside the Rules.

23. I therefore dismiss the Appellant's appeal.

24. Anonymity has been directed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray


