
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/49332/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 03 October 2017                       |On 27 October 2017                |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE

                                   Between
                                   M K M A
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Z Khan of Universal Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh, born in 1981. He entered the
    United Kingdom on 20 October 2010 with leave to remain  as  a  student.
    His leave was extended until 30  September  2014.  In  April  2014,  he
    married  a  British  citizen  Rahela  Choudhury  and  maiden  in   time
    application to remain as a partner.  Rahela  Choudhury  has  2  British
    citizen children born on 11 June 2005 and 24 December 2007.

 2. On 19 August 2014, the respondent refused the application on the  basis
    that the appellant had previously sought leave to remain in the  United
    Kingdom by deception because ETS had informed  them  that  his  English
    language speaking test taken on 18 September 2012 at  Synergy  Business
    College of London had been taken by  proxy.  The  respondent  concluded
    that the appellant did not meet the suitability requirements in S - L T
    R. 2.1 of appendix FM to the Immigration  Rules.  The  failure  of  the
    suitability requirements deprived the appellant of the Gateway  to  the
    partner  requirements  in  appendix  FM,  and  in  particular  to   the
    exceptions at EX 1. Respondent went on to conclude that  in  any  event
    those  provisions  were  not  met  and   there   were   no   compelling
    circumstances so that his removal was proportionate.

 3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. Judge Walters  found
    that the respondent was unable to rely upon deception using a  previous
    application in any event. As a result, the judge revisited  the  family
    and private life aspects of the decision and concluded that removal was
    proportionate in the context of his relationship with his  partner.  In
    considering the proportionality of the  removal  in  the  face  of  the
    family life with the partner's children the judge concluded that he was
    unable to attach weight to their circumstances in the  context  of  the
    immigration rules or section 117 of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 because as a "stepfather" he  was  unable  to  conclude
    that there was a qualifying parental relationship.

 4. The appellant was granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on
    the basis that test of a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship
    with a qualifying child could include a stepfather.

 5. In the rule 24 response the respondent conceded that there was an error
    of law but argued that in light of the judge's  conclusion  that  there
    were no insurmountable obstacles to the appellant's wife  returning  to
    Pakistan with him so as to continue to enjoy family life  included  the
    position of the children so that the result would in any event  be  the
    same.

 6. Before me Mr Melvin recognise the difficulty of that position in  light
    of clear responsibilities of a judicial decision to  address  the  best
    interests of children affected by  immigration  decisions.  As  parties
    recognised in this case there was  insufficient  judicial  findings  in
    respect of the facts pertinent to the children  so  as  to  assess  the
    character and quality of the family life  enjoyed  and  the  impact  of
    severance/separation or relocation. Any assessment  also  requires  the
    inclusion of countervailing public interest factors including,  on  the
    facts of this case, whether or not there had been  deception  practised
    in the earlier application. Judge Walters had not found it necessary to
    make the relevant findings.  Previous  judicial  consideration  of  the
    appellant's claim had been overtaken  by  the  recent  case  law  which
    assessed the respondent's generic evidence, when combined with specific
    evidence such as  an  individualised  printout,  to  be  sufficient  to
    discharge the burden of deception.

 7. The representatives were in agreement  that  I  should  set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal, and in light of the extensive fact-
    finding exercise that remained outstanding,  remit  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal De Novo.



Decision

 8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is flawed by legal error and  I
    set it aside. The matter is remitted to the first-tier tribunal.





Signed            E. Davidge            Date 26 October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge


