
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/49758/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 February 2016                   |On 24 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                       najeem rotimi borokinni-adeosun
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Haywood, Counsel instructed by Rodman Pearce
                    Solicitors Ltd
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal brought  in  respect  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Kelly promulgated on 21 August 2015. It concerns a claim brought by the
    appellant, born in August 1970 and a citizen of Nigeria.  The claim  is
    in respect of a permanent residence card under  Regulation  15  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations of 2006.

2.   In a very careful decision the  judge  goes  through  the  Reasons  for
    Refusal  Letter,  they  being  that  the  appellant  had  not  provided
    sufficient evidence to  show  that  he  met  all  the  requirements  of
    Regulation 10(5). At the hearing, and this is  perhaps  with  hindsight
    regrettable, there was  no  attendance  on  behalf  of  the  respondent
    Secretary of State.  The representative then acting for  the  appellant
    took the view that he did not  wish  to  call  the  appellant  to  give
    evidence but instead wished to move immediately to closing submissions.
    This also was a mistake, and  recognised  as  such  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge, who indicated  that  she  would  be  assisted  by  oral
    testimony from the appellant. There is a  brief  paragraph  within  the
    decision in which the First-tier Tribunal Judge  sets  out  in  summary
    form the evidence that was given by the appellant.

3.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge correctly identified the requirements  of
    Regulation 10(5) and that  the  material  date  for  carrying  out  the
    analysis would be the date when decree absolute was pronounced  by  the
    family court in Brentford, namely July 2014.  The judge  did  the  best
    she could by dealing with the admittedly limited  documentation  before
    her. She indicated in paragraph 12, "I conclude that the documents  are
    insufficient on their own  to  establish  that  Ms  Tavares  was  self-
    employed at that date".  I should interpose that Ms Tavares was at  one
    stage the wife of the appellant and the appellant's claim is  parasitic
    upon her status.

4.   The judge then analysed the basis upon which Ms  Tavares  purported  to
    have paid tax in  relation  to  her  self-employed  earnings.   On  any
    account, even taken at its highest, Ms  Tavares'  claim  to  have  been
    involved in appropriate economic activity was speculative at best.   It
    would appear that  the  way  in  which  she  earned  a  living  was  by
    purchasing cheap or discounted goods and then  selling  them  on  at  a
    modest profit to her friends and acquaintances in this country  or,  in
    some instances, overseas.

5.   The judge then analysed what documentation there was  from  the  Inland
    Revenue and considered what, if anything,  was  being  earned  at  that
    time.  She concluded in a clear finding at  paragraph  16  that  "these
    figures are insufficient to establish that they reflect  genuine  self-
    employment activity as opposed to being engineered for the  purpose  of
    facilitating  either   her   own   or   the   appellant's   immigration
    applications".

6.   The judge then made comments as to  the  genuineness  or  otherwise  of
    certain documentation that was placed before her but went on to say  at
    paragraph 17 that even if the documents had been genuine  she  was  not
    satisfied  that  they  indicated  the  appropriate  level  of  economic
    activity and income  that  was  claimed.   The  judge's  conclusion  at
    paragraph 21 was that, if genuine, "the activity described is on such a
    small  scale  as  to  be  regarded  as  marginal  and   ancillary   and
    insufficient to make Ms Tavares a qualified person for the purposes  of
    Regulation 6".

7.   It was for those reasons that the judge came  to  the  conclusion  that
    the appellant had not established  that  he  met  the  requirements  of
    Regulation 1(5)(b) in order to show  he  was  residing  in  the  United
    Kingdom at the date of the termination of his marriage and he  retained
    a right of residence when he and Ms Tavares were divorced.

8.   It seems to be common ground that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was
    faced with a very difficult task in the light of (a) the paucity of the
    evidence and (b) the fact that  the  respondent  was  not  represented.
    Criticism was made of the First-tier Tribunal Judge for approaching the
    matter in a manner inconsistent with the terms of the  refusal  letter.
    I am not convinced that that is  a  legitimate  complaint  because  the
    refusal letter was couched in much broader terms than the  limited  way
    claimed on behalf of the appellant.

7.   However, I have had shown to me today (and  the  Secretary  of  State's
    representative has had a very  brief  opportunity  of  considering  it)
    documentation presented by  the  appellant  which  seems  to  have  its
    origins in the HMRC. This  potentially  indicates  that  the  level  of
    economic activity of Ms Tavares was somewhat more than  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge understandably concluded was the case.

8.   I am narrowly persuaded that there  may  well  be  sufficient  material
    before me to indicate  that  there  was  an  error  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's approach in that she took a view on the  documentation
    which, as we now know from subsequent documentation, may not have  been
    open to her.  Without a full examination of this new  documentation  it
    is impossible to come to any concluded view. Nonetheless, the interests
    of justice require that this matter is looked at afresh even  though  a
    review of the matter could lead to exactly the same disposal as before.

9.   Therefore, I allow this appeal and remit the  matter  to  be  heard  de
    novo by a First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  at  which  time  the  additional
    documentation which has been placed before the Upper Tribunal today can
    be given the level of careful scrutiny which it undoubtedly deserves in
    the  context  of  testimony  from  the  appellant  tested   in   cross-
    examination.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed. Matter remitted to First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Mark Hill     Date 20 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC
