
[pic]
IAC-AH-pc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/49776/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 16 July 2014                                 |On 21 October 2014         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                 Nagina Bibi
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs E Brooksbank, Henry Hyams & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Nagina Bibi, was born on  25  December  1988  and  is  a
    female citizen of Pakistan.  On 7 November 2013, a decision was made to
    refuse the appellant indefinite leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom
    as the spouse of a person settled in  this  country  (Yasir  Mair,  the
    appellant's  husband).   The  appellant  appealed  to  the   First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Agnew) which, in  a  determination  promulgated  on  19
    March 2014, dismissed the appeal.   The  appellant  now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant was required to satisfy the provisions of  paragraph  287
    of the Immigration Rules:


    287. (a) The requirements for indefinite leave to remain for the spouse
    or civil partner of a person present and settled in the United Kingdom
    are that:
    (i) (a) the applicant was admitted to the United Kingdom for a period
    not exceeding 27 months or given an extension of stay for a period of 2
    years in accordance with paragraphs 281 to 286 of these Rules and has
    completed a period of 2 years as the spouse or civil partner of a
    person present and settled in the United Kingdom; or
    __(b) the applicant was admitted to the United Kingdom for a period not
    exceeding 27 months or given an extension of stay for a period of 2
    years in accordance with paragraphs 295AA to 295F of these Rules and
    during that period married or formed a civil partnership with the
    person whom he or she was admitted or granted an extension of stay to
    join and has completed a period of 2 years as the unmarried or same-sex
    partner and then the spouse or civil partner of a person present and
    settled in the United Kingdom; or
    __(c) was admitted to the United Kingdom in accordance with leave
    granted under paragraph 282(c) of these rules; and
    __(d) the applicant was admitted to the UK or given an extension of
    stay as the spouse or civil partner of a Relevant Points Based System
    Migrant; and then obtained an extension of stay under paragraphs 281 to
    286 of these Rules and has completed a period of 2 years as the spouse
    or civil partner of the person who is now present and settled here; or
    __(e) the applicant was admitted to the UK or given an extension of
    stay as the unmarried or same-sex partner of a Relevant Points Based
    System Migrant; and during that period married or formed a civil
    partnership with the person whom he or she was admitted or granted an
    extension of stay to join and has completed a period of 2 years as the
    unmarried or same-sex partner and then the spouse or civil partner of
    the person who is now present and settled in the UK; or
    __(f) the applicant was admitted into the UK in accordance with
    paragraph 319L and has completed a period of 2 years limited leave as
    the spouse or civil partner of a refugee or beneficiary of humanitarian
    protection who is now present and settled in the UK or as the spouse or
    civil partner of a former refugee or beneficiary of humanitarian
    protection who is now a British Citizen.
    (ii) the applicant is still the spouse or civil partner of the person
    he or she was admitted or granted an extension of stay to join and the
    marriage or civil partnership is subsisting; and
    (iii) each of the parties intends to live permanently with the other as
    his or her spouse or civil partner; and
    (iv) there will be adequate accommodation for the parties and any
    dependants without recourse to public funds in accommodation which they
    own or occupy exclusively; and
    (v) the parties will be able to maintain themselves and any dependants
    adequately without recourse to public funds; and
    (vi) the applicant has demonstrated sufficient knowledge of the English
    language and sufficient knowledge about life in the United Kingdom, in
    accordance with Appendix KoLL; and
    (vii) the applicant does not fall for refusal under the general grounds
for refusal.
    (b) The requirements for indefinite leave to remain for the bereaved
    spouse or civil partner of a person who was present and settled in the
    United Kingdom are that:
    (i) (a) the applicant was admitted to the United Kingdom for a period
    not exceeding 27 months or given an extension of stay for a period of 2
    years as the spouse or civil partner of a person present and settled in
    the United Kingdom in accordance with paragraphs 281 to 286 of these
    Rules; or;
    __(b) the applicant was admitted to the United Kingdom for a period not
    exceeding 27 months or given an extension of stay for a period of 2
    years as the unmarried or same-sex partner of a person present and
    settled in the United Kingdom in accordance with paragraphs 295AA to
    295F of these Rules and during that period married or formed a civil
    partnership with the person whom he or she was admitted or granted an
    extension of stay to join; and
    (ii) the person whom the applicant was admitted or granted an extension
    of stay to join died during that period; and
    (iii) the applicant was still the spouse or civil partner of the person
    he or she was admitted or granted an extension of stay to join at the
    time of the death; and
    (iv) each of the parties intended to live permanently with the other as
    his or her spouse or civil partner and the marriage or civil
    partnership was subsisting at the time of the death; and
    (v) the applicant does not fall for refusal under the general grounds
for refusal.

    The  judge  found  [7]  that  the  appellant   had   "established   the
    requirements of paragraph 287A(ii) and (iii)."  He also found [8]  that
    there would be adequate accommodation.  The remaining issue was whether
    the appellant and the sponsor would be able to maintain themselves  and
    any dependants adequately without recourse to public funds.  The  judge
    was not satisfied that the appellant was able to meet the  requirements
    of paragraph 287(a)(v).  The grounds of appeal challenge that  finding.
    The grounds acknowledge that the judge at no point in her determination
    used the word "forgery" but the appellant submits that the  judge  had,
    in effect, found that documents supplied by the sponsor had been false.
     It is submitted that the judge's findings are  not  available  to  her
    given that the respondent had not submitted  that  the  documents  were
    forgeries [21].  Had an allegation of  forgery  been  advanced  by  the
    Secretary  of  State,  the  appropriate  course  would  have  been   an
    adjournment of the hearing to enable the parties to  supply  additional
    evidence and for the Secretary of State, at an  adjourned  hearing,  to
    discharge the burden of  proving  that  the  sponsor's  documents  were
    forgeries.

 3. In her oral submissions, Mrs Brooksbank relied  upon  the  grounds.   I
    find that this is not a case where the judge has, in effect, introduced
    an allegation of forgery into proceedings where no such allegation  had
    been made by the Secretary  of  State.   Indeed,  the  judge  was  very
    careful in the language which she has used, in particular at [21]:

         "... [Mrs Brooksbank] submitted that the  documents  [submitted  by
         the sponsor] had not been challenged  and  had  been  issued  by  a
         reputable company.  I agree that the respondent has not  stated  in
         the refusal letter that  the  documents  are  forgeries.   That  is
         because  they  were  not,  for  some  reason,   lodged   with   the
         application.  Mr [Hunt Jackson - the Presenting  Officer]  did  not
         submit that they were forgeries.  Nevertheless he did  submit  that
         the bank statements did not reflect anything like what  is  claimed
         Mr Amir earns or pays into his bank account.  Whilst the company is
         no doubt reputable I am surprised that the salary is paid in  cash.
         It is not helpful the letter has emanated not from the head  office
         of the company but from  a  particular  branch  or  that  it  is  a
         photocopy with the position of the  writer  holds  in  the  company
         identified (sic)."

    Later, at [23], the judge wrote:

         "I find that there has been an attempt to mislead  the  immigration
         authorities and this Tribunal as to the income of Mr Amir.   It  is
         not  for  me  to  speculate  what  income  he  actually  gets  from
         employment, if any, or from what source.  I simply find it has  not
         been established that he earns the income he claims from the source
         he claims."

    Mrs Brooksbank submitted that, in  the  absence  of  an  allegation  of
    forgery, the Secretary of State and the First-tier Tribunal should have
    accepted the documents of the sponsor as  genuine  and  as  capable  of
    proving that the sponsor earned the income which he claimed to earn.  I
    do not accept that the judge was effectively compelled  to  accept  the
    documents as reliable of the sponsor's earnings in  the  absence  of  a
    forgery allegation.  The judge had  to  weigh  the  evidence  and  make
    findings accordingly.  Throughout the determination, it is  clear  that
    she was aware that the burden of proof in  the  appeal  rested  on  the
    appellant.  The judge found (giving adequate reasons for  the  finding)
    that the appellant had simply failed to discharge the burden of proving
    to the necessary standard that  she  and  the  sponsor  could  maintain
    themselves without recourse to public funds.   The  judge  plainly  had
    concerns regarding the documentary evidence submitted  by  the  sponsor
    and it was open to  her  to  attach  little  weight  to  that  evidence
    notwithstanding the fact that no allegation of forgery had been  raised
    by the respondent.  In short, it was open to the judge to find that the
    documents did not "reflect the true circumstances" [22].

 4. I find that the judge has not erred in law such that her  determination
    falls to be set aside.  Accordingly, this appeal is dismissed.

DECISION

 5. This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 10 September 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

