
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/49647/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 10 September 2015                 |On 16 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                         NUNO MIGUEL MENDES MOREIRA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Nuno Miguel Mendes Moreira, the appellant, is a national  of  Portugal.
    He has been in the United Kingdom since 2010  or  2011.   He  has  been
    convicted of an offence of facilitating  a  breach  of  United  Kingdom
    Immigration Law and sentenced to a term of imprisonment of  24  months.
    The Secretary of State made a decision to deport  him.   That  decision
    was served on him apparently on 4 October 2014 at which time he was, as
    we understand it, in detention.  A notice of appeal to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was put in, many weeks out of time, on 4 December 2014.   Time
    was extended, for  reasons  that  are  wholly  unclear,  by  Judge  NMK
    Lawrence on 19 January 2015.  There  has  been  no  challenge  to  that
    decision and it follows that the appellant has a pending appeal  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. It is an appeal against what is formally an EEA decision; and, although
    EEA appeals are not suspensive,  Regulation  24AA  of  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (as amended) applies to them.
     The effect of that Regulation  is  that  it  prevents  an  appellant's
    removal during the appeal process unless the case  is  certified  under
    that Regulation, as  one  to  which  paragraphs  (2)  and  (3)  of  the
    Regulation apply.  A certificate can be issued under  those  paragraphs
    if the Secretary of State considers that the removal of an appellant to
    the country to which it is proposed to remove him would not be unlawful
    under s.6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 as a breach of  anybody's  human
    rights.  Paragraph (3) of the Regulation gives an example.

 3. In the present case the appellant's case  has  been  certified  and  it
    follows that the fact  that  he  has  appealed  does  not  prevent  his
    removal.  Paragraph (4) of Regulation 24AA is as follows:

         "If P applies to the appropriate  court  or  tribunal  (whether  by
         means of judicial review or otherwise)  for  an  interim  order  to
         suspend enforcement of the removal decision, P may not  be  removed
         from the United Kingdom until such time  as  the  decision  on  the
         interim order has been taken, except -

               a) where the  expulsion  decision  is  based  on  a  previous
                  judicial decision;

               b) where P has had previous access to judicial review; or

               c) where the removal decision is based on imperative  grounds
                  of public security."

 4. On 30 December 2014 the appellant's solicitor, Pasha Immigration, wrote
    to the Upper Tribunal asking for an order  cancelling  the  appellant's
    deportation which was then due to take place  the  following  day.   In
    response, Judge Rintoul of the Upper Tribunal made  a  decision  on  31
    December.  The decision  is  headed  "Upper  Tribunal  Immigration  and
    Asylum  Chamber"  and   the   number   of   the   appellant's   appeal,
    IA/49647/2014; the heading continues by giving the status of the  judge
    as an Upper Tribunal Judge.  The decision sets out  Regulation  24AA(4)
    and continues as follows:

         "I am persuaded that the  letter  of  30  December  2014  from  the
         appellant's  representatives,  Pasha  Immigration,  requesting   an
         emergency injunction to cancel the  deportation  of  the  appellant
         today is, in effect, for the  purposes  of  regulation  24AA(4)  an
         application for an interim order  to  suspend  enforcement  of  the
         removal decision.  I am satisfied also that none of  sub-paragraphs
         (a) to (c) apply, and that accordingly, the appellant  may  not  be
         removed from the United Kingdom until a decision on the application
         is made, and that  pursuant  to  the  powers  given  to  the  Upper
         Tribunal that it has the power to make such an order.

         The interim application will now be  listed  for  hearing,  in  the
         Upper Tribunal.  Directions for that hearing will be issued in  due
         course,  but  it  is  expected  that  the  respondent  wish  to  be
         represented by Counsel and the Treasury Solicitors.




         SUMMARY OF DECISION

         The appellant is not to be removed from the  United  Kingdom  until
         further order

         Signed

         Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul."

 5. The Government Legal Department, on behalf of the Secretary  of  State,
    has enquired whether that order has any effect or whether the Secretary
    of State may, despite it, proceed to the  appellant's  removal.   There
    have been some delays in dealing with that request but it was  arranged
    to be listed before us today at 2 o'clock.   Both  parties  were  given
    notice of the hearing and notice was also subsequently sent  indicating
    the areas which this hearing would deal  with.   The  Government  Legal
    Department is not here.  Mr Clarke, who does not have the  government's
    file, has done his best to master the issues.  There is  no  appearance
    by or on behalf of the appellant and there has been no indication of  a
    change of representative.  We have considered whether to proceed in the
    absence of the appellant.  It appears to us that although the matter is
    of a little complexity, there is simply no question at all  as  to  the
    proper outcome of the query raised by the Government Legal Department's
    letter and we have therefore proceeded in the absence of the  appellant
    or his representative and with the limited assistance  that  Mr  Clarke
    has been able to give us.

 6. The position is as follows.  First, this Tribunal, the Upper  Tribunal,
    has jurisdiction (a) in appeals, if there  is  an  appeal  against  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal and  (b)  in  immigration  judicial
    reviews.  In each case there are requirements as  to  permission.   The
    Upper Tribunal has no jurisdiction simply to  intervene  in  an  appeal
    pending before the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  make  an  order  on  it.
    Secondly, the First-tier Tribunal has no power to make an interim order
    preventing the Secretary of State from removing an appellant  from  the
    United Kingdom.  Thirdly, Regulation 24AA(4) gives, of itself, no power
    to anybody to make an interim order; it merely describes the effect, if
    an application for such an order is made to the  appropriate  court  or
    tribunal.  We see nothing in that  Regulation  or  anything  else  that
    might lead us to  a  conclusion  that  the  application  to  which  the
    Regulation refers is anything other than an ordinary application for  a
    stay on removal.  Such an application is  made  by  means  of  judicial
    review either in the Upper Tribunal or in the High Court, depending  on
    the circumstances.  No such application has  ever  been  made  in  this
    case.

 7. It follows that Judge Rintoul had no power to make the order  he  made.
    The Upper Tribunal has no jurisdiction at all  in  this  case  and  if,
    despite the addressing of the solicitor's letter and the heading of the
    decision it is seen as a decision of the First-tier Tribunal,  then  it
    is a decision by a body which had no jurisdiction to grant  a  stay  on
    removal.  There was nothing that could  properly  be  described  as  an
    application to the appropriate court  or  tribunal  and  so  Regulation
    24AA(4) did not apply.

 8. The question therefore  is  what  to  do  now.   The  Government  Legal
    Department very properly have not taken the attitude that an order made
    without any jurisdiction should  be  ignored.   We  therefore  consider
    whether we have power to set aside the order.  Upper Tribunal  Rule  43
    empowers the Upper Tribunal to set aside a decision which  disposes  of
    proceedings; this order does not purport to dispose of any proceedings.
      By s. 25(2)(c) of the Tribunals Courts and Enforcement Act  2007  the
    Upper Tribunal has in judicial review proceedings  the  powers  of  the
    High Court in relation to (a) the attendance and examination  of  which
    has been the production and inspection of  documents  and  (c)  of  all
    other matters incidental to the Upper Tribunal's functions.  It appears
    to us that the determination of whether the Tribunal  had  jurisdiction
    to make a particular order is a matter incidental to its functions  but
    on its face, as distinct from  its  apparent  effect,  Judge  Rintoul's
    decision is not a decision in judicial review proceedings.  By s.  3(5)
    of the same act, however, the Upper Tribunal is  a  Superior  Court  of
    Record and so, subject of course to any statutory restriction including
    the rule-making powers of the Tribunal Procedure Committee,  the  Upper
    Tribunal has power to regulate its own procedure.  That power  includes
    the power to set aside its own decisions: see Akewashula v SSHD  [1999]
    Imm AR 594 at 600.

 9. In the circumstances, it appears to us that we have jurisdiction to set
    aside Judge Rintoul's order as made without jurisdiction, and we do so.
     It follows that, at the present time, the Secretary of  State  is  not
    inhibited from removing the appellant from the United Kingdom.


                                                                       [pic]

                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                     Date: 14 September 2015
