
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/49134/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |            Decision & Reasons      |
|                                         |Promulgated                         |
|On 26 November 2015                      |            On 8 December 2015      |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             mrs barbara tuffour
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms E Lagunju, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is a respondent's appeal but  I  shall  henceforth  refer  to  the
    parties in the original terms detailed in the decision of Judge of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Dickson following a consideration by him on  papers
    of this appeal in a decision promulgated on 24 February 2015.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana who on 10  September  2014  applied
    through her representatives for a residence card under Regulation 17 of
    the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006.    The
    respondent refused her application in  a  decision  dated  22  November
    2014.

 3. Following consideration of her appeal on papers Judge  Dickson  allowed
    her appeal.

 4. The respondent sought permission to appeal which was granted  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Gleeson on 24 June 2015.  Her reasons for so doing were:-



         "1.  The Secretary of State seeks permission to appeal against  the
             decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Dickson, who allowed the
             appellant's appeal against her decision to refuse her  an  EEA
             residence card as the spouse of a French citizen  said  to  be
             exercising Treaty rights in the United  Kingdom,  pursuant  to
             Regulation 17 of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
             Regulations 2006 (as amended).

         2.   The appellant had also appealed under Article 8 ECHR,  arguing
             that the interference with her family and private life  rights
             was unlawful; the First-tier Tribunal Judge did  not  consider
             it necessary to make a decision on Article  8  since  the  EEA
             Regulations appeal was allowed outright.

         3.   The application was based on a proxy marriage in Ghana between
             the appellant and her French spouse.  The respondent  did  not
             accept that the proxy marriage had  been  properly  registered
             according to  the  Ghanaian  Customary  Marriage  and  Divorce
             (Registration) Law 1985 or under Article 146-1 of  the  French
             Civil code, which provides that even where  a  French  citizen
             contracts a marriage in a foreign country,  physical  presence
             is required for it to be valid.  The respondent also  did  not
             accept that the marriage was a genuine one.

         4.   The appellant asked for the appeal to  be  considered  on  the
             papers and provided further  extracts  from  the  Code  Civil.
             First-tier Tribunal Judge Dickson accepted, having  regard  to
             Article 170 of the French Code Civil, that  the  marriage  was
             validly contracted and that  therefore  the  appellant  was  a
             family member of an  EEA  citizen.   He  allowed  the  appeal,
             noting that it was necessary to make any decision in  relation
             to the asserted breach of Article 8 ECHR.

         5.   The Secretary of State applied to the First-tier Tribunal  for
             permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  First-tier  Judge
             Osborne refused the first application, because she  considered
             that the decision made by the First-tier Tribunal was open  to
             it on the French law evidence before it.

         6.   The respondent renews her application to the  Upper  Tribunal.
             The proposed grounds of appeal on the second application were,
             in particular,  that  in  refusing  permission,  the  Tribunal
             misdirected  itself  by  failing  to  consider  the   Judicial
             headnote in Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law) [2014]  UKUT  24
             (IAC).  It is right that the Judge did not direct  himself  by
             reference to Kareem, but having regard to that  decision,  and
             to the decision of the Upper Tribunal in TA and Others (Kareem
             explained) Ghana [2014] UKUT 316 (IAC) that ground  of  appeal
             is arguable.

         7.   The respondent also notes that the First-tier  Tribunal  cited
             JO (Uganda) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
             [2010] EWCA Civ 10, a decision  on  Article  8  ECHR.   It  is
             unclear what the relevance is of that decision to  the  issues
             in this appeal.

         8.   The question for the Upper Tribunal when considering error  of
             law is whether the French Code Civil as it stood at  the  date
             of decision permitted the celebration  in  Ghana  of  a  proxy
             marriage.  Article 146-1 is in plain terms: a  French  citizen
             may not contract  a  marriage  overseas  with  another  French
             citizen or with an alien unless they are  physically  present.
             Expert evidence  will  be  required  to  clarify  whether  the
             provision of Article 170 that a marriage contracted abroad  is
             valid where it is celebrated in the forms used in the  country
             of marriage varies the absolute terms of Article 146-1 or is a
             gloss thereon.  The attention of the parties is drawn  to  the
             amendment to the relevant  article  of  the  Code  Civil  (now
             appearing as Article 170-1) by Loi No 2006-1376, in force from
             1 March 2007.

         9.   Permission to appeal is granted."

 5. Thus the appeal came before me today.

 6. Ms Lagunju at the outset of the  hearing  conceded  that  there  was  a
    material error of law within the judge's decision.  I  was  invited  by
    both her and Mr Kandola to remit this appeal by consent to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing.

 7. They both contended that the judge had materially erred in  failing  to
    engage with all elements of this appeal and had  thereby  not  resolved
    the issues that were before him.  In particular  whether  there  was  a
    valid civil marriage, if not was there a valid proxy marriage according
    to French law and finally failure to deal with Regulation 8(5)  of  the
    above-mentioned EEA Regulations.

 8. I share the analysis of the two advocates before me.

 9. For the above-mentioned reasons I find that the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal contains material errors of law and has to be  set  aside
    in its entirety.  All parties were agreed that, in  the  circumstances,
    it was appropriate for the appeal to be remitted and that  all  matters
    be determined afresh by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   In  view  of  the
    appellant's address I was asked for this matter to proceed by way of  a
    hearing at Taylor House, London.

Notice of Decision

The making of a decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of
an error on a point of law.  The decision  is  set  aside.   The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, to be dealt with  afresh,  pursuant  to
Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Statement 7.2(b), before any judge aside from Judge Dickson.

Directions

Any further documentary evidence relied upon by either  party  to  be  filed
and served upon the other party no later than fourteen  days  prior  to  the
date of hearing.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                              Date 30 November 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard


