
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/49450/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly       |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 30 September 2015                 |On 9 October 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between

                          NEVILLE ANTHONY WILLIAMS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Lang of Dar & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Mc Vitie Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this  appeal  but
    in order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in
    the First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the  Secretary  of  State
    against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Brunnen, promulgated on
    6 May 2015 which allowed the Appellant's appeal under the Rules against
    a refusal of leave to remain on the basis of  his  family  and  private
    life.

Background

 3. The Appellant was born on 6 August 1957 and is a national  of  Jamaica.
    The Appellant came to the United Kingdom as a visitor in 2001 and after
    his leave expired he remained and did not  regularise  his  status.  He
    married a British Citizen on 31 October 2013 and applied for  leave  to
    remain on 20 November 2013  and  his  application  was  refused  on  24
    December 2013.On 17 July 2014 he applied for a residence card and  this
    was refused. The application made on 21 November 2013 was  reconsidered
    and rejected on 21 November 2014 and a decision was made to remove  the
    Appellant.

 4. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons:

      a) In relation to EX.1 while it was accepted that the Appellant had  a
         genuine and subsisting relationship with his  wife  there  were  no
         insurmountable obstacles to them relocating to Jamaica.

      b) The Appellant could not  meet  the  private  life  requirements  of
         paragraph 276DE.

      c) There was no basis for a grant of leave outside the Rules.

The Judge's Decision

 5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Brunnen ("the Judge") allowed the appeal against the Respondent's
    decision on the basis that the Appellant met the requirements of  EX.1.
    The Judge

      a) Set out the law that was in issue identifying that he was  required
         to consider both EX.1 and the meaning of  insurmountable  obstacles
         as set out in EX.2.

      b) He identified that the basis of the Appellant's claim was that  his
         wife's medical condition amounted to insurmountable obstacles.

      c) The Judge set out those medical problems in detail (paragraph 14  )
         which were based medical reports including a  GP  letter  and  oral
         evidence.

      d) He accepted the Appellant's assertion that his wife  would  not  be
         able to obtain the treatment she had received in the United Kingdom
         which is detailed in the GP letter were she  to  live  in  Jamaica.
         There  was  no  evidence  from  the  Respondent  to  counter   this
         assertion.

      e) Even if the treatment were available in  Jamaica  the  judge  found
         that  the  difficulties  of  living  in  Jamaica  in  her   current
         circumstances were simply too great. He accepted that this amounted
         to very significant difficulties that  would  entail  very  serious
         hardship.

 6. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing that the  Judge  failed  to  give
    adequate reasons as to why there were insurmountable obstacles  to  the
    Appellant and his wife continuing their family life in Jamaica.

 7.  The  Judge  failed  to  consider  section  117B  of  the   Nationality
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 8.  On 16 July 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Holmes  gave  permission  to
    appeal.

 9. At the hearing I heard submissions from Mr Mc Vitie on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent  that :

      a) He accepted that ground 2 was misconceived and as the Judge allowed
         the appeal under the Rules, under  EX.1,  he  was  not  obliged  to
         consider s117B.

      b) He questioned whether the  circumstances  described  by  the  Judge
         could amount to 'very serious hardship.'

      c) He relied on the case of Agyarko [2015] EWCA Civ 440 to argue  that
         the circumstances found by the Judge was not  enough  to  meet  the
         requirements of the law.

10. On behalf of the Appellant Mr Lang

      a) Relied on the rule 24 response.

      b) He pointed out that Aygarko post-dated the decision in this case.

      c) The Judge had clear medical evidence and the witness statements  of
         the Appellant and his wife on which his conclusions were based.

      d) The Judge also considered in the alternative the situation in which
         the treatment that the Appellant's wife was entitled to receive  in
         the UK was available in Jamaica.

11.  In reply Mr Mc Vitie on behalf of the Appellant submitted:

      a) A bare statement by the Appellant that the treatment in  issue  was
         not available in Jamaica was insufficient as the Appellant bore the
         burden of proof.

      b) The only objective evidence available was from the COIS that  there
         was such treatment available.

The Law

12.  Errors  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow  binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational  conclusions  on  facts  or  evaluation  or  giving
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

13. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail  to
    deal with every factual issue  under  argument.  Disagreement  with  an
    Immigrations Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of the evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law. Unless an Immigration  Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have  taken  no  account  of  evidence  that  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible. Nor is it necessary  to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration judge concludes that the story told is untrue.

Finding on Material Error

14. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made no material errors of law.

15. The only issue in this case was  whether  the  Judge  who  allowed  the
    appeal under EX.1 had given sufficient reasons for his finding that the
    Appellant met the requirements of the Rule.

16. At paragraphs 10  and  11  of  the  decision  the  Judge  set  out  the
    applicable law referring to both paragraph EX.1 and  2  .  Thus  it  is
    clear that he self  directed  himself  appropriately  both  as  to  the
    applicable law and at paragraph 13 as to the  burden  and  standard  of
    proof. There is no reference to Aygarko as it post dated the decision.

17. The Judge had before him witness statements from the Appellant and  his
    wife and medical evidence at pages  57-82  from  a  number  of  sources
    including the consultants who are currently  treating  the  Appellant's
    wife. The Judge had the benefit of hearing  of  hearing  evidence  from
    both the Appellant and his wife and made it plain that he found both of
    them to be credible witnesses.

18. The Judge correctly  identified  that  the  Appellant's  wife's  health
    problems  underpinned  their  claim  that  there  were   insurmountable
    obstacles to them enjoying family life together in Jamaica and analysed
    that evidence at paragraphs 17-25 of the decision.

19. I am satisfied that in the face of the generic information contained in
    the refusal letter that in essence Jamaica  has  a  functioning  health
    service the Judge  was  entitled  to  take  into  account  the  medical
    evidence as to the nature and extent of Mrs Williams problems  together
    with the evidence of the Appellant  and  was  entitled  to  prefer  the
    Appellant's evidence that the specific treatment required by  his  wife
    was unavailable in Jamaica.

20. However I am satisfied  that  the  Judge  nevertheless  considered  the
    alternative scenario that such treatment was available in paragraph 25.
    He gave a number of reasons why he found that the  circumstances  would
    amount to 'very significant difficulties that would entail very serious
    hardship' which is clearly the correct test to apply. He noted  against
    a background of specialist evidence that the risks of surgery  included
    death, nerve damage with subsequent paralysis, incontinence and  sexual
    dysfunction that Mrs Williams had lived all  her  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom and is now 51 years old; she has  an  established  relationship
    with her doctor and consultant and requires surgery; she would have  no
    support in Jamaica apart from her husband. The weight he gave to  those
    factors was a matter for him and I am satisfied that it was open to him
    to conclude that these facts reached the threshold set out in EX.2.

21. I remind myself of what was said in  Shizad  (sufficiency  of  reasons:
    set aside) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 85 (IAC) about the  requirement  for
    sufficient reasons to  be  given  in  a  decision  in  headnote  (1)  :
    "Although there is a legal duty to give  a  brief  explanation  of  the
    conclusions on the central issue on  which  an  appeal  is  determined,
    those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole  makes
    sense, having regard to the material accepted by the judge."

22. I was therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read as a
    whole set out findings that were sustainable and sufficiently  detailed
    and based on cogent reasoning. I  find  that  the  reasons  given  were
    adequate and the Respondent cannot be in any doubt about why the appeal
    was allowed.

CONCLUSION

23. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established and  that
    the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

24. The appeal is dismissed.


Signed      Date 7.10.2015
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

