
IAC-FH-NL-V2
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/49932/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 5 March 2015                              |On 13 May 2015                |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE COLLINS
                  SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN


                                   Between

                                     JS
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss M Attcha, Solicitor instructed by Ebraham
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This appeal has a very unfortunate history.  The appellant is  the  son
    of parents from India who  came  to  this  country  and  remained  here
    unlawfully.  We do not need to go into the full details: suffice it  to
    say that their claims were considered in terms of Article  8  and  were
    dealt with in considerable detail by First-tier Tribunal Judge Rose  in
    November 2013.  In the course of that decision he had to  consider  the
    position of the present appellant, their child.  I will refer to him as
    their child; in fact the father is the stepfather, the  natural  father
    not being on the scene at all.

2.   Judge Rose had to consider and did consider in  detail  Section  55  of
    the 2009 Act and what the  best  interests  of  the  child  were.   His
    decision ante-dated the 2014 Act so he did not need to go into  Section
    117B of that Act which affects the position in relation  to  Article  8
    and indirectly also the position of children who are to  be  considered
    under Section 55.  Judge Rose went through the  matter  in  detail  and
    what he concluded, having referred to all  material  evidence  and  the
    relevant authorities was as follows, and it is in paragraph 48  of  the
    determination:

         "His best interests lie in remaining with his mother and the second
         appellant (the stepfather).  The appellants are Indian citizens and
         have continuing family and linguistic ties with India.  I  have  no
         reason  to  find  that  their  cultural  and  religious  ties  have
         diminished significantly.  I have no reason to find that Jay  is  a
         British citizen or that he would not  be  permitted  to  remain  in
         India with  the  appellants  as  an  Indian  national.   He  speaks
         Gujarati and has mixed with the  Indian  community  in  the  United
         Kingdom.  He is progressing well at school in the UK but it was not
         contended that he would not be able to continue  his  education  in
         India, and it is likely that he would be able to adapt and to  make
         new friends there.  He has now been living in the UK for more  than
         seven years but his place of residence while he was a  baby  and  a
         very young child  are  of  less  importance  than  later  years  in
         assessing his best interests.  There was no evidence that he  would
         be disadvantaged in India as a consequence of not being the  second
         appellant's natural son."

3.   The claims by the  parents  were  rejected.   As  we  have  said  their
    immigration history is exceedingly  poor  so  we  are  faced  with  the
    position so far as this appeal is concerned  with  the  knowledge  that
    both parents have no leave to remain and have failed in  their  appeals
    against removal.  It cannot conceivably be suggested that it  would  be
    in the child's  interest  that  he  should  remain  here  on  his  own.
    Equally, as we have said and shown, Judge Rose went into the matter  in
    detail and concluded that it was not  in  the  best  interests  of  the
    present appellant that he should be able to remain so that his parents'
    removal would be prevented.

4.   He was made subject of a Section 10  notice  and  Miss  Attcha  on  his
    behalf has submitted that it was necessary in those  circumstances  for
    him to make a separate appeal.  That clearly was not necessary  because
    if she had applied her mind properly to the situation  following  Judge
    Rose's decision which was not overturned then she would have been bound
    to recognise and to advise the parents that there was no chance that an
    appeal by this appellant could succeed.  Unfortunately,  not  only  did
    she not give that advice which she ought to have given,  but  persisted
    in an appeal.  It was a  further  unfortunate  matter  that  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Monro before whom this appeal came  decided  on  19  May
    last year that there was no valid appeal  because  there  had  been  no
    application by this appellant under human rights  and  therefore  there
    was no right to an in-country appeal and so he  did  not  consider  the
    merits of the appeal.  It is perhaps exceedingly  unfortunate  that  he
    did not make it clear that there was indeed no merit in the appeal  and
    so even if there had been a right of appeal it would have been bound to
    have been dismissed.  However that did not happen.  We should say  that
    the mother had not made an independent human rights application but  it
    was accepted that she had an in-country right of appeal.

5.   In due course the matter came before this Tribunal.  Mr  Justice  Davis
    and Upper Tier Tribunal Judge Gill decided in October of last year that
    Judge Monro had been wrong to take the  view  that  there  was  no  in-
    country right of appeal.   That  it  seems  to  us  was  an  inevitable
    decision because a minor cannot be expected to make his own application
    in circumstances such as this, particularly a minor of the age of  this
    appellant, and in those circumstances any application  will  inevitably
    be made by another and in this case by  the  obvious  other,  namely  a
    parent, and as we say in those circumstances we are not  in  the  least
    surprised that this Tribunal took the view that Judge  Monro  had  been
    wrong.  It was in our judgment unfortunate that  instead  of  directing
    that this appeal remain live the Tribunal did not decide then and there
    on the merits because it was clear in our judgment that there could  be
    no conceivable merit.  The Tribunal had before it the decision of Judge
    Rose and they referred to Devaseelan but they left open the possibility
    that there might be a  claim.   That  is  regrettable  because  it  has
    resulted in false hope for the family and further cost which should not
    have been incurred.  For the reasons we have given  it  is  clear  that
    this appeal is completely and utterly without merit.  As the  Secretary
    of State indicated in the  letter  of  14  January  2015  opposing  the
    appeal, it was considered that the determination of Judge Rose, in  the
    absence of evidence to the contrary,  was  definitive  of  the  factual
    matrix of the family's position.   There  is  no  evidence  which  goes
    against any finding made by  Judge  Rose.   We  have  dealt  with  this
    perhaps at  rather  greater  length  than  might  otherwise  have  been
    necessary because we are appalled at what has happened in this case and
    the conduct of the solicitor concerned.  This was an utterly  negligent
    approach  and  we  have  no  doubt  that  it  is  appropriate  in   the
    circumstances that a transcript of this  judgment  should  accompany  a
    report to the disciplinary body of the solicitors for them to take  any
    action that they consider appropriate.  Furthermore the solicitor  will
    appreciate that this means that there will be focus upon  her  and  her
    firm in relation to any other cases that are  brought  before  this  or
    indeed any Immigration Tribunal and care must be taken to  ensure  that
    nothing like this happens again.  Although we can  of  course  make  no
    order to this effect we would express the hope that no money  is  taken
    from this family by this firm of solicitors in all  the  circumstances.
    As it is this appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed:       Dated: 13 May 2015

Mr Justice Collins
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal
