
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/49867/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 17 February 2016                      |On 4 April 2016                     |
|Prepared 17 February 2016                |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY

                                   Between

                               mr manu mathew
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Sreevalsalan, instructed by Legend Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Sreeraman, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant, a national of India, date of birth  22  September  1988,
    appealed against the Respondent's decision, dated 28 November  201,  to
    refuse leave to remain as a Tier 4 General (Student Migrant) under  the
    points-based system and to make removal directions under Section 47  of
    the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality  Act  2006.   His  appeal  came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Bowler who, on 8 July 2015,  dismissed
    the appeal with reference to the Immigration Rules and under Article  8
    of the ECHR but did not address the removal directions.

2.   Permission to appeal that decision was given by Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Mailer on 12 November 2015.

3.   The Respondent made a Rule 24 response on 17 December 2015.

4.   The grounds of appeal against  the  judge's  decision  [D]  essentially
    were directed  at  the  question  of  whether  the  judge  should  have
    investigated further and/or sought to establish whether the Immigration
    Officer's record of  interview  correctly  recorded  the  Appellant  as
    having said he worked for 30 hours per week; whereas subsequently or at
    the time the Appellant argued that he had  said  only  twenty  hours  a
    week.  A general issue of fairness was raised which, in  my  view,  was
    misplaced in relation to the format of the interview conducted  by  the
    Immigration Officer.  It is said that because the  Immigration  Officer
    should have investigated the issue of the number of  hours  worked  and
    perhaps other matters relating to the course  modules  completed.   The
    failure to do so by the Immigration Officer was said to be  unfair  and
    such unfairness tainted the judge's decision.

5.   The interview was carried out, on 17 November 2014,  of  the  Appellant
    ran to some 36  questions.   Of  those,  Mr  Sreevalsalan  particularly
    relied upon one part of an answer to question 29 in terms of the number
    of hours worked a week. He submitted that there was no other element of
    unreliability claimed by the Respondent.  Although I  note  before  the
    judge an issue was latterly raised  over  the  number  of  modules  the
    Appellant had undertaken but that was not an issue argued before me.

6.   Mr Sreevalsalan also relied on the decision of the Upper Tribunal in  a
    judicial review being a decision of the  President  in  Mushtaq  v  ECO
    Islamabad IJR [2015] UKUT 00224 (IAC).  From that case it is clear that
    the President of the Upper Tribunal  was  identifying  expectations  in
    relation to fairness which might arise in relation to ECO's  interviews
    bearing in mind  what  became  the  challenges  the  ECO  made  to  the
    reliability of that Appellant and his application.

7.   As a matter of general approach in interviews there was an  expectation
    of fairness but there was nothing on  the  face  of  the  interview  or
    points being taken about contradictions in the interview to  show  that
    the interview was being used as a tool to challenge the credibility  or
    reliability of the Appellant; as had been the case in the decision made
    by the ECO in Mushtaq.  Rather, the judge  identified  that  a  request
    contained in grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for sight  of
    the transcript had in  fact  been  provided.   The  Appellant  had  the
    opportunity to consider that matter with his representative and on  the
    face of it there was no unfairness in the  judge  proceeding  with  the
    hearing.

 8.  The judge went on to note that the Appellant gave  evidence  about  the
    interview in respect of the hours of work was disputed  and  the  judge
    returned to that issue in [D24] of the findings.  In the circumstances,
    the judge heard submissions from Mr Sreevalsalan as well  as  from  the
    Respondent.

9.   I do not accept, on the face of the documents provided, the  judge  was
    under an obligation to  resolve  the  issue  of  the  accuracy  of  the
    interview record because, quite simply, it is  impossible  to  see  how
    that could have been  effectively  conducted  at  the  time  but,  more
    importantly, there was no need to do so because the judge  was  alerted
    to the disputed matter and nevertheless went on to  make  the  findings
    that he did.

10.  I find that  there  is  no  procedural  unfairness  which  tainted  the
    judge's decision nor any arguable issue of unfairness  in  relation  to
    the conduct of the Immigration Officer's  interview.   I  can  find  no
    proper basis to show the judge made any arguable error of  law  in  his
    own right on the evidence received.

11.  It was said the judge was wrong in effect to  have  concluded  that  it
    was open to the Appellant to adduce evidence  at  the  hearing  of  the
    appeal concerning the number of hours he worked each week.   It  seemed
    to me that when the point was taken in the Reasons for  Refusal  Letter
    or the Notice of Immigration  Decision,  it  was  always  open  to  the
    Appellant, by evidence, to challenge the issue of the number  of  hours
    that the Respondent referred to and to  show  by  way  of  payslips  or
    otherwise even to the extent of an employment  contract,  that  he  was
    only contracted to work twenty hours a week and no more.   I  have  not
    seen the employment contract which  has  still  not  been  produced.  I
    cannot tell whether or not the hours of  work  are  limited  to  twenty
    hours a week and  absent  a  letter  from  the  employer  or  employers
    confirming that the Appellant had only worked twenty hours a  week  and
    not more it was hard to see  what  other  conclusion  the  judge  could
    otherwise have come to.

12.     In my view there was no arguable error of law by  the  judge  making
    reference to the employment contract because even that he did not treat
    as effectively determinative of the hours of work  that  the  Appellant
    could have undertaken. Alerted to  the  issue  the  Appellant,  between
    November 2014 and the hearing in June 2015, had  ample  opportunity  to
    prepare and  present  evidence  touching  upon  it  and  also  had  the
    opportunity with such evidence to invite the Respondent  to  reconsider
    that basis of refusal.

13.  In any event, the judge also refused the matter by reference to  issues
    of whether or not the appellant was a genuine  student  and  the  judge
    gave reasons why he rejected the Appellant's claim.  Thus, there was  a
    further and separate basis for refusal.

14.  The judge noted that no submissions were made in relation to Article  8
    ECHR although it had been raised in the grounds of appeal.

15.  I have to say the judge did not consider whether or not there  was  any
    basis to look at Article 8 outside of the  Immigration  Rules  but  the
    judge's decision on that matter is not challenged.  For  these  reasons
    therefore I find the judge made no error of law.  The Original Tribunal
    decision stands.

16.  The appeal by the Appellant is dismissed.

NOTICE OF DECISION
The appeal is dismissed.
No anonymity direction was sought or necessary.
The appeal has failed no fee award can be made.



Signed                                  Date 20 March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

P.S. I regret the promulgation has been delayed du to the  case  file  being
    mis-filed.

