
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/49819/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Sheldon Court               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 4th July 2014                                |On 10th July 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS



                                   Between

                              MR Muhammad Irfan
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Richard Martin (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr Neville Smart (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge V Woolf promulgated on 7th February 2014, following a hearing  at
    Arnhem House on 6th February 2014.  In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal of  Muhammad  Irfan,  who  applied  for,  and  was
    subsequently granted, permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  and
    thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Pakistan, who was  born  on  12th
    August 1987.  He appealed against the decision of the Respondent  dated
    12th November  2013  to  remove  him  from  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    Appellant lodged an appeal with the Tribunal without Grounds of Appeal.
     The Notice of Appeal gave the Appellant's  address  as,  "The  McLaren
    Building, 46 The Priory,  Queensway,  Birmingham,  United  Kingdom,  B4
    7LR".  Directions were thereafter issued on 4th December 2013, and sent
    by post to him, at the address given, requiring the Appellant to submit
    his Grounds of Appeal to the  Tribunal  by  11th  December  2013.   The
    Appellant was put on notice that a failure to comply  would  result  in
    the appeal being dismissed without a hearing under  the  provisions  of
    Rule 15(2)(c) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure)  Rules
    2005.  The notice, however, was returned by post endorsed "not known at
    this address".

 3. It was in these circumstances,  that  the  matter  arose  before  Judge
    Woolf.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge applied Rule 56(2) of the 2005 Procedure Rules, which was  to
    the effect that, "until a party or representative notifies the Tribunal
    of a change of address, any documents served on him at the most  recent
    address which he has notified to the Tribunal shall be deemed  to  have
    been properly served on him" (see paragraph 1  of  the  determination).
    Since the Appellant had not notified the  Tribunal  of  the  change  of
    address, Judge Woolf went on to apply Rule 15(2)(c) of the  2005  Rules
    and to dismiss the  appeal  without  a  hearing.   On  14th  May  2014,
    permission to appeal was granted on the basis that  the  Appellant  had
    argued in his Grounds of Appeal, following the determination  of  Judge
    Woolf, that he did not receive any letters sent  out  by  the  Tribunal
    either directly or to his representative, and did not have  a  copy  of
    the determination.  That being so, permission to appeal was granted  on
    the basis that  there  may  have  been  procedural  unfairness  to  the
    Appellant.

The Hearing

 5. At the hearing before me on 4th July  2014,  Mr  Martin,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant, who  also  attended  court,  stated  that  the
    address of "The McLaren Building, The Priory," is actually the  address
    of barristers' chambers known as "Equity  Chambers".   It  is  not  the
    address of  the  Appellant  at  all.   However,  had  the  letter  been
    addressed to "Equity Chambers" on 4th December 2013, it was conceivable
    that it would have gone to lawyers who would then  have  been  able  to
    submit Grounds of Appeal.  Given that it went to the building as  such,
    which houses a number of other enterprises as well,  it  was  bound  to
    have been returned to the Tribunal unserved.  This is  the  reason  why
    the Appellant was unable to furnish the Grounds of  Appeal.   This  was
    the reason why nobody else was able to furnish the Grounds of Appeal on
    his  behalf.   Mr  Martin  directed  my   attention   to   the   recent
    determination of MM (unfairness; E & R) Sudan [2014] UKUT 00105,  where
    the judgement of Mr Justice McCloskey was  to  the  effect  that  where
    there was a defect or impropriety of a procedural nature in proceedings
    at first instance, the material error could lead to the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal being set aside.   This  was  especially  the  case
    where material evidence, through no fault of the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    was not considered, resulting in unfairness.

 6. For his part, Mr Smart submitted that he would have to  agree  with  Mr
    Richard Martin because neither he, on behalf of the  Home  Office,  nor
    the Appellant's representatives, actually had the original appeal form,
    so it was not clear who had been representing the Appellant.  In  fact,
    the Home Office  records  showed  that  no  one  was  representing  the
    Appellant.  On 28th August 2013, the Home Office had written  a  letter
    to the Appellant, but the Tribunal had clearly written  the  notice  to
    the wrong address.  In the circumstances, it was  accepted  that  there
    was unfairness to the Appellant.

Error of Law

 7. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside that decision.  My reasons are quite
    simply that the Appellant was not  sent  the  notice  by  the  Tribunal
    because it went to the wrong address, and that address  in  itself  was
    incomplete so that no one representing him could respond to the request
    from the Tribunal.  This has caused  a  procedural  unfairness  to  the
    Appellant.

Decision

 8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal.  I remit this matter back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in accordance with Practice Statement 7.2 so that  it  can  be
    determined de novo  by  a  judge  other  than  Mrs  V  Woolf.   I  give
    directions that the Appellant is to have seven days from  the  date  of
    promulgation  of  this  determination  in  which  to  file   full   and
    comprehensive Grounds of Appeal such as to  enable  his  appeal  to  be
    determined on the basis of the grounds submitted.  These  grounds  must
    be filed and served so that the Home Office also  has  a  copy  of  the
    grounds.

 9. No anonymity order is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 9th July 2014


