
                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/49384/2014
     IA/49399/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 27 September 2016                 |On 01 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey, President and
                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                                Ronke Balogun
                              Adenike Aderogba
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellants:    Dr V Onipede, instructed by London South Law
Chambers
For the respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Shape of the Appeal

 1. The Appellants, Ronke Balogun, date of birth 10 July 1982, and  Adenike
    Aderogba, date of birth 3 March  1988,  are  sisters  and  citizens  of
    Nigeria.  This is their  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal ("FtT") Judge Martins promulgated 15 January 2016,  dismissing
    their linked appeals against the decisions of the Secretary  of  State,
    dated 21 November  2014,  to  refuse  the  applications  made  by  each
    appellant on 1 September 2014 for an EEA  Residence  Card.   The  Judge
    heard the appeal on 10 September 2015.

 2. The applications were made on the basis  that  each  appellant  is  the
    sister and "extended family member" of their joint sponsor, Mr  Raymond
    Aderogba, a citizen of Ireland exercising Treaty rights in the  UK.  It
    is claimed that prior to coming to the UK, they were dependent  on  the
    sponsor and since arrival both have continued to reside with and remain
    dependent on him,  pursuant  to  regulations  8(2)  and  17(4)  of  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006, as amended.

 3. The matter  was  previously  before  the  FtT,  who,  in  its  decision
    promulgated on 29 April 2014, dismissed the appeal of  each  appellant.
    The appeal was subsequently remitted to the  FtT  to  be  made  afresh,
    giving rise to the further appeal hearing on 10 September 2015.

 4. On 19 July 2016, permission to appeal was granted on the basis that  it
    was arguable that the FtT's findings of fact were unsafe because of the
    substantial delay between the date of hearing and the  promulgation  of
    the decision, a period in excess of  four  months,  giving  rise  to  a
    legitimate concern as to whether the Appellants  had  received  a  fair
    determination of their appeal, it being suggested that the judge  could
    not be expected to have retained a proper level of recall of  the  oral
    evidence after such a delay. Reference was made to Mario  [1998]  ImmAR
    281, and Sambasivam [1999] 1ATRF 1999/0419/4.

 5.  Having  considered  all   documentary   evidence   adduced   and   the
    representations of the parties' respective representatives, the hearing
    was adjourned from 27 September 2016 on the following terms:

      a) The Appellant's written submissions relating  to  the  decision  in
         Sala [2016] UKUT 04711 (IAC) were to be  filed  and  served  by  04
         October 2016.

      b) The Respondent's response was to be filed and served by 11  October
         2016.

      c) Any necessary further direction would follow in the  discretion  of
         the Tribunal.

 6. Albeit they  were  filed  late,  the  Tribunal  has  now  received  the
    Appellants' written submissions and the Secretary of State's  response.
    Having considered the written submissions, the  Tribunal  is  satisfied
    that the matter can be disposed of  fairly  without  any  further  oral
    hearing.

The Right of Appeal Issue

 7. In the first instance and in the light of  the  considerations  of  the
    Upper Tribunal raised in Sala, we have to decide whether there was  any
    right of appeal to the FtT against the decision  of  the  Secretary  of
    State made in 2014 to refuse to issue the requested residence cards.

 8. The representatives of both parties accept that  should  this  Tribunal
    conclude that the FtT had no jurisdiction to hear the appeal, then  the
    substantive issue identified in the  grant  of  permission  to  appeal,
    namely delay in  promulgation  of  the  decision,  does  not  fall  for
    resolution.

 9. In  relation  to  the  right  of  appeal,  Dr  Onipede  points  to  the
    construction of regulation 26(3) and the Secretary of State's  decision
    letters, which advised each appellant,  "You  are  entitled  to  appeal
    against this decision under section 82 of the Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 and Regulation  26  of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006."

10. Dr Onipede further submits that Sala can be distinguished on the  basis
    that:

      a) Sala dealt  with  the  issue  of  a  'durable  relationship'  under
         regulation 8(5) whereas the present appeal  relates  to  dependency
         and/or membership of a household under regulation 8(2);

      b) Sala turned on whether there is a statutory right of appeal against
         the decision of the  Secretary  of  State  to  refuse  to  grant  a
         residence card and did not consider the question of  whether  there
         was an entitlement to the right of  appeal  under  the  Immigration
         Rules.

11. In substance, the argument appears  to  be  that  because  the  refusal
    decision stated that there is a right of appeal  against  the  decision
    both under the regulations and under section 82 of  the  2002  Act,  on
    grounds that the decision is not in  accordance  with  the  Immigration
    Rules, there is a right of appeal.

12. In reply for the Secretary of State, Mr Deller submits that:

      a) Sala applies to all "extended  family  members"  and  did  not  and
         cannot be construed so  as  to  distinguish  between  qualification
         under regulation 8(2) and regulation 8(5);

      b) Although the refusal decisions are headed  'Notice  of  Immigration
         Decision,' refer to section 82(1) and list the various  grounds  of
         appeal that were  then  available  arising  from  section  84,  the
         Secretary of State has taken no action capable of  constituting  an
         'immigration decision' of a type listed under section 82(2) as  was
         then in force;

      c)  The  applications  for  residence  cards  were  made   under   the
         Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006  and  refused  by   an   'EEA
         decision,' as defined in regulation 2;

      d) There was no application to  vary  leave  and  thus  there  was  no
         refusal to vary leave to remain as a result of which the Appellants
         had no leave to remain in the UK;

      e)  Further,  there  was  no  enforcement  decision.  As  the  refusal
         decisions stated, if  the  Appellants  fail  to  make  a  voluntary
         departure a separate decision may  be  made  at  a  later  date  to
         enforce removal and any such decision and appeal  rights  would  be
         notified separately;

      f) Accordingly, despite the wording of the  refusal  decisions,  there
         was no immigration decision within the  meaning  of  section  82(2)
         that would attract a right of appeal. An error of drafting  by  the
         executive cannot confer that which does not exist under statute.

13. We consider that there  is  no  distinction  to  be  drawn  between  an
    "extended family member" seeking to qualify under  regulation  8(2)  on
    the basis of dependency or household membership, and regulation 8(5) on
    the basis of being in a durable relationship. Regulation 17(4) draws no
    distinction between extended family members,  save  for  those  falling
    within regulation 7(3), which does not apply to  these  appellants.  We
    therefore reject Dr Onipede's first submission.

14. We also reject the submission that the decision  of  the  Secretary  of
    State was an immigration decision within the meaning of  section  82(2)
    of the 2002 Act, as was then in force. That  the  decision  was  headed
    'Notice of Immigration Decision,'  is  unfortunate,  but  neither  that
    error nor the erroneous wording of the decision suggesting  that  there
    was a right of appeal under the Immigration Rules can create a right of
    appeal where none exists. A right of appeal can be conferred by statute
    only.

15. Having carefully considered the other oral and written submissions,  we
    find for the following reasons that the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
    have jurisdiction to hear the appeal.

      a) On the same reasoning as in Sala, we conclude  that  regulation  26
         confers a right of appeal only against an 'EEA decision;'

      b) Regulation 2 defines an 'EEA decision' as, inter alia,  a  decision
         that "concerns ... a person's entitlement to be issued with or have
         renewed, or not to have  revoked,  a  ...  residence  card..."  The
         rationale of Sala is that on the wording of the definition of  'EEA
         decision' there is no 'entitlement' for an extended  family  member
         to be issued with a residence card;

      c) It follows from the wording of regulation 17(4), that the grant  of
         a residence card to an "extended family  member"  is  a  matter  of
         discretion  to  be  exercised  by  the  Secretary   of   State   on
         application, if the relevant EEA national is a qualified person, or
         has a permanent right of residence under regulation 15, and "in all
         the circumstances it appears to the Secretary of State  appropriate
         to issue the residence card." Regulation  17(5)  provides  that  in
         exercising  this  discretion  the  Secretary  of  State   "...shall
         undertake an extensive examination of the personal circumstances of
         the applicant and if he refuses the application shall give  reasons
         justifying the refusal unless this is contrary to the interests  of
         national  security.  The  requirement  to  undertake  an  extensive
         examination follows the wording of  article  3.2  of  the  Citizens
         Directive (2004/38/EC). As explained at [22] of Sala:

             "It has been accepted by the CJEU  that  the  rights  of  free
             movement and residence conferred upon EEA nationals and  their
             "family members" are not directly replicated in  the  case  of
             EFMs (see, SSHD v Rahman and others (Case C-83/11) [2013]  Imm
             AR  73).  A  Member  State's  obligations  are  limited,  only
             requiring it to "facilitate" entry and residence in accordance
             with national legislation founded on an extensive  examination
             of an individual's personal circumstances."

             Inevitably, such an examination can only be  conducted  within
             the exercise of discretion;

      d) If the Secretary of State refuses  or  neglects  to  undertake  the
         extensive examination or otherwise fails to exercise the discretion
         under  regulation  17(4)  reasonably,  the  appropriate  remedy  is
         Judicial Review and not an appeal under regulation 26;

      e) In reaching this conclusion, we have taken account of the fact that
         regulation 26(3) purports to restrict the  right  of  appeal  of  a
         person who claims to be the family member "or relative" of  an  EEA
         national unless he produces a passport and,  in  effect,  proof  of
         relationship, and that it has long been assumed  that  there  is  a
         right of appeal against a refusal to issue a residence card  to  an
         Extended Family Member. However, as stated in Sala, as regards  the
         sister provision under regulation 26(2A) in relation to those in  a
         'durable relationship,' such an amending provision (substituted  in
         2012) cannot grant a right of appeal where none  exists,  or  alter
         the definition of 'EEA decision' under regulation 2;

The Delay Issue

16. In relation to the primary issue and on which permission to appeal  was
    granted, that of the delay between the hearing and the promulgation  of
    the decision on 15 January 2016, we note that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    does not appear to have completed the drafting of the decision until 14
    January 2016. There is  no  explanation  in  the  case  file  for  this
    striking delay of over 4 months between the hearing and making  of  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal. However,  the  file  contains  the
    judge's very full note of all the oral evidence and the submissions  of
    the parties at the hearing.

17. In Sambasivam v Secretary of State IATRF 1999/0419/4, Potter LJ stated:

         "In cases of delay .... the matter  is  best  approached  from  the
         starting point, where important  issues  of  credibility  arise,  a
         delay of over three months between hearing and  determination  will
         merit remittal  for  rehearing  unless,  by  reason  of  particular
         circumstances, it  is  clear  that  the  eventual  outcome  of  the
         application, whether by the same or a different route must  be  the
         same." However, more recently, in Arusha and  Demushi  (deprivation
         of citizenship - delay) [2012] UKUT 80  (IAC)  the  Upper  Tribunal
         held that to establish that  a  delay  in  the  promulgation  of  a
         decision has led to an error of law it has to  be  shown  that  the
         decision was not safe and therefore unlawful.

18. There must be a nexus between the delay and the safety of the decision:
    see Secretary of State v RK (Algeria) [2007] EWCA Civ 868. In R (on the
    application of Ghorbani) [2004] EWHC 510 it was held that  where  there
    has been a delay the inference that something has been  overlooked  may
    be more readily drawn.

19. The grounds of the application for permission to appeal do not identify
    any specific error of fact in the decision of the FtT and, instead rely
    on the  suggestion  that  the  delay  is  contrary  to  the  overriding
    objective in the Tribunal Procedure Rules 2014, to  deal  with  a  case
    fairly and justly, including by avoiding delay, so  far  as  compatible
    with proper consideration of the issues.

20. As the Rule 24 response of the Secretary  of  State,  dated  11  August
    2016, points out,  the  decision  "contains  a  thorough  and  detailed
    assessment of both the documentary and oral evidence none of  which  is
    challenged in the grounds of appeal and there is no indication that, in
    this instance, the passage of time affected the outcome of the case."

21. Considering the decision of  the  FtT  in  light  of  the  delay,  with
    reference to the grounds of and grant  of  permission  to  appeal,  the
    submissions of the parties, the judge's record of proceedings, and  the
    decision itself, the Tribunal finds that the appellant  has  failed  to
    demonstrate that the delay in any of itself renders the decision unsafe
    or in any way unfair to the Appellants, other than by  the  unfortunate
    delay in receiving the outcome of his appeal.

22. In the circumstances,  even  if  the  Tribunal  found  that  there  was
    jurisdiction to entertain the appeal,  this  Tribunal  would  not  have
    found any material error of law  on  grounds  of  delay  sufficient  to
    require the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to be set aside.

Conclusion

23. It follows from the above that this Tribunal finds there is no right of
    appeal and thus no valid appeal to the Tribunal against  the  decisions
    of the Secretary of State, and that there was no  jurisdiction  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal to hear the appeal. To that extent the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal was in error of law.

24. The correct course of action is to set aside the decision  of  the  FtT
    and to substitute a finding that there is no valid  appeal  before  the
    Tribunal.

Decision

25. The making of the decision of the FtT did  involve  the  making  of  an
    error on a point of law such that the decision should be set aside.

                    We set aside the decision.

                    We re-make the decision by finding no  right  of  appeal
                    and no jurisdiction in the First-tier Tribunal  to  hear
                    the matter, and thus the matter must be dismissed.
                    [pic]


                    Signed
                    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                    Dated  01 November 2016

Anonymity

We have considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not  make  an  order.  Given  the  circumstances,  we  make  no
anonymity order.

Fee Award     Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of our decision, we have  considered  whether  to  make  a  fee
award.

We have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

We make no fee award.

Reasons: There is no valid appeal and thus there can be no fee award.


                    [pic]


                    Signed
                    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                    Dated  01 November 2016






