
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/49686/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 3rd June 2014                                |On 6th June 2013           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between


                            mr Aviel Shlomo levi
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     The Appellant and his Spouse attended
For the Respondent:    Miss Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant Mr Aviel Shlomo Levi date of birth 25th January 1987 is a
    citizen of Israel.

 2. I have considered whether any of the parties to the present proceedings
    requires the protection of an anonymity direction.  Taking  account  of
    all the circumstances I  do  not  consider  it  necessary  to  make  an
    anonymity direction.

 3. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the determination of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge S Aziz.  The judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal
    against the decision of  the  Respondent  to  refuse  the  Appellant  a
    residence card as a spouse of an EEA national exercising treaty rights.
     The judge heard the appeal on 25th February 2014 and the determination
    was promulgated on 6th March 2014.

 4. Leave to appeal was granted by  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Baird on 25th March 2014.  In essence the Grounds of Appeal submit that
    documentation was sent to the Tribunal specifically payslips to confirm
    that Mrs Naama Levi was in work and exercising treaty  rights.   It  is
    alleged that after the appeal was  lodged  but  prior  to  the  hearing
    documents were sent to the Tribunal confirming that  Mrs  Levi  was  in
    employment.  It is alleged that the judge failed to take  into  account
    those documents in assessing the appeal.

 5. I have checked the Tribunal's computers and it is correct to  say  that
    documentation was received  by  the  Tribunal  in  January  2014.   The
    documents seem to be payslips relating to Mrs Levi and her  employment.
    By reason of the fact that the appeal was first listed at Manchester to
    be dealt with on the papers  the  payslips  were  sent  to  Manchester.
    However the appeal had been transferred to be heard at Hatton Cross  on
    the papers.

 6. It does not appear that the payslips were put on the file and were  not
    part of the papers considered. Therefore in coming  to  a  decision  in
    this matter First-tier Tribunal Judge Aziz through no fault of his  did
    not have all the documentation submitted in support of the appeal.

 7. No criticism is made either of the Home Office or the Appellant.  It is
    merely a matter that through an administrative error the  documentation
    in evidence was not put before the judge.  In  the  circumstances  that
    constitutes a procedural error amounting to an error of  law.   In  the
    light of that the decision by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Aziz  cannot
    stand.

 8. The appeal therefore has to  be  re-determined  on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence that is currently before the Tribunal.

 9. I can by reason of the fact that this is an in-country appeal  relating
    to EEA rights take account of evidence up to the date of  the  hearing.
    I have before me payslips relating  to  the  employment  of  Mrs  Levi.
    Those payslips commenced on 13th November  and  continue  through  into
    April 2014.  There  is  also  a  letter  from  the  employers  and  the
    accountants for the employers confirming that Mrs Levi is  working  for
    the Deli and Dine Kosher Food Shop.

10. Today Mrs Levi has also produced a copy of her P60 to confirm that  she
    continues in employment with the Deli and Dine.  In the light  of  that
    the only issue before the Tribunal was whether  or  not  Mrs  Levi  was
    exercising treaty rights.  Mrs Levi is clearly exercising treaty rights
    as an EEA citizen.

11. Mrs Levi is an Austrian in the United Kingdom exercising treaty  rights
    and  working  in  the  United  Kingdom.   Accordingly  under  the   EEA
    Regulations 2003 she is entitled to have her  husband  with  her.   Her
    husband Mr Levi falls for consideration under Regulation 7 of the  2003
    Regulations and is entitled to a residence card under Regulation 15.

12. For the sake of completeness I would note that  the  documentation  was
    not submitted to the Secretary of State and accordingly the appeal  had
    to be brought in order for the evidence to substantiate  that  Mr  Levi
    was entitled to a residence card proved.  Accordingly I do not make any
    fee award in respect of this matter.

13. However having considered all of the matters  together  it  is  evident
    that Mr Levi is entitled to a residence card and I allow the appeal.

Decision

14. I allow the appeal under the EEA Regulations.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure

