

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/49062/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7 July 2014                                |On 9th July 2014             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN

                                   Between

                                 Huma Sadiq
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The Secretary Of State For The Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr L. Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who was born on 5 June  1986.
       She appeals against the determination of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Broe promulgated on 24 April 2014 dismissing her appeal against  the
       decision of the Secretary of State refusing her leave to remain as a
       Tier  4  (General)  student.  The  application  was  refused   under
       paragraph 322  (1A)  because  it  was  supported  by  a  false  bank
       statement. The appellant came to the attention of the authorities on
       20 November 2013 at which point removal directions were  made  which
       provided her with an in-country right of appeal which she exercised.


    2. Paragraph 322 (1A) is one of the mandatory grounds on which leave to
       remain or variation of leave  to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United
       Kingdom must be refused:

             where false representations have been made or false  documents
             or information have been submitted (whether or not material to
             the  application,  and  whether  or  not  to  the  applicant's
             knowledge), or material  facts  has  not  been  disclosed,  in
             relation to the application...


    3. The substance of  her  claim,  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  she
       accepted that a forged document had been submitted, was that she was
       innocent of any wrongdoing and  that  she  was  entitled  to  asylum
       because of a fear of the consequences of a return to Pakistan.


    4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge rejected the appellant's claim in  its
       entirety. He was satisfied that she overstayed  her  leave  and  her
       asylum claim was no more than a last ditch attempt to remain in  the
       United Kingdom when she was facing removal. He went on  to  consider
       her Article 8 rights and concluded  that  it  was  proportionate  to
       remove her, given there were no arguable grounds for  the  grant  of
       leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules.


    5. No specific challenge is made to those  findings.   Given  the  fact
       that the Judge did not accept she was innocent of  the  events  that
       resulted in the use of a false statement or that she was  a  genuine
       asylum seeker, any residual Article 8 claim based on proportionality
       was bound to be assessed against a public interest  heavily  stacked
       against her.

    6. The grounds seeking permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  are
       directed towards the fairness of the appeal process.  The  appellant
       refers  to  the  fact  that  the  Tribunal  made  reference  in  its
       determination to documentary evidence which was not available to the
       appellant or her representatives and this amounted to  a  procedural
       irregularity. General grounds of fairness are raised.  Fairness must
       be viewed in the context of the case as a whole, including the  fact
       of an Article 8 claim heavily stacked against her.

    7. In paragraph 2.5 of the Grounds, further mention is made to the fact
       that  no  reference  had  been  made  in  the  determination  to   a
       consideration  of  the  claim   for   humanitarian   protection   or
       discretionary leave. This ground is without foundation since, on the
       basis of the unchallenged findings of fact made by the Tribunal that
       the appellant's claim had been fabricated, this left no room  for  a
       sustainable finding that the appellant was a risk of serious harm or
       entitled to any subsidiary form of relief.

    8. I am satisfied that if there  had  been  a  procedural  irregularity
       leading to unfairness, this would be a proper ground  of  appeal  to
       the Upper Tribunal. I am, however, entirely satisfied that  no  such
       procedural irregularity took place for the reasons I now give.

    9. The respondent refused the application  because  the  appellant  had
       submitted a false bank statement. As recorded in paragraph 5 of  the
       determination, the appellant accepted that  a  forged  document  had
       indeed been submitted. In paragraph  6  of  the  determination,  the
       Judge summarises the appellant's statement to the  effect  that  the
       respondent had sent her a letter refusing her  application  but  she
       stated that she did not receive it, nor the  removal  decision  that
       was made in  relation  to  her.  However,  she  accepted  a  removal
       decision was served upon her when she was detained at Becket  house.
       The substance of  her  claim  was,  however,  not  directed  towards
       documentary evidence but to establish she was not to blame  for  any
       deception because what had happened was the fault of her mother, the
       agent or her lawyer.


   10. At the hearing before the Judge, he records in paragraph 22 that  he
       had not been provided with a copy of the refusal decision but  noted
       from correspondence that  the  relevant  decision  was  made  on  17
       February 2012. It was not disputed that the application was  refused
       because a forged bank statement had been submitted. The  documentary
       evidence referred to by the Judge included a letter written  by  the
       appellant's representatives Gill Law Chambers  dated  7  March  2012
       asking that the respondent reconsider the refusal, which  was  taken
       by the Judge as an indication the appellant was aware at that  stage
       of the fact that the statement had been found to be a  forgery.  The
       respondent responded to Gill Law Chambers on 11 April 2012.

   11. On the basis of this material, there is no arguable  case  that  the
       appellant was not supplied with the  relevant  documentary  material
       necessary to determine the appeal.


   12. At the hearing of the appeal on 19 March  2014,  the  appellant  was
       represented by Mr Gill. Reference is made  in  paragraph  1  to  the
       application  of  7  March  2012  for  a  reconsideration   and   the
       respondent's response of 11 April 2012. There is  no  suggestion  in
       the determination that Mr  Gill  had  not  been  provided  with  the
       respondent's bundle, referred to in  paragraph  3.  Had  there  been
       documentary evidence that Mr  Gill  had  not  seen,  he  would  have
       referred to it and asked for a copy. He was  plainly  aware  of  the
       evidence  that  the  appellant  herself  had  submitted  or  he  had
       submitted on her behalf. The Judge himself referred to  the  absence
       of a refusal decision but it was not disputed such  a  decision  was
       made and refused because a forged bank statement had been submitted.
       Accordingly, the grounds of appeal wholly failed  to  identify  what
       documents were produced  of  which  the  appellant  was  unaware  in
       circumstances that amounted to a procedural unfairness.

   13. There was before the Judge the letter dated 7 March 2012  from  Gill
       Law Chambers (headed by Mr Khalid Gill and signed by him) in  which,
       on behalf of the appellant, he reiterated  the  appellant's  earlier
       claim that  the  letter  and  bank  statements  submitted  with  the
       application were genuine. That  stance  is,  of  course,  no  longer
       adopted by the appellant. The letter also  asserted  that  enquiries
       made with Allied Bank were defective and this may have caused doubts
       as to the authenticity of letters and bank statements.  Accordingly,
       the writer requested to have details of the enquiries which led  the
       respondent to believe that the letter and bank statements  submitted
       were not genuine. The letter continues:

         "We would appreciate if you could send us a copy of enquiry  report
         giving  our  client  a  fair  opportunity  to  know  why  her  bank
         statements were considered to be not genuine. On receiving the full
         information on alleged false bank statements she would be  able  to
         address this issue and provide evidence to refute the allegation of
         submitting false documents."


       The letter was accompanied by a document, signed by  the  appellant,
       giving Gill Law Chambers authority to act on her behalf.


   14. The response to Gill Law  Chambers  dated  11  April  2012  included
       correspondence confirming the bank statements were  fraudulent.  The
       letter ended by stating that it was open to the appellant  to  apply
       in person in order to arrange an interview in Sheffield but  if  the
       Border Agency did not hear from her within 14 days, enforced removal
       would be contemplated.


   15. I have also been provided with  a  file  note  dated  15  June  2012
       prepared  by  the  respondent  dealing  with  the  request   for   a
       reconsideration in which it is said:


         "The decisions  were  maintained,  and  copies  of  the  fraudulent
         documents  were  sent  to  Gill  Law  AG128199730GB,  confirmed  as
         delivered on 13 April 2012."


   16. I take the identification  number  as  a  reference  to  a  recorded
       delivery slip.  This material satisfies me  that  no  objection  was
       made at the hearing that documentary evidence had not been submitted
       to the appellant's representative.  No  material  documentation  was
       mentioned by the Judge of which the appellant or her  representative
       was unaware. It is apparent that the falsity  of  the  document  was
       conceded  by  the  appellant's  representative   at   the   hearing.
       Accordingly, the grounds of challenge to the Upper Tribunal have not
       been made out. Indeed the grounds themselves fail to  identify  what
       documents  are  relied  upon  as  giving  rise  to  the   procedural
       unfairness.


   17. Since the hearing, the appellant has changed her representative. Her
       current representative on file is  Maxim  law  and  the  grounds  of
       appeal have been settled by Mr Asad Maqsood  of  that  organisation.
       There was no appearance before me of either the appellant  or  Maxim
       Law. The hearing before me took place on 7 July 2014 and  was  fixed
       for 2pm. By fax dated 7 July and timed at  10.54  (GMT),  Maxim  Law
       wrote to the Tribunal seeking  an  adjournment.  In  support  was  a
       letter dated 5  July  2014  (the  previous  Friday)  from  a  Dr  A.
       Chatterjee of the Clockwork Centre, London E8 in which he says:

         "This is to confirm that I have seen and examined the above named.
         She has significant stress and regular panic attacks. She  has  low
         mood with poor sleep, early morning awakening, poor  concentration,
         memory etc.  She also experienced floaters before her eyes.  May  I
         please request that her official  engagements/appointments  etc  be
         postponed to the middle of August or thereafter."


   18. There is no reference, of course, to the appellant being  unable  to
       attend the hearing by reason of her medical condition. Nor is  there
       any consideration of any treatment that is  necessary.   The  letter
       does not provide a reason why, if stress,  panic  attacks  and  poor
       sleep prevented her appearance on 7 July  2014,  that  situation  is
       likely to have altered in a month's time, were  the  hearing  to  be
       reconvened then.  If the cause of stress is  the  Tribunal  hearing,
       that source of her anxiety will not have altered.


   19. More importantly, however, is the fact that the  hearing  before  me
       was to determine  whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  made  a
       material error of law in his determination. That was a matter  which
       was essentially for the appellant's representative to deal  with  by
       way of submissions and, in particular,  to  identify  the  documents
       referred to in the grounds of appeal which were not  made  available
       to the appellant or her representative at the hearing which rendered
       the hearing unfair and procedurally irregular. There was no  attempt
       on  the  part  of  Maxim  Law  to  attend  the  hearing  before   me
       notwithstanding the fact that they had received no response from the
       Tribunal to the  application  for  an  adjournment.  An  appellant's
       representative is not entitled  to  assume  an  application  for  an
       adjournment has been granted without hearing from  the  Tribunal  to
       that effect, far less to provide the Tribunal with a  fait  accompli
       by failing to attend. There is no suggestion that the appellant  was
       unable to give her representative prior instructions, either on  the
       day of the hearing or on any earlier  occasion;  indeed  stress  and
       panic attacks along with poor sleep and poor  concentration  do  not
       offer  a  reason  why  an  appellant  is  incapable   of   providing
       instructions. This was not an appeal which required the appellant to
       give  evidence  in  support  of  the  error  of  law  finding.   The
       appellant's presence was not, therefore,  essential  to  the  proper
       determination of the error of law stage.


   20. There was no skeleton argument served or filed which may  have  shed
       light on the merits of the appeal.

   21.  I am not satisfied  on  considering  the  grounds  of  appeal,  the
       determination of the First-tier Tribunal Judge, the doctor's  letter
       or the request for an adjournment by Maxim Law that  it  is  in  the
       interests of justice to adjourn the appeal. I am satisfied that  the
       appellant's previous representatives  were  supplied  with  all  the
       material documentation and that there was nothing said by Mr Gill at
       the First-tier Tribunal hearing  which  suggests  he  had  not  been
       provided with the documentation. There is no statement from Mr  Gill
       to the effect that he had been misled or that his  client  had  been
       placed at an unfair disadvantage. In such  circumstances,  the  bald
       assertion made in the grounds of appeal that the Tribunal had looked
       at, and referred to, documents  which  were  not  available  to  the
       appellant or her representatives is, as a matter of fact,  not  made
       out. Whilst the grounds may have been prepared on instructions  from
       the appellant, this does not amount to evidence.

DECISION

         The Judge made no error on a point of law and the original
         determination of the appeal shall stand.






                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                                 7 July 2014


