
[pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/49929/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21st January 2016                 |On 24th February 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                        Donald O'Neil Orden Campbell
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Tear of Duncan Lewis & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Jamaica born on 24th  January  1976.
    He first arrived in the UK on 14th June 1999 when he was granted  leave
    to enter as a visitor.  Subsequently the Appellant was granted leave to
    remain as a student until 28th February 2001.  Thereafter the Appellant
    overstayed.  Some time in 2002 the Appellant began to  cohabit  with  a
    woman known as [Ms S], and [in] 2004 their daughter [S] was born.   The
    next significant event is that on 28th April  2006  the  Appellant  was
    convicted of offences of obtaining property by deception  and  handling
    stolen goods and sentenced  to  fifteen  months'  imprisonment.   As  a
    consequence on 27th October 2006 the Respondent decided to  deport  the
    Appellant.  The Appellant unsuccessfully appealed that decision, and on
    22nd January 2007 the Secretary  of  State  made  a  Deportation  Order
    against the Appellant.  That Order  was  never  effected  because  from
    September 2007 the Appellant disappeared.

 2. [In] 2010 the Appellant's son [D]  was  born.   [Ms  S]  then  made  an
    application for leave to remain naming the Appellant and their children
    as dependants.  That application was initially refused, but following a
    successful appeal, the Appellant was granted limited  leave  to  remain
    until 9th February 2017.  Finally on 25th November 2014 the  Respondent
    decided that the Appellant's leave to remain was invalid by  virtue  of
    the Deportation Order, and decided not to revoke  that  Order  for  the
    reasons given in her letter of that date.  The Appellant appealed  that
    decision, and his appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    O'Malley (the Judge) sitting at Taylor House  on  6th  July  2015.   He
    decided to allow the appeal for the reasons given in his Decision dated
    the  following  day.   The  Respondent  sought  leave  to  appeal  that
    decision, and on 21st October 2015 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 3. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 4. The Judge allowed the appeal because  he  found  the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant and his partner to be credible, and that the Appellant had  a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship with his daughter [S]  who
    as a British citizen was a qualifying child for the purposes of Section
    117C(5), Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002.   Further,  the
    Judge found that the effect  of  the  Appellant's  deportation  on  his
    daughter would be unduly harsh.  Therefore Exception 2 applied.

 5. At the hearing, Mr Whitwell argued that the Judge had erred in  law  in
    coming to that conclusion.  The Judge had not specifically referred  to
    nor taken into account the  particular  Immigration  Rule  relating  to
    revocation of Deportation Orders being  paragraph  390  of  HC  395  in
    accordance with the decision in Chege  (section  117D  -  Article  8  -
    approach) [2015] UKUT 00165 (IAC).  Further, the Judge  had  failed  to
    give adequate reasons for his decision.  He had not taken into  account
    the serious nature of the Appellant's offending when  considering  what
    weight to be attached to the public interest, and  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant had assumed a false identity  in  order  to  work  unlawfully
    after the completion of his  prison  sentence.   The  analysis  of  the
    Appellant's behaviour between 2007 and 2012 was incoherent.  The  Judge
    had also failed to take into account and attach the  proper  weight  to
    the fact that the Appellant had not kept in regular  contact  with  his
    daughter's school.  Finally, in  considering  whether  the  Appellant's
    deportation would be  unduly  harsh  as  regards  [S],  the  Judge  had
    attached insufficient weight to the facts that the  Appellant  and  his
    partner  maintained  good  relations  with  their  extended  family  in
    Jamaica.  The Judge's decision was not in compliance with the  decision
    in KMO (section 117 - unduly harsh) Nigeria [2015] UKUT 00543 (IAC).

 6. In response, Mr Tear submitted that there had been  no  such  error  of
    law.  The reasons given by the Judge for his decision came nowhere near
    satisfying the test of irrationality.  The Judge had decided the appeal
    in accordance with the guidance given by the decision in Greenwood  (No
    2) (para 398 considered) [2015] UKUT 00629 (IAC).  In  considering  the
    best interests of a child who was a  British  citizen,  the  Judge  had
    demonstrated at paragraph 49 of the Decision that he was aware  of  the
    appropriate Immigration Rules including paragraphs 398 and  399  of  HC
    395.  The Judge had identified and applied the correct test, which  was
    whether there were any compelling circumstances justifying the  Judge's
    decision.  The Judge had given sufficient reasons for his decision.

 7. I find no error of law in the decision of the Judge and therefore  that
    decision is not set aside.  Mr Whitwell's argument was that  the  Judge
    had given insufficient reasons for his decision, not that he  had  made
    an irrational decision as referred  to  by  Mr  Tear.   However,  I  am
    satisfied that the Judge gave adequate reasons for  his  decision.   As
    the Judge recorded at paragraph 64 of  the  Decision,  it  was  not  in
    dispute that the  Appellant  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with his daughter [S], a qualifying  child  as  a  British
    citizen.  Therefore the issue the Judge had to decide was  whether  the
    Appellant's deportation would have unduly harsh consequences  for  that
    child.  This the Judge did find, and his reasons for that decision  are
    given at paragraphs 67 and 68 of the Decision.   These  reasons  in  my
    view are sufficient.  The Judge decided that it would be  in  the  best
    interests of [S] to continue  to  benefit  from  the  presence  of  her
    father, and those best  interests  must  be  a  primary  consideration.
    Having found that Exception 2 applied, the  Judge  correctly  concluded
    that the public interest did not require the  Appellant's  deportation.
    He was therefore entitled to also find that as regards Article 8  ECHR,
    the public interest did not outweigh other considerations.  In reaching
    that conclusion, the Judge took into account the serious nature of  the
    Appellant's offending  at  paragraph  70  of  the  Decision.   In  this
    connection, the Judge also made a finding, which was open to him on the
    evidence, that the Appellant had not "gone to  ground",  and  that  the
    Appellant had not committed any further offences for a period of  eight
    years.

 8. It is true that the Judge made no reference to paragraph 390 of HC 395,
    and did not make his decision by reference to its provisions.   On  the
    face of it, this appears to be an error of law.  However, in my view it
    is not a material error of law.  Paragraph 390 says that  a  revocation
    decision must be considered in  the  light  of  all  the  circumstances
    including a short list of circumstances which must be  considered.   It
    is apparent from what the Judge wrote that he did make his decision  in
    the light of all the circumstances known to him, and that he took  into
    account the  specific  circumstances  referred  to  in  paragraph  390,
    including the public interest.  Therefore had  the  Judge  specifically
    referred to paragraph 390 he would have come  to  the  same  conclusion
    which he did come to.

 9. It cannot be said that the Judge's decision was not in accordance  with
    paragraph 390A when it was found that Exception 2 contained in  Section
    117C of the 2002 Act applied.

Costs

10. At the hearing I announced my decision that I found no error of law  in
    the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Mr  Tear  then  made  an
    application for the Appellant's costs under Rule  10  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  The Appellant had not  complied
    with Rule 10(5)(b), but nonetheless I heard the application.   Mr  Tear
    argued  that  the  Respondent's  conduct   of   the   proceedings   was
    unreasonable because the Respondent had not responded to correspondence
    from the Appellant's representatives on  five  occasions  pointing  out
    that  the  Respondent's  case  could  not  succeed,  and  further   the
    Respondent had failed to  comply  with  Directions.   The  Respondent's
    conduct fell within that criticised by the Upper Tribunal in Greenwood.



11. I indicated to Mr Whitwell that I did not need to hear from him on this
    subject.  I have taken into account the matters  raised  in  Mr  Tear's
    Skeleton Argument.  I have considered the issues of  wasted  costs  and
    unreasonable costs according to the guidance given by the  decision  in
    Cancino (costs - First-tier Tribunal - new powers) [2015]  UKFTT  00059
    (IAC).  It is lamentable that the  Respondent  did  not  reply  to  the
    correspondence from Mr Tear and has not conducted these proceedings  in
    accordance with the Directions of the Tribunal.  However, I do not find
    that there have been wasted costs nor  unreasonable  costs  in  a  case
    where the Respondent decides to pursue to a hearing  an  argument  that
    there is an error of law in the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    when a Judge has already decided that there is an arguable error of law
    in that decision by granting leave to appeal.

Decision

12. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

    I do not set aside the decision.

    The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

13. The First-tier Tribunal made an Order for anonymity.  I was  not  asked
    to continue it, and find no reason to do so.  I therefore make no Order
    for anonymity and I lift the original Order.


Signed   Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
