
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/49018/2014
                                                               IA/49020/2014
                                                               IA/49019/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th May 2016                              |On 15th September 2016        |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                (1) Sidra [S]
                                (2) BILAL [S]
                                  (3) [B A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    No legal representation
For the Respondent:    Mr David Mills (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge E B Grant, promulgated on 23rd June 2013, following  the  hearing
    at Hatton Cross on 27th May 2015.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeals of Mrs Sidra [S] and her husband, Mr  Bilal  [S],
    and their daughter, [BA], whereupon the  Appellants  applied  for,  and
    were granted, permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus  the
    matter comes before me.

The Appellants

 2. The Appellants are a family, comprising a wife, a  husband,  and  their
    daughter, respectively, and all are citizens of  Pakistan.   The  First
    Appellant, Mrs [S], was originally granted leave to enter the UK  as  a
    Tier 4 (General) Student and in August 2012 she was  granted  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 1 (Post-Study) Migrant until 22nd  August  2014.   Mrs
    [S] subsequently applied for leave to remain in the  UK  as  a  Tier  1
    (Entrepreneur)  Migrant  under  the   points-based   system   and   her
    application was refused on 21st November 2014.  It  is  at  this  stage
    that she appealed and the appeal was dismissed by Judge E B Grant.

 3. The major issue before the judge was  the  existence  of  an  interview
    record which it was alleged  demonstrated  inconsistencies  of  such  a
    nature as to leave doubts as to whether  the  application  in  question
    involved a genuine entrepreneur, for the purposes of paragraph 245DD(h)
    of HC 395.  The Appellant's case was  that  her  business  was  to  run
    unreserved  legal  services  and  that  the  interview  had  failed  to
    establish that this was not a credible venture, and the  disclosure  of
    the interview record would prove this.

The Judge's Findings

 4. At the hearing itself, the judge at the outset stated (see paragraph 2)
    that she had

         "received  a  Respondent's  bundle  on  each  Appellant's  file,  a
         combined Appellant's bundle and a temporary  migration  credibility
         interview template which was part of the enclosures D1 to D4 of the
         Respondent's bundle which were given to me at the  hearing  because
         they were not enclosed with the Respondent's  bundle  sent  to  the
         Tribunal" (paragraph 2).

    The Appellant however continued to maintain that she  herself  had  not
    been given access to this interview record, even at the hearing.

 5. The judge went on to make findings that,  "having  read  the  interview
    record of her interview with the Respondent I find that her claims that
    she is an entrepreneur running an unreserved legal services business to
    be incredible ..."  (paragraph  11).   The  judge  concluded  that  the
    appellant "is not a credible witness" (paragraph 11).  The  judge  then
    went on to give three specific reasons as to why the  unreserved  legal
    services business was not credible.

 6. First, it was not credible that someone who  generally  operated  their
    own website would need to search for it in Google in order to access it
    on any particular day (paragraph 11).

 7. Second, the Appellant's evidence about  her  three  contracts  was  not
    credible because these do not demonstrate that she has legal skills and
    knowledge to provide the services she claims.

 8. Third, the business was registered in Bradford but  the  Appellant  had
    since moved to Luton and it was not credible  that  she  could  provide
    documents, research or paralegal services for companies based  in  West
    Yorkshire (paragraph 13).  Having made these findings, the judge stated
    that "although having read the interview record I agree and concur with
    the reasons given in the refusal ..." (paragraph 14).   The  permission
    to appeal was given by the Upper Tribunal specifically on the basis  of
    the non-disclosure of the interview record.

 9. The Upper Tribunal stated, upon examination of the  file,  that,  there
    was a record of interview with the Appellant that took  place  on  10th
    October 2014; that it was clear that the judge  took  it  into  account
    (see paragraphs 11 and 14); and that according to the judge's Record of
    Proceedings, the Appellant's representative "stated in submissions that
    'the iv record is not with us'."  The grant of permission  goes  on  to
    say that, "as it is not clear precisely what aspects of  the  interview
    record were relied upon by the judge, I  am  unable  to  rule  out  the
    possibility that the Appellant's answers at her  interview  might  have
    been material to the judge's reasoning".

10. At the hearing before me, Mrs Sidra [S], the First  Appellant  herself,
    attended to represent the appeal.  She still maintained  that,  if  her
    integrity had been impugned on the basis that she was not credible, and
    if this was done on the grounds  that  the  answers  given  during  the
    interview, gave cause for concern, then  the  interview  record  should
    have been disclosed to her side.  It was not.  She had emphasised  that
    it was not.

11. For this part, Mr Mills submitted that  this  could  not  be  plausible
    because, although the initial bundle of the Respondent did not  include
    a copy of the full interview transcript, a subsequent bundle  from  the
    Respondent's side did include this transcript, and  it  was  the  basis
    upon which the judge had subsequently then dismissed the appeal,  after
    having  placed  reliance  on  it.   If  at  the  hearing  itself,   the
    Appellant's side did  not  have  disclosure  of  the  bundle,  she  was
    represented by a Mr Mannan (Counsel), and it was open to him to  object
    to the non-disclosure of the interview record.  Yet, the  determination
    did not disclose any reference to the Appellant not  having  access  to
    the interview record.  The judge was  entitled  to  conclude  that  the
    Appellant was not credible.

12. I asked Mr Mills whether Mrs  Sidra  [S]  now  had  disclosure  of  the
    interview transcript.  Mr Mills submitted that he had passed on a  copy
    of the interview record to her.  However, Mrs [S] replied that she  did
    not have  the  full  transcript  itself  because  at  the  end  of  the
    transcript the interview should end with confirmation that the  parties
    had understood the questions and had been happy with the answers given,
    and that last page was missing.

13. I directed that the full transcript should be disclosed to Mrs  [S]  so
    that she could satisfy herself that if there was an allegation of  lack
    of credibility, this was properly granted in the interview record.   Mr
    Mills  produced  a  copy.   The  court  usher  photocopied  the  entire
    transcript.  When I looked at the transcript  myself,  I  noticed  that
    this transcript now included the last page (D5) which was missing  even
    from the Tribunal's file before this court.

14. The Tribunal file  currently  before  me  began  at  D1  and  had  "the
    temporary migration credibility interview template (Tier  1)"  and  ran
    into four pages, but did not include the fifth page, which was the page
    that Mr Mills' copy now contained.  I pointed this out to Mr Mills.  Mr
    Mills submitted that even if this was the case,  the  judge  had  given
    three additional reasons to conclude why the claim put  forward  as  an
    entrepreneurial business woman by the  Appellant  was  not  a  credible
    claim.  The two could have been properly dismissed on that basis  alone
    by the judge as it was.  There was no material  error  of  law.   I  am
    satisfied that this was not the case.  I give my reasons below.

Error of Law

15. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law  (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.

16. First, if one looks at the clarity of the interview  ending  with  page
    D5, the  interviewing  officer,  Janice  O'Neill,  completes  the  last
    section  which  has  the  question  "was  the  customer   credible   at
    interview?"   with   an   answer   "yes".    Underneath   the   heading
    "Recommendation Summary", the interviewing officer has  inserted,  "the
    applicant answered all questions satisfactorily and  I  therefore  deem
    her to be a  credible  entrepreneur  at  the  interview  stage  of  the
    application".

17. I must say that it is a matter of some concern to  this  Tribunal  that
    first, the interview  transcript  is  not  disclosed  in  the  original
    Respondent's bundle.

18. Second, when it is disclosed, it is not disclosed  to  the  Appellant's
    side, but only disclosed to the Tribunal.

19. Third, the version that the Tribunal had, (and the version that Judge E
    B Grant had) does not include the last page (D5).

20. Fourth, the version that is before this Tribunal, even after an  appeal
    has been lodged, and permission granted for this precise  issue  to  be
    determined, again does not include page D5, which contains the  vitally
    important  statement  that,  "the  applicant  answered  all   questions
    satisfactorily" and that she was  "a  credible  entrepreneur"  at  this
    stage.  This is not a material non-disclosure but it is  tantamount  to
    wrong foot the Appellant's side which leads to a procedural unfairness.



21. Fifth, insofar as Mr Mills' submission is concerned that the judge gave
    additional reasons (at paragraphs 11 to 13) for why she concluded  that
    the Appellant was not  an  entrepreneur  running  an  unreserved  legal
    services business in  a  credible  fashion.  It  is  clear  that  these
    additional  reasons  are  predicated  on  the  finding   of   lack   of
    credibility, both before the additional reasons are  given,  and  after
    they are given.  The additional reasons can simply not stand  on  their
    own and are tainted by what the judge believed  to  have  been  in  the
    interview record.

22.  Indeed, the judge in turn states  that,  "having  read  the  interview
    record of her interview with the Respondent I find that her claims that
    she is an entrepreneur ... is not a credible witness"  (paragraph  11).
    She ends by stating that, "although having read the interview record  I
    agree and concur with  the  reasons  given  in  the  refusal  that  the
    Appellant is not a genuine Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) and I agree  with  the
    decision of the Respondent" (paragraph 14).

23. How this  could  possibly  have  been  a  conclusion  that  could  have
    logically been arrived at is difficult to see because, now that one has
    the full transcript of the interview, it is plain that the answers  are
    all given in a perfectly reasonable and adequate  manner,  and  indeed,
    the interviewing officer ends by concluding that all the  answers  were
    answered satisfactorily.

24. Therefore, the interview  record  could  not  have  been  a  basis  for
    concluding that the Appellant was not  embarking  upon  a  business  of
    unreserved legal services.  This is all the more troubling  given  that
    the principal Appellant has an LLM in International Commercial Law, and
    is versed in matters of the law, although she is not legally  qualified
    as a solicitor or a barrister.

25. It is also a matter  of  some  considerable  concern,  given  that  her
    credibility was impugned on the basis of an interview  which,  had  the
    last  page  of  the  interview  record  been  disclosed,   would   have
    demonstrated that she was indeed a credible witness.

Re-making the Decision

26. I agree with the decision on the basis of the findings of the  original
    judge, the evidence that was before her, and  the  submissions  that  I
    have heard today.

27. I am allowing this appeal to the extent that it is remitted back  to  a
    judge at Hatton Cross, other than Judge  E  B  Grant,  to  be  re-heard
    again, with all positive findings to date remaining intact in favour of
    the Appellant for one simple reason.  What the interview record by  the
    interviewing officer, Janice O'Neill states, is that the  Appellant  is
    deemed to be credible "at the  interview  stage  of  the  application".
    That does not mean to say  that  the  application  would  automatically
    thereafter have succeeded or  that  this  appeal  should  automatically
    succeed.

28. There were still additional matters, which Judge Grant in this case was
    perfectly entitled to consider namely, in relation to the website,  the
    contracts made, and the relocation of the Appellant  from  Bradford  to
    Luton, which is some considerable distance from her place where she  is
    providing paralegal services for companies  based  in  West  Yorkshire,
    while she lives in Bedfordshire (see  paragraph  13  of  Judge  Grant's
    determination).

29. These are matters which must be considered on the  basis  of  the  oral
    evidence of the Appellant once again, but with the added  advantage  to
    her of her interview record being in  her  favour,  and  this  must  be
    undertaken by another judge at Hatton Cross.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it is to be set aside.   I  set  aside  the  decision  of  the
original judge.  I re-make the decision as follows.

This appeal is remitted back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  under  Practice
Statement 7.2(b) to be determined by a  judge  other  than  Judge  Grant  at
Hatton Cross.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 13th September 2016





