
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/49461/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 19th November 2015               |On: 21st December 2015               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                   Immigration Officer, Manchester Airport
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Ebrahim Mansour Khani
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Schwenk, Counsel instructed by Arshed and Co
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The Respondent is a national of Iran born on the 31st August  1969.
         On the 26th March 2015  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Herwald)
         allowed his appeal against the decisions of an Immigration  Officer
         at Manchester Airport to refuse him leave to enter and  to  curtail
         his entry clearance  as  a  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)  Migrant.   The
         Immigration Officer now has permission[1] to appeal  against  Judge
         Herwald's decision.

    Background

      2. On arrival at Manchester Airport  on  the  9th  December  2014  the
         Respondent had two UK visas in his  Iranian  passport.  One  was  a
         visit visa valid until September  2016.  This  five  year  multiple
         entry visa had been granted to him because he has a child at school
         in the United Kingdom. The second visa was a Tier 1  (Entrepreneur)
         visa, granted on the 18th November 2012 and due  to  expire  on  in
         March 2016. This was issued in  connection  with  the  Respondent's
         business interests in the United Kingdom.  The Immigration  Officer
         checked the records and observed that in  support  of  his  Tier  1
         application  the  Respondent  had  submitted  an  English  language
         certificate issued by ETS.  When  interviewed  the  Respondent  was
         observed to be unclear about where and when  he  might  have  taken
         such a test. Further checks led the officer to  conclude  that  the
         Respondent had employed fraud in obtaining that certificate, namely
         the use of a proxy test taker.  It was for  this  reason  that  his
         leave as Tier 1 Migrant was curtailed.

      3. When the appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal the  Respondent
         had mounted a robust defence against the allegation  of  fraud.  He
         provided a witness statement and oral evidence pointing out that he
         speaks English in addition to five other languages; his  successful
         international business (a marine diving consultancy)  is  conducted
         almost exclusively in English, and that he has  an  IELTS  speaking
         score of 8.  He vehemently denies having used a proxy to  take  his
         test.   If he was vague at the port interview it was because he was
         tired after a long flight and was not immediately  able  to  recall
         the exact circumstances of the test, which  had  been  taken  three
         years earlier. He also relied on a report from a Dr Philip Harrison
         of JP French  and  Associates,  a  Forensic  Speech  and  Acoustics
         Laboratory. Dr Harrison's report is, in essence, a critique of  the
         evidence relied upon by the Secretary of State in most if  not  all
         of what have become known as the "ETS cases".

      4. Judge Herwald directed himself  to  the  appropriate  standard  and
         burden of proof in respect of an allegation of fraud.  He  set  out
         the Respondent's evidence as to where and when he took the test  in
         some detail. He then examined  the  evidence  put  forward  by  the
         respective parties as to the reliability of the analysis of the ETS
         tests.  He concluded, in summary, that the  "lengthy  and  cogent",
         "highly persuasive" report of Dr Harrison cast sufficient doubt  on
         the methodology employed by the Secretary of State so  as  to  mean
         that the allegation of fraud could not be proven.   He  noted  that
         the refusal notice characterised the test result as  "questionable"
         and that this indicated that the analysis was  inconclusive  as  to
         whether the test had been taken  by  a  proxy;  this  caused  Judge
         Herwald sufficient worry for him to find that the burden  of  proof
         had not bee discharged.  Having reached that conclusion he  allowed
         the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

    Error of Law

      5. Having heard submissions from both parties I indicated that  I  was
         not satisfied that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains
         an error of law such that it should be set aside. My reasons are as
         follows:

          i) Ground 1 is that the First-tier  Tribunal  "erred  in  law  in
             finding  that  a  false  document  was  not  submitted   under
             paragraph 321A(2)". It will be  observed  that  this  'ground'
             does  not  actually  identify  an  error  of  law,  rather  it
             represents a disagreement with the outcome of the appeal.  The
             particulars under this heading are, in effect, that the First-
             tier Tribunal applied the wrong standard  of  proof,  applying
             the   criminal   standard   rather   than   the   balance   of
             probabilities.

             There is no justification for this conclusion.  Judge  Herwald
             sets out the correct standard of proof at paragraph 13 of  the
             determination.  There  is  nothing  in  the  determination  to
             indicate that he did not  apply  that  standard.   He  made  a
             careful assessment of  whether  the  Immigration  Officer  had
             produced cogent evidence. Finding that he had not,  the  Judge
             was entitled to allow the appeal.

         ii) Ground 2 asserts that there was a misdirection in  that  there
             was a failure to address whether there  had  been  a  material
             change in circumstance  such  that  leave  could  properly  be
             curtailed under paragraph 321A(1). The grounds submit that the
             fact that the certificate  itself  had  been  invalidated  was
             sufficient to show such a change in circumstances, even absent
             any evidence of  deliberate  deception  on  the  part  of  the
             Respondent.

             The 'change in circumstances' is said to be that  the  English
             language certificate submitted in 2012 is no longer valid. Any
             recent withdrawal of that certificate does not  mean  that  it
             was invalid when it was submitted, and relied upon, when leave
             was granted. There is, as far as I am aware, no requirement to
             show that an English language certificate remain valid for the
             entire  duration  of  a  person's  leave.  Further,  and  more
             fundamentally, there can be no error on Judge  Herwald's  part
             since the refusal  notice  specifically  relies  on  paragraph
             321A(2)  (fraud  and  false  representations)  and  makes   no
             reference to 321A(1). He cannot now be criticised for  failing
             to deal with a reason for refusal that was never raised.   The
             Tribunal cannot be expected to  go  on  a  fishing  expedition
             looking to every rule that an appellant might not comply with.

        iii) Ground 3 is that the Judge erred in law in allowing the appeal
             "under the Rules". This decision was a  curtailment  of  leave
             made with reference to 321A(2). If the Judge  found  that  the
             burden of proof  was  not  made  out  it  follows,  agrees  Mr
             McVeety, that the consequence is that the  original  leave  is
             reinstated. That leave was as a Tier 1 Entrepreneur.  Although
             not stated, it is presumably to this matter  that  the  First-
             tier Tribunal referred.

    Decisions

      6. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no  error  of  law
         and it is upheld.

      7. I was not  asked  to  make  an  order  for  anonymity  and  in  the
         circumstances I see no reason to do so.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                          19th November 2015
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission granted by Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Zucker on
the 1st June 2015

