
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/50493/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 28July 2015                       |On 11 August 2015                     |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                           ADEREMI ONADIPE ODUKOYA
                        (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Idris (counsel), instructed by Rees Myers,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1     I have considered whether any party  requires  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of the appellant.  Having  considered  all  of  the  circumstances  and  the
evidence, I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity order.

2     For the purposes of this decision, I refer to the Secretary  of  State
for the Home  Department  as  the  respondent  and  to  Mr  Odukoya  as  the
appellant, reflecting their positions before the First Tier Tribunal.

3     This is an appeal by the Secretary of  State  against  a  decision  of
First Tier Tribunal Judge  Boardman  promulgated  on  10  March  2015  which
allowed the appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision  to
refuse to grant leave to remain in the UK.

Background

4     The appellant was born  on  17  January  1974.  He  is  a  citizen  of
Nigeria.

5     (a)   The appellant entered the UK as a student on 8  September  2007.
    His leave to remain in the UK was extended by the respondent  until  31
    December 2011. The appellant's wife and son (born 6 May  2002)  entered
    the UK on 21 March 2009 with leave  to  do  so  as  dependents  of  the
    appellant until 31 December 2011. On 5 January 2011, the appellant  and
    his wife had a daughter born in the UK.

    (b)    On 31 March 2010, the appellant applied for indefinite leave  to
    remain as the relative of a person settled in the UK.  His  application
    was refused. On 13 March 2013,  the  appellant  applied  for  leave  to
    remain in the UK on the basis of established family and  private  life.
    That application was refused on 8 May 2013. The appellant did not  have
    a right of appeal against that decision because his leave to remain  in
    the UK had expired before his application was submitted.

6     The appellant asked the respondent to reconsider  the  decision  of  8
May 2013 and, on 19 November 2013, the respondent adhered  to  the  decision
of 8 May 2013 and served a decision to remove the appellant on  21  November
2013. It is against that decision that the appellant appealed.

The Judge's Decision

7     The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal.  First  Tier
Tribunal Judge Boardman ("the judge") allowed the appellant's  appeal  in  a
determination promulgated on  10  March  2015.  The  judge  found  that  the
appellant fulfilled the requirements of  Paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi),  deciding
that  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   the   appellant's
reintegration into his country of origin. The  judge  went  on  to  consider
Article 8 outside of the Rules and found that the respondent's decision  was
a disproportionate breach to the  right  to  respect  for  both  family  and
private life.

8     Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 1 May 2015, First  Tier  Tribunal
Judge Andrew gave permission to appeal, stating inter alia:

         "2 I am satisfied that there is an arguable error of  law  for  the
             judge to rely on a medical report from 2012 in order  to  make
             findings at a hearing in 2015 which findings then led onto the
             judge finding that the  appellant  could  not  return  to  his
             country of  origin  in  part  because  his  medical  condition
             prevented him from working and thus there are very significant
             obstacles to the appellant's return.

         3  I am also satisfied that there is an arguable error  of  law  in
             that the judge did not take note of the case law  in  relation
             to Article 8 and in particular to Zoumbas v SSHD  [2013]  UKSC
             74 and EV (Philippines) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874."

The Hearing

9     Mr Kandola argued that the judge erred in allowing  the  appeal  under
both Paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules and in relation to Article  8
ECHR consideration outwith the  Immigration  Rules.  He  accepted  that  the
correct test was applied in relation to Paragraph 276ADE ("very  significant
obstacles...") but argues that the factors taken into consideration  by  the
judge  fell  outwith  the  consideration  of  the  provision  of   Paragraph
276ADE(1)(vi) and that the judge's reasoning demonstrated that, as a  matter
of fact, he did not apply the correct test. In addition, he argued that  the
evidence produced (focusing  particularly  on  a  medical  report  dated  30
November 2012)  did  not  support  the  judge's  findings.  In  relation  to
consideration of Article 8 outwith the Rules, Mr Kandola  submitted  neither
Section 117B of the  2014  Act  nor  the  established  case  law  have  been
properly  considered  and   that   the   judge's   exercise   in   assessing
proportionality was fundamentally flawed.

10    Mr Idris for the appellant urged me to restrict consideration  to  the
matters specifically mentioned by First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Andrew  when
granting permission to appeal (set out about at  [8]  above).  He  submitted
that there are no material  errors  of  law  contained  within  the  judge's
decision and that the correct legal tests have been  applied  and  that  the
findings made by the judge were findings which  were  open  to  him  on  the
evidence produced. He urged me to dismiss  the  appeal  and  to  affirm  the
decision of the judge promulgated on 10 March 2015.

Analysis

11    The appellant's application was submitted on  13  March  2013.  On  19
November 2013, the respondent made the decision against which the  appellant
appeal, adhering to the decision originally made  on  8  May  2013.  All  of
those dates fall within the period between 9 July 2012 and 28 July 2014.

12    Between 9 July 2012  and  28  July  2014,  the  wording  of  Paragraph
276ADE(6) was "...is aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously  in  the
UK for less than 20 years (discounting any period of imprisonment)  but  has
no ties (including social, cultural or family) with the country to which  he
would have to go if required to leave the UK".

That is clearly the test which was applied by the respondent in the  reasons
for refusal letter of 19 November 2013.

13    At [30], the judge applies the wrong test. The  judge  narrates  there
"...the requirements of Paragraph 276ADE require the appellant to show  that
there are not just "obstacles", and not just  "significant  obstacles",  but
"very significant obstacles" to the appellant's integration into Nigeria".

14    I therefore find that the decision is tainted by a material  error  of
law because the wrong wording for Paragraph 276ADE(6) was applied.

15    The judge went on to consider Article 8 outside the  Rules  and  found
that the respondent's decision was a disproportionate breach  of  the  right
to respect for  family  life  because  of  the  relationship  of  dependency
between the appellant and his mother  who  is  in  the  UK.  He  finds  that
private life is established and  at  [60],  he  sets  out  his  exercise  of
assessing the proportionality of the  decision,  but  in  assessing  "public
interest" at [56] and [57], the judge clearly takes  account  of  a  finding
that the appellant satisfies the requirements  of  Paragraph  276ADE.  As  I
have already found that the  wrong  Rule  was  applied,  the  assessment  of
proportionality in terms of Article 8 outwith the Rules cannot  be  correct.
I therefore find that I must set aside the decision because  it  is  tainted
by material errors of law.

Analysis

16     It  is  beyond  dispute  that  the  appellant   cannot   fulfil   the
requirements of Appendix FM of the Immigration  Rules.  It  is  equally  not
disputed that the appellant does not fulfil the  requirements  of  Paragraph
276ADE(1)(i) to (v).

17    The application was accompanied by a "statement of facts"  which  says
that the application proceeds under the sub-paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the
Immigration Rules "...on the  grounds  that  the  first  claimant  needs  to
remain with his settled mother who suffers from Parkinson's disease  and  on
the grounds of the first claimant's own medical  condition".  Those  grounds
do not engage the relevant wording of Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) which  existed
between the date of application and the date of decision.

18    In the statement  of  grounds  of  appeal,  the  appellant's  position
changes and at paragraph 3, it is argued "His mother is in the  UK  and  his
father is deceased. He is the only child of the family. The claimant has  no
ties (social, cultural or family) with Nigeria..." The evidence produced  by
the appellant is summarised in his witness statement of 4 August 2014.  That
witness statement dwells on the appellant's mother's medical conditions  and
the appellant's own medical conditions, and is  silent  on  the  appellant's
claim to have no ties whatsoever (including  social  and  cultural)  to  his
country of origin.

19    The appellant arrived in the UK when he was 33 years of  age.  He  has
now been in the UK for just under 8 years. The appellant argues that he  has
no relatives in Nigeria, no home in Nigeria, no job there  and  no  prospect
of a job but I cannot close my eyes to the fact  that  the  appellant  spent
his formative years in Nigeria, was educated in Nigeria  and  only  came  to
the UK to further  his  education.  By  the  time  the  appellant  made  his
application, he had spent 21% of his life in the UK.  At  today's  date,  he
has spent 24% of his life in the UK. That means that 76%  of  his  life  was
spent in Nigeria. The  appellant  is  a  Nigerian  national.  His  wife  and
children are Nigerian nationals. The weight of evidence indicates  that  the
appellant has not lost all ties to his  country  of  origin.  The  appellant
cannot fulfil the  requirements  of  Paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration
Rules.

20    In Meera Muhiadeen  Haleemudeen  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  558  Lord  Justice
Beatson confirmed it is necessary to  find  "compelling  circumstances"  for
going outside the Rules. He confirmed that "the passages from the  judgments
in the cases of Nagre and MF (Nigeria) appear  to  give  the  Rules  greater
weight than as  merely  a  starting  point  for  the  consideration  of  the
proportionality of an interference  with  Article  8  rights".  He  did  not
consider  that  it  is  necessary  to  use  the   terms   "exceptional"   or
"compelling" to describe the circumstances, and it will suffice if that  can
be said to be the substance of the tribunal's decision.

21.   In MM (Lebanon) and others [2014] EWCA Civ 985 it was  suggested  that
where a particular set of the immigration rules are  not  a  complete  code,
then the issue of proportionality under Article 8 will be more at large.  In
this respect in R (on the  application  of  Ganesabalan)  [2014]  EWHC  2712
(Admin)  it  was  held  that  unlike  other  Rules  which  have  a  built-in
discretion based on exceptional circumstances, Appendix FM and  Rule  276ADE
are not a "complete code" so far as Article  8  compatibility  is  concerned
because  Appendix  FM  and  Rule  276ADE  have  no  equivalent  "exceptional
circumstances" provision.


22.   If I find such compelling circumstances, I then have to determine  the
following separate questions:


         (i)      Does family life, private  life,  home  or  correspondence
         exist within the meaning of Article 8

         (ii)     If so, has the right to respect for this  been  interfered
         with

         (iii)    If so, was the interference in accordance with the law

         (iv)     If so, was the interference  in  pursuit  of  one  of  the
         legitimate aims set out in Article 8(2); and

         (v)      If so, is the interference proportionate to the pursuit of
         the legitimate aim?

23    Section 117 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  is  a
factor  to  be  taken  into  account  in  determining   proportionality.   I
appreciate that as the public  interest  provisions  are  now  contained  in
primary  legislation  they  override  existing  case  law,  Section  117A(2)
requires me to have regard to the considerations  listed  in  Sections  117B
and 117C.  I am conscious of my statutory duty to take  these  factors  into
account when coming to  my  conclusions.   I  am  also  aware  that  Section
117A(3) imposes upon me the duty of carrying out a  balancing  exercise.  In
so doing I remind myself of the guidance contained within Razgar.

24.   The effect of the Respondent's decision does not cause separation  for
this family. The family will remain together. I am mindful of Section 55  of
the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act  2009,  and  the  case  of  ZH
(Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4.

25.   I remind myself of the cases of  Azimi-Moayed  and  others  (decisions
affecting children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197.  It is the  intention
of the SoS to ensure that the Appellant, his wife  and  their  two  children
stay together. It has long been established that it is in the  interests  of
children to remain with their parents. The Respondent's  decision  maintains
the unity of this family  and  does  not  separate  the  children  from  the
parents. The interests of the children are served because the  integrity  of
the family unit is not challenged.

26    In MM (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2012]
EWCA Civ 279 the Court of Appeal noted that the courts had declined  to  say
that Article 8 could never by engaged by the health consequences of  removal
but they had never found such a breach and had not been  able  to  postulate
circumstances in which such a breach was likely to be established. The  only
cases where the absence of adequate medical  treatment  in  the  country  to
which a person is to be deported would be relevant to Article  8  are  those
where it is an additional factor to be weighed in  the  balance  with  other
factors that engaged Article 8 (paras 17 - 23). This approach  was  endorsed
by Laws LJ in GS (India) and Others [2015] EWCA Civ 40 (para 86).

27.   The appellant's health conditions are set  out  in  a  medical  report
dated 30 November 2012. That "report" is in fact  just  a  letter  from  the
appellant's GP which sets  out,  in  the  briefest  of  terms,  six  medical
conditions from which the appellant suffers. It does no more than provide  a
summary of diagnosis.  It  provides  no  opinion  on  the  effect  of  those
conditions  on  the  appellant.  The  final  sentence  of  the  letter   was
misconstrued by the judge. The decision records that the  appellant  is  not
able to work and will not be able to work in Nigeria. That is not  what  the
letter from the appellant's GP dated 30 November 2012. It says  "Mr  Odukoya
has been under considerable stress as he is unable to  work  and  make  ends
meet for his family at present".

28    There is no support for the appellant's assertion that he  is  so  ill
that he cannot work, either in the UK or in Nigeria.

29     The  appellant  argues  that  family  life  exists   because   of   a
relationship  of  dependency  with  his  mother.  The  appellant's  mother's
medical  conditions  are  set  out  between  documents  34  and  58  of  the
appellant's  bundle.  The  appellant's  mother  suffers  inter   alia   from
Parkinson's disease and has a diagnosis of cancer, but it is clear from  the
evidence produced that the appellant's mother is  receiving  treatment  from
the NHS. It is also clear from the evidence produced  that  the  appellant's
mother maintains her own home, she does not live with the  appellant.  There
is insufficient evidence to indicate  that  the  appellant's  mother  cannot
pursue the ordinary activities of daily living with the  assistance  of  the
appellant.

30    In Kugathas v SSHD [2003] INLR 170  the Court of Appeal said that,  in
order to establish family life, it is necessary to  show  that  there  is  a
real committed or effective  support  or  relationship  between  the  family
members and the normal emotional ties between a  mother  and  an  adult  son
would not, without more, be enough. In Etti-Adegbola v SSHD [2009] EWCA  Civ
1319 the Court of Appeal concentrated on the last  part  of  that  test  and
confirmed that the Tribunal had applied the right test  in  finding  that  a
family's behaviour was "no way exceptional  or  beyond  the  norm".   In  JB
(India) and Others v ECO, Bombay [2009] EWCA Civ 234  the  Court  of  Appeal
reiterated that the approach in Kugathas must be applied to the question  of
whether family life for the purposes of Article 8 subsists  between  parents
and adult children.

31.   The evidence in this case  indicates  that  Family  life  (within  the
meaning of Article 8 ECHR) does not exist  between  the  appellant  and  his
mother.

32    The effect of the respondent's decision would not force separation  on
the appellant's family. There is no breach  to  the  right  to  respect  for
family life.

33    It is argued that private life is established because the  appellant's
children have been in the  UK  for  6  years.  Neither  of  the  appellant's
children are "qualifying children" in terms of Section 117B(6) of  the  2014
Act. Both of the children benefit from education in the UK. They  have  made
friends in the UK. They enjoy sporting and social activities in the UK.

34    Because of the operation of Section 117B(1) of the 2002  Act,  I  must
find that removal is in the public interest. I consider the  proportionality
factor set out in Section 117B. It is in  the  appellant's  favour  that  he
speaks English but the remaining factors count against  the  appellant.  The
appellant is not financially independent. The appellant's claim is  that  he
cannot work (even though I find that  he  could).  The  appellant  last  had
leave to remain on 30 December 2011. He has remained  in  the  UK  for  more
than three and a half years illegally. That period  amounts  for  more  than
half of the lifetimes of both of his children. I must give little weight  to
any private life that has been established throughout the  period  that  the
appellant has overstayed his right to remain in the UK.

35    There are therefore more factors weighing against the  appellant  than
weighing in his favour. If I were enabled to consider this case outwith  the
Immigration Rules, I would have to find that the respondent's decision is  a
proportionate breach to any right to respect for any Article 8  rights  that
the appellant would have. However, I find that there  are  no  circumstances
which  would  merit  consideration  of  the  appellant's  case  outwith  the
Immigration Rules.

Decision

36    The decision promulgated on 10 March 2015 contains material errors  of
law.

37    I therefore set the decision promulgated on 10 March 2015 aside.

38    I remake the decision and substitute the following decision.

39    The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration Rules.

40    The appeal is dismissed under Article 8 ECHR.






                                 Signed:


                                 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
                                 3rd August 2015


