
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/50435/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 16th July 2014                             |On 21st July 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge POOLE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           JULIANA STELLA QAUINOO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B Owusu, Solicitor


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. In this determination I will refer to the parties in the order and  by
      the description adopted in the First-Tier Tribunal.
   2. The appellant, Juliana Stella Qauinoo is a citizen  of  Ghana  born  2
      August 1961.  She made application to the respondent for  a  Residence
      Card as the wife of an EEA national exercising treaty  rights  in  the
      United Kingdom.  That application was refused on 26 November 2013.

   3. The appellant appealed that decision and her appeal came before  Judge
      of the First-Tier Tribunal Simpson sitting at Taylor House on 24 March
      2014.  There was an oral hearing and each party was  represented  (the
      appellant by Mr Owusu).

   4. In a determination dated 24  March  2014  Judge  Simpson  allowed  the
      appeal having found that the appellant's marriage by proxy  was  valid
      both in the appellant's home country and  in  the  Netherlands.   That
      being the country of nationality of her spouse.

   5. The respondent appealed that decision.  The ground for  seeking  leave
      was that the judge had misdirected himself with regard  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal decision in the case of Kareem (Proxy  Marriages  -  EU  Law)
      [2014] UKUT 00024 (IAC).  It was alleged that the judge had  concluded
      that this case was authority for the recognition  of  proxy  marriages
      under Dutch Law so long as it is a valid marriage in  the  country  in
      which it was contracted.  In this case Ghana.

   6. The application for leave came before  Designated  Judge  McClure  who
      granted leave and gave as reasons the following:

         "1.  By determination promulgated on 31 March 2014 First-Tier Judge
      J Simpson allowed the appellant's appeal against the decision  of  the
      respondent to refuse her an EEA Residence Card enabling her to  remain
      in the United Kingdom as a family member of an EEA qualified person.

      2. The grounds of the application seeking permission assert that:

         a)   The judge has erred in law by not properly applying the  legal
             principles in the case of Kareem (Proxy Marriages  -  EU  Law)
             [2014] UKUT 00024 (IAC).
         b)   The judge interpreted the case law to the effect that, if  the
             marriage  was  lawful  in  Ghana,  it  was   lawful   in   the
             Netherlands.  Kareem requires that evidence of the law of  the
             Netherlands be produced in order to prove the validity of  the
             marriage under that law.

     3.  It is arguable that the case law requires the  appellant  not  only
         to produce evidence that the proxy marriage was legal in Ghana  but
         evidence also that in the country of the EEA national the  marriage
         would be recognised and lawful.  There was no evidence  as  to  the
         law of the Netherlands.  Kareem as identified in the  grounds  does
         not make any finding on the validity of proxy  marriages  according
         to the law of the Netherlands.  It is arguable that the  judge  has
         failed to follow Kareem.  Leave is granted".

   7. Hence the matter comes before me in the Upper Tribunal.  I noted  that
      the appellant's solicitors had produced a  Rule  24  response  wherein
      they asserted that Judge Simpson had correctly applied the decision in
      Kareem  but  in  the  alternative  that  the  appellant  had  provided
      independent evidence from Dutch sources to the effect that a  Ghanaian
      customary marriage would be recognised.

   8. Mr Deller drew my attention to  and  produced  a  copy  of  the  Upper
      Tribunal case of TA & Others (Kareem explained) Ghana [2014] UKUT  316
      (IAC) which gave authority to the  concept  that  an  appellant  "must
      always" have a claimed marital  relationship  examined  in  accordance
      with the laws of the Member State from which the union citizen obtains
      nationality.

   9. There ensued a discussion upon the  effect  of  TA  and  the  case  of
      Kareem.  This discussion included evidence obtained by Mr  Owusu  from
      Holland and Ghana with regard to the  question  of  recognition  of  a
      marriage by proxy.  At this stage I indicated that my preliminary view
      was that there was an error or law in Judge Simpson's determination in
      that Kareem was not authority to say that the Kingdom  of  Netherlands
      recognised proxy marriages.  Whereas the correct reading of Kareem was
      that in such a situation evidence must be adduced by the appellant  to
      show that such a marriage was recognised by the Member State and  that
      only then could an application succeed.  This  must  always  be  based
      upon the premise that the proxy marriage was recognised by the country
      in which it was conducted.  Neither representative  objected  to  this
      preliminary view.

  10. At this stage I retired to  enable  Mr  Deller  to  consider  evidence
      adduced at the hearing with regard to the position of the  Netherlands
      with regard to proxy  marriages.   This  was  evidence  not  available
      before.  Mr Deller very reasonably did not object  to  its  production
      and I consider it appropriate for that evidence to be  admitted,  read
      and considered.

  11. Upon my return to court Mr Deller indicated that his view was that the
      appellant now satisfied the requirements as  set  out  in  Kareem.   I
      agree with that proposition.

  12.  I  find  that  Judge  Simpson  did  err  in  law  by   way   of   his
      misinterpretation of the effect of Kareem.  There was evidence  before
      the  judge  with  regard  to  the  recognition  or  otherwise  by  the
      Netherlands but that was outweighed by the judge's view on the  effect
      of Kareem.  But for that error the outcome might have  been  different
      at that stage and I therefore consider the error to  be  material  and
      should be set aside.

  13. I find that I am able to remake the decision preserving  the  findings
      made by Judge Simpson.  He had expert evidence that  the  marriage  by
      proxy was recognised in Ghana.  There was evidence  before  the  judge
      then with regard to whether or not the marriage would be recognised in
      the Netherlands.  The judge had already  found  that  the  appellant's
      spouse was a national of the Netherlands.   There  are  available  two
      letters from a Dutch Advocate specialising in International Family Law
      together with a letter from the Kingdom of the Netherlands Embassy  in
      Ghana and extracts from the Dutch Civil Code.  Reference  is  made  by
      the Kingdom of the Netherlands to paragraphs 27 and 28 of the case  of
      Kareem.  To quote from the Advocate's  letter  "according  to  Article
      10:31 from the Dutch  Civil  Code  an  outer  the  Netherlands  closed
      marriage that is legally follow the law the state where  the  marriage
      took place will be recognised as such (sic)".  He goes on  to  suggest
      that a valid foreign proxy marriage  is  probably  not  against  Dutch
      Public Order and this would not be a bar against recognition.

  14. In all the circumstances I find that the appellant's marriage  to  her
      spouse is valid within Ghana (the evidence of Professor  Woodman)  and
      the appellant  has  produced  evidence  that  her  marriage  would  be
      recognised by the Dutch Authorities.

  15. Having set aside Judge Simpson's decision I  remake  it  allowing  the
      appellant's appeal.

  16. No application has been made before me for anonymity.   Judge  Simpson
      made a fee award and I have no cause to  overturn  that  part  of  his
      decision.

Decision

  17. The appeal  of  the  original  appellant  Juliana  Stella  Qauinoo  is
      allowed.




Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Poole


