
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/50916/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 11 October 2016                        |On 18 October 2016               |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                                     N M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Jegarajah, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity order
Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269), we make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
Appellant or his wife.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
parties. Any failure to comply  with  this  direction  could  give  rise  to
contempt of court proceedings.

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka who  applied  for  a  residence
    card in 2013 on the basis of her derivative right to a residence  card,
    her child being a British citizen.  Her application was refused and she
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  First  tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lal
    allowed her appeal in July 2014.  That decision was set  aside  in  the
    Upper Tribunal and the matter was remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for a fresh decision to be made. It  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Kimnell who dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on  14
    January 2016.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer  on  5
    September 2016 in the following terms:

         "If the appellant's husband is not an exempt  person,  then  it  is
         arguable that the First tier-Tribunal [sic] (FTT) failed  to  apply
         regulation 15A(7)(ii) of the EEA Regulations 2006 (as amended)."

 3. Hence the matter comes before me.

Submissions

 4. Ms Jegarajah, for the appellant, relied on her skeleton argument.   She
    acknowledged  that  the  reference  in  [8]  of  the   FTTJ   Kimnell's
    determination to the appellant's husband not being an exempt person was
    not correct: he was an exempt person. She argued,  however,  that  this
    was not merely a typographical error by the FTTJ; it was  an  error  of
    law. In any event, it cast doubt as to the reliability of the findings.
    The FTTJ should have made findings under  regulation  15A(4A)(c),  this
    being a Zambrano type situation. The FTTJ's failure to do so gave  rise
    to another error of law.  Ms Jegarajah relied on the unreported case of
    SSHD v Ms Yao Zhu, IA/32737/2013, promulgated on 17 November  2014,  at
    [16] in which Mrs Justice Andrews found the FTT  had  made  a  material
    error of law in that case in failing to address the relevant test under
    Regulation 15A(4A)(c).  There should have been  express  findings  with
    regard to that limb of the regulations.  Secondly, she  submitted  that
    the FTTJ's approach to the appeal had been wrong: he should first  have
    considered whether the husband  was  exempt  or  not  and  whether  the
    appellant was a  primary  carer  at  the  date  of  hearing;  this  was
    irrespective of the appellant's statement in her application that  they
    shared care: the issue was the situation at the date  of  hearing,  not
    the date of application. The third limb was whether the "husband" would
    be "required to leave". The failure to follow this process, and to stop
    at the first stage, amounted  to  a  material  error  of  law.   I  was
    referred to the Home Office guidance cited in Ms  Jegarajah's  skeleton
    argument.  Notwithstanding the decision of FTTJ Lal had been set aside,
    Ms Jegarajah submitted that that decision should be taken into  account
    in this appeal.

 5. Ms Jegarajah confirmed there was no challenge to the findings  of  fact
    of the FTTJ.  She also confirmed there was no challenge to the findings
    with regard to the Article 8 claim. The appeal before me was limited to
    the FTTJ's findings under the EEA Regulations.

 6. Mr Avery, for the respondent, submitted that  it  was  clear  from  the
    context that the reference in [8] to the husband not  being  an  exempt
    person was a typographical error.  This was also clear from  the  facts
    of the case, the appellant's  husband  having  been  naturalised  as  a
    British citizen in 2011, prior to the date  of  application.   He  also
    referred to the summary of the reasons for refusal at [3] to the effect
    that the issue was whether the appellant was the primary carer  of  the
    British child. As Mr Avery put it, if the husband were not exempt, this
    would have been a "pointless exercise".  The decision at [8] refers  to
    the appellant's counsel indicating "she was under instructions  not  to
    concede the point"; there would have been no requirement to concede the
    issue if the husband were not an exempt person  because  the  appellant
    would have qualified, in such circumstances, under regulation 15(7)  on
    the basis that she had shared responsibility for  her  child  with  her
    husband.  Mr Avery submitted that, barring the typographical error, the
    FTTJ had approached the issues and  evidence  properly.   His  findings
    were open to him on the evidence before him.

Discussion

 7. Regulation 18A of the regulations  (in  so  far  as  relevant  to  this
    appellant) states

             "18A.- Issue of a derivative residence card
             (1) The Secretary of State must issue a person with a
             derivative residence card on application and on production of-
             (a) a valid identity card issued by an EEA State or a valid
             passport; and
             (b) proof that the applicant has a derivative right of
             residence under regulation 15A."


   8. Regulation 15A states, in so far as is relevant to this claimant:

            "15A. Derivative right of residence
            (1) A person ("P") who is not an exempt person and who satisfies
            the criteria in paragraph (2), (3), (4), (4A) or (5) of this
            regulation is entitled to a derivative right to reside in the
            United Kingdom for as long as P satisfies the relevant criteria.


            .........
            (4A) P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if-
             (a) P is the primary carer of a British citizen ("the relevant
             British citizen");
             (b) the relevant British citizen is residing in the United
             Kingdom; and
             (c) the relevant British citizen would be unable to reside in
             the UK or in another EEA State if P were required to leave.
            ......
            (7) P is to be regarded as a "primary carer" of another person
            if
             (a) P is a direct relative or a legal guardian of that person;
             and
             (b) P-
               (i) is the person who has primary responsibility for that
               person's care; or
               (ii) shares equally the responsibility for that person's care
               with one other person who is not an exempt person.
                   .......
            (8) P will not be regarded as having responsibility for a
            person's care for the purpose of paragraph (7) on the sole basis
            of a financial contribution towards that person's care."

 9. I take account of the three limbs of Ms Jegarajah's submissions but  am
    unable to accept them for the following reasons.

10. I am wholly satisfied that the FTTJ made a typographical error  at  [8]
    in referring to the husband as not being an exempt person.  It is clear
    from the evidence and the context of the FTTJ's statement at  [8]  that
    the husband was an exempt person both at the date of application and at
    the date of hearing: he was naturalised as a British citizen  in  2011,
    prior to the application being made.  Indeed Ms Jegarajah  conceded  as
    much in her oral submissions.  I am unable to  find  that  this  is  an
    error of fact such as to amount to a material error of law: it does not
    impact on the outcome of the appeal because  the  appellant  could  not
    have qualified under Regulation 15A(7)(b)(ii),  her  husband  being  an
    exempt  person.  Nor,  for  the  reasons  set  out  below,   does   the
    typographical  error  impact  on  the  outcome  of  the  appeal   under
    Regulation 15A(4A).

11. For the avoidance of doubt, I do not accept  the  submission  that  the
    typographical error is an indicator  of  a  lack  of  scrutiny  of  the
    evidence: the sole  issue  was  whether  the  appellant  fulfilled  the
    criteria in Regulation 15A(4A) and the  FTTJ  considered  appropriately
    whether that was the case: he addressed each  of  the  issues  in  that
    Regulation, in turn.

12. There is no challenge by the appellant to  the  FTTJ's  record  of  the
    evidence given at the  hearing.   The  FTTJ  records  the  evidence  of
    relevance  to  the  appellant's  role  as  a  carer  [27].   He   makes
    appropriate findings on the issue,  particularly  noting  the  evidence
    that, in her application form,  the  appellant  identified  herself  as
    having "joint primary care" of the  children.   This  was  a  situation
    which continued at the date of hearing.   It  is  noteworthy  that  the
    appellant's counsel at the hearing focussed her argument "on Article 20
    TFEU and Article 8 ECHR, because the children  would  be  left  in  the
    United Kingdom without a carer if the appellant leaves the  UK".   That
    was a difficult submission given the evidence that  the  husband  "will
    have to take care of his children and would so  if  his  wife  was  not
    present in the UK" [22].   The FTTJ found, on the oral evidence of  the
    husband, that the children would not leave the UK if the appellant were
    required to do so.  That was a finding which was open to him. Thus  the
    FTTJ addressed all the relevant issues in reaching  his  findings  that
    the appellant shared responsibility with her husband for  the  care  of
    the children and that neither the husband nor the children would  leave
    the UK in the event of the appellant having to leave.

13. This appeal is no more than a disagreement with  the  findings  of  the
    FTTJ. It cannot succeed. There is no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    FTTJ's decision.

Decision

14. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of a material error on a point of law.

15. I do not set aside the decision.



Signed           A M Black                         Date  17 October 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black

