
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/50629/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11th November 2015                |On 2nd December 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Sajjad Ali
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Staunton, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr E Chaudhry, Eden Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although the Appellant in this case is the Secretary of State  I  refer
    to the parties as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant, a  citizen  of  Pakistan,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  dated  20th
    October 2014 to refuse him leave to remain on the basis of his marriage
    to a British citizen.  Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Lodge  allowed
    the appeal and the Secretary of State now appeals  with  permission  to
    this Tribunal.

 3. The background to this appeal is that the Appellant entered the  UK  on
    22nd May 2011 on a Tier 4 Student visa valid until 30th September 2012.
    He submitted an application for leave to remain as  a  spouse  on  25th
    September 2012 and was granted leave to remain until 14 August 2014. He
    submitted an application for leave to remain on human rights grounds on
    24 July 2014. The Secretary of State refused that  application  on  the
    basis that the Appellant did not meet S-LTR.2.2(a) of  the  suitability
    requirements of Appendix FM because the  Educational  Testing  Services
    (ETS) confirmed that  English  language  certificate  obtained  by  the
    Appellant on the basis of an English speaking test taken on 29th August
    2012 was obtained through deception.

 4. At the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal  the  judge  decided  not  to
    admit documents relating to the alleged deception submitted by the Home
    Office Presenting Officer on the morning of the hearing. However in the
    determination she went on to consider the matter as if she had admitted
    the documents. The judge found that the Appellant had not obtained  his
    English language certificate by deception. She went on to conclude that
    the Secretary of State had not considered all of the other requirements
    of Appendix FM and decided that the appropriate course  was  to  decide
    that the decision was not in accordance with the law and to  remit  the
    matter back to the Secretary of State so that the application could  be
    considered properly within the Immigration Rules.

 5. The Respondent contends in the Grounds of Appeal that the  judge  erred
    in three  respects.   It  is  firstly  contended  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge erred in refusing to admit the documents relating to the
    alleged deception due to their late submission. Mr  Staunton  submitted
    that the judge should have allowed the Secretary of State to submit the
    evidence in relation to the ETS English testing.   I  accept  that  the
    judge should have considered admitting these documents, particularly as
    she admitted documents submitted by the Appellant the  day  before  the
    hearing. In any event I consider that this  is  not  a  material  error
    because at  paragraphs  15,  16  and  17  the  judge  considered  these
    documents. She found that the evidence in relation to the  ETS  English
    test was all generic and do not refer to the Appellant specifically and
    that the only reference to the Appellant says that that  his  test  was
    invalid without giving any further explanation.

 6. The second Ground of Appeal, which is connected to the third,  is  that
    it is contended that the judge made a material misdirection of law  and
    failed to give adequate reasons for findings on material  matters.   It
    is contended on behalf of the Secretary of State that the judge made  a
    material error of law in that at paragraph 15 the  judge  said  "having
    said that even if the evidence were admitted I could not find that  the
    Respondent has established to the high standard of proof required  that
    the Appellant  has  obtained  his  test  pass  by  deception".   It  is
    contended that this  demonstrates  that  the  judge  applied  a  higher
    standard of proof than that required.  It is contended that the  burden
    is the civil standard of proof, the balance of probabilities, and  that
    there is only one civil standard of proof which is  that  the  fact  in
    issue has more probably occurred than  not.   The  Secretary  of  State
    contends that the misapplication of the standard of proof by the First-
    tier Tribunal renders the decision  unsustainable  due  to  a  material
    misdirection.

 7. Mr Chaudhry contended in his skeleton argument and in  his  submissions
    that the judge did not err in relation to the standard  of  proof.   He
    relied on the case of Giri [2014] EWHC 1832 (Admin),  and  referred  to
    paragraph  24  therein  which  discussed  the  "heightened  balance  of
    probabilities standard".  He referred also to the case of AA  (Nigeria)
    v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 773 where at paragraph 4.11 the court said  that
    the  standard  of  proof  for  matters  of  false  representations  and
    documents and other information is "a higher balance  of  probabilities
    than normal".  He also relied on the case of  Khawaja  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [1983] UKHL 8 where the court said:

         "With regard to the standard of proof, I agree with  my  noble  and
         learned friend, Lord Scarman, that for  the  reasons  explained  by
         him, the appropriate standard is that which  applies  generally  in
         civil proceedings, namely proof on a balance of probabilities,  the
         degree of probability being proportionate to the nature and gravity
         of the issue.  As cases  such  as  those  in  the  present  appeals
         involve grave issues of personal liberty, the degree of probability
         required will be high."

    I accept, reading the determination as  a  whole,  that,  although  the
    judge referred to the high standard of proof required, she was in  fact
    referring to  the  higher  balance  of  probabilities  in  relation  to
    deception.  I am satisfied that the judge weighed the evidence properly
    as at paragraph 15 she  set  out  the  evidence  on  the  side  of  the
    Secretary of State, at paragraph  16  she  set  out  the  evidence  put
    forward by the Appellant as to how and where he had set the  test,  and
    she concluded on the evidence that the Appellant had not  obtained  his
    English language test by deception.  Looking at the way  in  which  the
    judge weighed the evidence for both sides,  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    judge applied the correct standard of proof in relation to this matter.

 8. The third Ground of Appeal contends  that  the  judge  failed  to  give
    adequate  reasons  for  rejecting  the  evidence  put  forward  by  the
    Secretary of State.  However, I am satisfied that the judge put forward
    proper reasons at paragraphs 15 and  16  as  to  how  she  weighed  the
    evidence from both sides and concluded that it had not been established
    that the Appellant obtained his English language test by deception.

 9. I raised with the parties my concern as to the way in which  the  judge
    disposed of the case.  Having found that the Appellant had not obtained
    his English language certificate by deception the judge did not  go  on
    to consider whether the appeal could be allowed within or  outside  the
    Rules.  The judge said at paragraph 23 that she did not do  so  because
    neither the Appellant nor the Respondent had  applied  their  minds  to
    anything other than the issue of deception in relation to  the  English
    language certificate.  She said that there  was  very  little  evidence
    before her in relation to the financial requirements.  I also note that
    at paragraph 18 of the determination the judge noted that Mr  Chaudhry,
    who also appeared in the First-tier Tribunal for the  Appellant,  urged
    her to allow the appeal on the  basis  that  the  decision  is  not  in
    accordance with the law and that it should be returned to the  decision
    maker because, he submitted, the entire decision was infected with  the
    suggestion  that  the  Appellant  had  obtained  his  English  test  by
    deception.  The judge therefore considered that the appropriate  course
    was to allow the appeal as being not in accordance with the law so that
    it could be considered properly and fully within the Rules and  outside
    the Rules by the Secretary of State.  I raised with the parties whether
    the judge should have in fact gone on to determine the issue given that
    the reasons for refusal  letter  dealt  with  all  of  the  aspects  of
    Appendix FM.  However, I note that the Secretary of State did not apply
    for permission to appeal on this basis and the Appellant had not cross-
    appealed on this basis and in fact Mr Chaudhry had asked the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge to deal with the appeal in this way.  Neither party made
    submissions to be in relation to the disposal of the appeal.  In  these
    circumstances I did not consider it appropriate to interfere  with  the
    way in which the First-tier Tribunal Judge had disposed of the case.

10. In all of the circumstances I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge made no material error of law in determining this appeal.

Notice of Decision

The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not make a material  error  of  law
in the determination of this appeal.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 25th November 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date: 25th November 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

