
IAC-TH-CP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/50203/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated |
|On 14th November 2014                    |On 28th November 2014     |
|                                         |                          |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                      Miss Smitaben Mahendrabhai Patel
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance - letter received from her Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


            DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW AND DETERMINATION OF APPEAL

1.   On 30th November 2013, the Secretary  of  State  refused  to  vary  the
    appellant's leave to remain in the United Kingdom and also  decided  to
    remove her by way of directions under section 47  of  the  Immigration,
    Asylum  and  Nationality  Act  2006.   These  decisions  followed   the
    appellant's application on 20th October 2013 for leave to remain  as  a
    Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant.  She had earlier been given leave  in
    the same category, in July 2011, and her leave  was  valid  until  12th
    November 2013.

2.   The appellant's appeal against the adverse decisions came before First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Wahlen ("the judge") on 29th  May  2014.   Although
    listed for an oral hearing,  the  appellant  (through  her  solicitors)
    requested a determination "on the papers".  The judge took into account
    evidence which included a witness statement made by her.  He found as a
    fact that although the appellant's CAS was valid when she submitted her
    application for leave, it was  withdrawn  by  her  sponsor  before  the
    Secretary of State's decision following  a  dispute  about  fees.   The
    judge noted that the CAS might be withdrawn  or  cancelled  in  certain
    circumstances, including the expiry of a sponsoring college's  licence.
    He drew attention to guidance  published  by  the  Secretary  of  State
    providing that a person "should get 60 days leave to remain in  the  UK
    to be able to switch to a different sponsor".  No such period of  leave
    was given to the appellant by the respondent.   The  judge  accordingly
    found that the adverse decisions were not in accordance with  the  law,
    by reason of a failure to act fairly or in accordance with guidance.

3.   An application was made by the Secretary of  State  for  permission  to
    appeal.  It was contended that any deficiency in the CAS was entirely a
    matter between the appellant and the sponsoring college and nothing  to
    do with the Secretary of State.  The Court of Appeal in  Rahman  [2014]
    EWCA Civ 11 held that in the circumstances of that case,  fairness  did
    not require the Secretary of State to give an appellant an  opportunity
    to address any deficiency in a CAS.  If it was the result of a  mistake
    on the part of a sponsor, it was a matter to  be  pursued  between  the
    appellant and her college.   In  accordance  with  that  guidance,  the
    Secretary  of  State  submitted  that  fairness  did  not  require  the
    invitation of further information regarding why the CAS was  withdrawn.
    The Secretary of State's policy did not include a  positive  obligation
    to request information in every case where a CAS is withdrawn.

4.   Permission to appeal was granted, in due course, by an  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge.

5.   The appeal was listed for hearing  at  Field  House  on  14th  November
    2014.  The day beforehand, the  appellant's  solicitors  wrote  to  the
    Upper Tribunal indicating  their  client's  wish  that  the  matter  be
    determined "by way of the papers submitted in the initial appeal".   On
    the appellant's behalf, it was  argued  that  the  Secretary  of  State
    misunderstood Rahman, which was a  case  about  academic  progress  not
    being mentioned in the CAS.  In the appellant's case, withdrawal of the
    CAS was not simply a matter between the appellant and her sponsor.  The
    appellant did not discover the reason for withdrawal of the  CAS  until
    after her refusal.  This was "a  Robinson  obvious  point"  and  Rahman
    could be distinguished.

Submissions on Error of Law

6.   Mr Wilding said that it was not clear why the "60 day policy"  had  any
    bearing  on  the  appellant's  case.   As  the  judge  found   in   the
    determination, withdrawal of the CAS followed  a  dispute  about  fees.
    This was not the Secretary of State's concern.  The decision in  Thakur
    concerned a decision which led to unfairness.  This was not the case in
    the present appeal where the dispute was between a  sponsoring  college
    and a  student.   Paragraph  14  of  the  determination  had  not  been
    challenged at any stage and this contained the  judge's  assessment  of
    the evidence and the cause of withdrawal of the CAS.  It was not  clear
    how the "60 day policy" was relevant, especially where,  as  here,  the
    appellant had made an application for  further  leave.   Mention  of  a
    "Robinson obvious point" in the solicitors' letter was inappropriate as
    this was a points-based system case.

7.   I took into account the letter from the appellant's solicitors and  the
    submission made in it on the appellant's behalf.

Conclusion on Error of Law

8.   I conclude that the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  contains  a
    material error of law and must be set aside.   It  is  clear  from  the
    witness statement which was before the judge that the CAS issued to the
    appellant was withdrawn following a dispute about fees.  This is  clear
    from paragraph 4 of that statement, which was made on  27th  May  2014.
    In the same statement, the appellant indicated that she wished to enrol
    at a different college so that  she  could  continue  studying  in  the
    United Kingdom.  There was nothing in the witness statement to  suggest
    that the appellant had, by the time her  case  was  determined  by  the
    judge in late May 2014, taken any particular steps to further that aim.

9.   In any event, withdrawal of  the  CAS  was  clearly  the  result  of  a
    dispute between the appellant  and  her  sponsoring  college  regarding
    payment of fees (and in her witness statement the appellant refers to a
    discussion she had with the  college  about  this).   It  was  not  the
    concern of the Secretary of State, who simply decided  the  application
    made by the appellant in the light of the withdrawal of the CAS.

10.  The guidance given by the Court of Appeal in Rahman  is  relevant.   It
    was held (at paragraph 32) that fairness does not require the Secretary
    of State to give an appellant an opportunity to address any  deficiency
    in a CAS.  Naved and  similar  cases  may  be  distinguished.   In  the
    present appeal, as in Rahman, there was no question of the Secretary of
    State  obtaining  additional  information  without  reference  to   the
    appellant and then relying  on  it  to  refuse  the  application.   The
    Secretary of State simply applied the terms of  the  rules  themselves.
    The cause of the withdrawal of the CAS was a consequence of  a  dispute
    between the appellant and her college, the Secretary of State not being
    involved.  Although not available to the judge, the recent judgment  of
    the Court of Appeal in EK (Ivory Coast) [2014] EWCA Civ  1517  supports
    the conclusion that there has been no unfairness in this case.

11.  I conclude that the judge erred in finding that the  appellant's  leave
    fell to be curtailed to a period of 60 days, to give her an opportunity
    to find another sponsor.  The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
    set aside and must be remade.

Remaking the Decision

12.  Directions were  sent  to  the  parties  in  advance  of  the  hearing,
    advising them that if the decision were  to  be  remade,  any  evidence
    required should be filed and served so that it could be  considered  at
    the hearing.  The appellant's solicitors helpfully indicated  in  their
    letter that the appellant relied upon the documents already submitted.

13.  So far as the  decision  to  refuse  to  vary  leave  is  concerned,  I
    conclude that the appellant has not shown that it was unlawful  in  any
    respect.  The grounds of appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  contain
    brief assertions that the  appellant  provided  relevant  documents  in
    support of her application and that the Secretary of State should  have
    contacted her so that another CAS could be obtained.  It  is  contended
    that there was a failure to take  into  account  fairness  and  so  the
    decision was not in accordance with the law.  Again, however, the cause
    of withdrawal of the CAS was not a matter for the  Secretary  of  State
    and there is nothing to suggest that the appellant would have been able
    to obtain another CAS in any event.   In  her  witness  statement,  she
    mentioned a conversation with a member of  staff  at  her  college,  in
    which she was advised that the college was  allocated  only  a  limited
    number of documents and could not provide  another  CAS  as  none  were
    left.  As noted earlier, the witness statement, which was made  several
    months after the adverse decisions, contains nothing  to  suggest  that
    the appellant has taken any steps to enrol at a different college, save
    that she states that she made enquiries with a few Tier 4 sponsors  but
    cannot be enrolled in view of her immigration status.

14.  So far as the section 47 removal decision  is  concerned,  the  grounds
    suggest that the appellant relies "on the  recent  case  law".  As  the
    decision was made in November 2013, it is not clear what is meant here.

15.  The  grounds  also  contain  a  single  sentence  indicating  that  the
    appellant relies on Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.  In  this
    context, her witness statement contains no detail at all regarding  any
    private or family life ties established here since she arrived in 2011.
     I have taken into account the guidance given by the Supreme  Court  in
    Patel [2013] UKSC 72 in this context.  My primary finding is  that  the
    paucity of evidence shows that Article 8 is not engaged but, even if it
    were, there is nothing to show that any ties  the  appellant  may  have
    established here cannot be maintained from abroad and she  may  equally
    pursue further studies in the country of her  nationality,  should  she
    wish to do so.  There really is very little of any substance to put  in
    the balance against the Secretary of State's case that her  failure  to
    comply with the Immigration  Rules  and  the  absence  of  anything  to
    suggest that she is entitled to leave to remain combine to  demonstrate
    the strong public interest in the maintenance of  immigration  control.
    The appellant has not shown that the adverse decisions, or her  removal
    in consequence, breach her human rights.

16.  In summary, the appellant has not made out her grounds of appeal.   She
    has not shown that the decision to refuse to vary leave and the section
    47 removal decision are unlawful, by reason of unfairness, a failure to
    apply relevant policy or on the basis that  the  decisions  breach  her
    human rights.

17.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal, having been set aside,  it  is
    remade as follows: appeal dismissed.

DECISION

Appeal dismissed.

ANONYMITY

There  has  been  no  application  for  anonymity  at  any  stage  in  these
proceedings and I make no direction on this occasion.



Signed        Date 28th November 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell


FEE AWARD

As the appeal has been dismissed, there can be no fee award.



Signed        Date 28th November 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell
