
[pic]

UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/50612/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|on 26 November 2015                  |on 21 December 2015                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER


                                   Between

                            Mrs Jelena Lopatjuka
                         no anonymity direction made
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Latvia, born on 16  February  1986.  She
    appeals with permission against the dismissal of her appeal  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Phull against the refusal by the respondent of  her
    application for a permanent residence card as an EEA national under the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 ("the 2006 Regulations"). Her appeal
    was considered on the papers.

 2. Judge Phull stated at [9] that the appellant did not attend the hearing
    or submit original documents in support of her appeal despite the  fact
    that this was raised in the refusal letter.  An  untranslated  document
    was produced.

 3. Further, there was also a gap of evidence relating  to  the  five  year
    period, namely 2008, 2010 and 2011 [8]. She was thus  unclear  which  5
    years continuous residence period the appellant relied on as  this  had
    not been made clear in her application or the grounds  of  appeal.  She
    therefore found  that  the  appellant  did  not  satisfy  the  relevant
    requirements under the Regulation that she has been living continuously
    in the UK for five years.

 4. In granting permission to appeal, First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cruthers
    stated that it may have  been  that  the  Judge  had  before  her  bank
    statement printouts covering the period 2008  until  5  December  2014.
    Accordingly it was arguable that the Judge could have  "inferred"  that
    the appellant was contending for a  period  of  five  years  continuous
    residence up to and including the respondent's decision of 27  November
    2014.

 5. He noted that the appellant had realistically accepted in  her  grounds
    seeking permission that she may not have been clear as  to  which  five
    year continuous residence period 'she was contending for'.

 6. Mrs Lopatjuka attended the hearing before  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  26
    November 2015. She produced a  letter  she  sent  to  the  Loughborough
    support Centre and which was received on 15  June  2015  in  which  she
    stated that she and her husband completed an EEA 3 application form  in
    October 2015. Her husband was granted residence, whereas she was not on
    the basis that she did not produce the original  marriage  certificate.
    She acepted that the original certificate was not provided as it is  in
    Latvian and she assumed that the certified  copy  would  be  enough  to
    prove that she is the wife of Mr Lopatjuka, bearing in mind  that  they
    have the same last name, address and have a son.

 7. She agreed that it was unclear which five years'  continuous  residence
    period she sought to rely on. She indicated  that  she  relies  on  the
    period for the last five years up to October 2015, which  is  the  date
    when she and her husband applied for residence documents.

 8.  She  has  also  produced  various  documents  including  an   original
    certificate of marriage together with a  translation;  bank  statements
    for the last five years and a BA Hons degree from the University  which
    she completed in the three years between 2009 and 2012.

 9. She informed the Tribunal that she became pregnant in December 2012 and
    did not work for nine months until her son's birth on 9 September 2013.
    The period of continuous residence that she relied on was between  2009
    and 2015.

10. She explained that she did not work at  all  during  her  pregnancy  as
    there were 'issues'  associated  with  the  pregnancy.  In  effect  she
    contended that she has retained continuity of residence for the purpose
    of the 2006 Regulations. However, no evidence was produced to the First-
    tier Tribunal to justify, explain or excuse the nine month gap.

11. The appellant also provided her  degree  certificate  from  the  London
    Metropolitan University dated 12 July 2012.

12. In  reply,  Ms  Isherwood  helpfully  referred  the  appellant  to  the
    provisions of Regulation 7, which defines a family member.  A  copy  of
    the 2006 Regulations were provided to the appellant during  the  course
    of Ms Isherwood's submission.  For the purpose of the 2006 Regulations,
    a spouse is treated as the family member of another person.

13. Ms Isherwood referred the appellant to Regulation 15(1) relating to the
    acquiring of a permanent right of residence in the United Kingdom. This
    includes an EEA national who has resided in the UK in  accordance  with
    these  regulations  for  a  continuous  period  of  five  years.   That
    potentially  applies  to  the  appellant  -  Regulation  15(1)(a).  Her
    attention was also drawn to definition of qualified workers set out  at
    Regulation 6 (1).

14. Ms Lopatjuka indicated  that  she  now  understood  the  position.  She
    submitted that she was a qualified  person  as  she  had  been  a  self
    sufficient person under Regulation 6(1). She stated that she had  never
    become a burden on the social assistance system of the  UK  during  the
    period of her residence. However, she accepted that she had  never  had
    comprehensive sickness insurance cover in the UK.

      Assessment

15. I have had regard to the  appellant's  current  submissions,  including
    those relating to the nine month gap from working during her pregnancy.
    As already noted she did not rely before the First-tier Tribunal on the
    her pregnancy in an attempt to show continuity of residence.

16. I have nonetheless considered the submissions in that regard.

17. I have had regard to the decisions of the CJEU construing the Citizen's
    Directive. The term "worker" within Article 45 covers, to a greater  or
    lesser extent, not only actual workers but also women who,  because  of
    the physical constraints of  the  late  stages  of  pregnancy  and  the
    aftermath of childbirth, give up  work  or  jobseeking,  provided  they
    return to work or find another job within a reasonable period after the
    birth of her child - Jessy St Prix v SSWP [2014] CJEU C-507-12.

18. In Weldemichael and another (St Prix  [2014]  EUECJ  C-507/12;  effect)
    [2015] UKUT 00540 (IAC), the Tribunal at [59]  answered  the  questions
    posed at the outset, as follows:

      a) A woman will retain continuity of residence for the purposes of the
         2006 EEA Regulations for a period in  which  she  was  absent  from
         working or job seeking if, in line with the decision of the CJEU in
         Jessy St Prix;

          i. At the beginning of the  relevant  period  she  was  either  a
             worker, or seeking employment;

         ii. the relevant period commenced no more than 11 weeks before the
             expected date of confinement (absent cogent  evidence  to  the
             contrary  that  the  woman  was  physically  constrained  from
             working or seeking work);

        iii. the relevant period did not extend beyond 52 weeks; and

         iv. she returned to work.

19. In applying this reported decision, I find on  the  evidence  that  the
    appellant did not retain continuity of residence for the purpose of the
    2006 Regulations. She was absent from working or seeking employment for
    the whole of her pregnancy.  There was no cogent evidence produced that
    she was in any way physically constrained from working or that she  was
    unable to work. Nor is there any evidence that  she  was  seeking  work
    during that period. Her decision to remain off  work  was  a  voluntary
    choice in the circumstances.

20. I find that the appellant has not shown that she retained continuity of
    residence for the purposes of  the  2006  EEA  Regulations  during  her
    pregnancy.

21. Having regard to the limited evidence before the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    the finding that she had not shown that she has resided in  the  UK  in
    accordance with the 2006 Regulations for a continuous  period  of  five
    years, is sustainable.

Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    any material error of law. The decision shall accordingly stand.

    No anonymity direction is made.




    Signed   Date 10 December 2015


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer
