
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/50689/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at  Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On  27 July 2014                              |On 26 August 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                     JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL HANBURY

                                   Between

                            ABDEL MALEK BOUAMRANE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Lingorthy
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, a Home Office Presenting Officer


      DETERMINATION AND REASONS FOR FINDING OF NO MATERIAL ERROR OF LAW

Introduction

 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision of the  First  Tier
    Tribunal to  dismiss  his  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision to refuse him leave to remain in the UK.   The  Appellant  was
    granted permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  by  Judge  of  the
    First Tier Tribunal Simpson on 21st  May  2014  because  Judge  Simpson
    considered that the grounds disclosed arguable errors in  his  approach
    to the evidence which was said to show  that  the  Appellant  had  been
    resident in the UK for  a  continuous  period  of  twenty  years.    In
    particular, the Judge of the First Tier Tribunal who decided the appeal
    (Judge  Sullivan)  was  criticised  for  denying  the   Appellant   the
    opportunity to present evidence in the  form  of  a  DVD.   Immigration
    Judge Simpson decided that the  grounds  disclosed  at  least  arguably
    material errors of law.


 2. The Appellant's claimed immigration history is that he came to  the  UK
    in 1993 and had worked throughout the following twenty years.   Because
    he was in the "black economy" he had not contacted the HMRC.    He  was
    also unable to produce  medical  records  for  his  claimed  period  of
    residence.   Nevertheless, Immigration Judge Sullivan did  accept  that
    the Appellant had been in the UK since 1996 and then, due to  a  change
    in the law, was allowed to work here.   Having  analysed  the  evidence
    produced, the Immigration Judge concluded that there was a gap  in  the
    alleged twenty-year period and dismissed  the  appeal  both  under  the
    Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds on 8th April 2014.    His
    decision was promulgated on 15th April 2014.


The appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 3. By a Notice of appeal lodged on 2nd December  2013  the  Appellant,  an
    Algerian national born on 17th November 1970, attached his  grounds  of
    appeal.   These state that Immigration Judge Sullivan had  reached  the
    incorrect conclusion in that the Appellant qualified under the  twenty-
    year rule and had erred in law "regarding the Applicant's human  rights
    under Article 8."   There was a failure to consider the  insurmountable
    obstacles of relocation to Algeria and whether it would  be  reasonable
    in all the circumstances for him and his girlfriend to live there.


 4. Following the grant of permission on 21st May 2014 standard  directions
    were sent out requiring a formal application to be made  if  any  fresh
    evidence was to be sought to be adduced before the Upper Tribunal.   On
    10th June 2014 the Secretary of State  submitted  a  Rule  24  Response
    which indicates that the criticism of  Immigration  Judge  Sullivan  in
    relation to  the  failure  to  play  the  DVD  was  ill-founded.    The
    Appellant's representative had indicated his contentment at  proceeding
    with the hearing in the absence of suitable equipment on which to  play
    the DVD and there was no evidence to back up the Appellant's  assertion
    that he had been in the UK for a  full  twenty  year  period.   Indeed,
    there were numerous gaps in the documentation he supplied, particularly
    in relation to the period prior to 1996 identified by  the  Immigration
    Judge.   In the circumstances,  Immigration  Judge  Sullivan  had  been
    correct to dismiss the appeal.


 5. The hearing was fixed for 22nd July 2014 at  2.00  pm.    Both  parties
    were represented.   In the case of the  Appellant,  the  representative
    was the same legal representative who appeared before  the  First  Tier
    Tribunal.   I took a full note of the submissions made.


 6. Mr Lingorthy said that although he no longer criticised the Immigration
    Judge for his failure to play the DVD, it was relevant to look  at  the
    numerous photographs produced.  These, in his view,  demonstrated  that
    the Appellant had been in the UK since at least 1993.    He  said  that
    his client had used a false French passport to enter  the  UK  in  that
    year and therefore qualified under the twenty-year rule.   Further,  or
    alternatively, the Appellant  had  a  claim  under  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights ("ECHR") due to a  long  period  of
    residence.   I was invited to "re-make the decision" if I was in favour
    of the grounds.    It was not suggested that supplemental evidence  was
    required for me to do this.


 7.  Mr  Tufan  began  by  explaining  that  Judge  Simpson,  who   granted
    permission, had plainly got confused over the issue of the DVD  player.
     There was no insistence that the DVD was played and no application for
    an adjournment.  The burden  of  proof  rested  on  the  Appellant  and
    Immigration Judge Sullivan had carefully analysed  the  evidence  given
    and reached conclusions that were open to him.  The Article 8 claim did
    not hold up  in  the  light  of  recent  case  law.   However,  it  was
    acknowledged that the Appellant may have an  opportunity  to  apply  to
    join his girlfriend, Ms Martinez, who is in the UK.


 8. Finally, Mr Lingajorthy submitted that his client had not  persistently
    evaded immigration controls and bearing in mind that he had established
    a private or family life here the burden rested on  the  Respondent  to
    show that the removal was justified.


 9. At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision as to whether  or  not
    there was some material error of law in the decision of the First  Tier
    Tribunal.

Discussion

10. The issues before me are:

        i) Whether Immigration Judge Sullivan was entitled to conclude that
           the  Appellant  had  not  established  a  continuous  period  of
           residence in the UK for twenty years?

       ii) Whether  Immigration  Judge  Sullivan  had  failed  to  consider
           adequately or at all the guidance on Article 8 of the  ECHR  and
           in particular the  obligation  on  the  UK  Government  "not  to
           inhibit" the development of family life in  the  future  flowing
           from the case of R (Ahmadi)  v.  Secretary  of  State  for  Home
           Department [2005] EWCA Civ 1721?

      iii) Whether the manner  in  which  Immigration  Judge  Sullivan  had
           conducted the hearing had been so procedurally unfair as to deny
           the Appellant a proper opportunity to present his case?


11. I will deal with these points in turn.

(i)  Twenty year period of residence


12. The Immigration Judge fully dealt with this issue in Paragraphs 46 - 57
    of his determination.    Whilst  acknowledging  that  persons  will  be
    unable to present evidence dealing with every  day  of  their  presence
    over a period of twenty years, the Immigration Judge  was  entitled  to
    look critically at the evidence and in particular the substantial  gaps
    that there were.   Evidence for the period 1993 to 1996 was  backed  up
    by a Mr Azzedine Ghazali, but he did not attend the  Tribunal  to  give
    oral evidence.    In  the  circumstances,  the  Immigration  Judge  was
    entitled to attach little weight to  his  evidence  and  to  point  out
    discrepancies between what Mr Ghazali said and important parts  of  the
    Appellant's own evidence.    The  Immigration  Judge  was  clearly  not
    persuaded to the civil standard of proof that the Appellant lived  with
    Mr Ghazali in 1993 as the latter claimed.


13. There was oral evidence dealing with the Appellant's presence in the UK
    in 1995, but again this was fully dealt with by the  Immigration  Judge
    in Paragraph 53 of his  determination.   The  assessment  of  how  much
    weight to attach to the evidence of Laadjal Kamel was a matter for  the
    Immigration Judge and not for this  Tribunal  to  second-guess.   There
    were a number of discrepancies in the evidence given by Mr  Kamel,  who
    did attend the hearing to give oral evidence.   These are alluded to by
    the Immigration Judge in his determination.


14. There was a period of nine years (between approximately 1998 and  2007)
    where there was  minimal  if  any  evidence  at  all  pointing  to  the
    Appellant's presence in the UK.  There was a lack of  NHS,  housing  or
    HMRC records over the whole period of the Appellant's presence  in  the
    UK, but the Immigration  Judge  was  able  to  accept  the  Appellant's
    presence from 1996 onwards, albeit that  that  presence  had  not  been
    "continuous".  The lack of proper account of the Appellant's activities
    in the UK over the whole period of twenty years on which he relied  for
    the purposes of the Immigration Rules more than  justified  Immigration
    Judge Sullivan's decision that the Appellant  had  not  discharged  the
    burden which rested on him in relation to this claim.

(ii) Article 8


15. This is not a ground on which the Appellant  was  specifically  granted
    permission  to  appeal  to  this  Tribunal,  but  nevertheless  it   is
    appropriate to consider it.


16. The Immigration Judge referred correctly to recent case  law,  although
    he did not specifically refer to the case of Ahmadi.   The  Immigration
    Judge specifically referred to the recent cases of Gulshan,  Nagre  and
    Nasim.   His approach cannot be faulted, although  he  dealt  with  the
    issues concisely.   In summary, he did not find that the Appellant  had
    produced adequate evidence that his relationship with Ms  Martinez  was
    any more than boyfriend and girlfriend.    There was  no  certainty  it
    would develop from private  life  into  a  family  life.   Indeed,  the
    Immigration Judge thought that their  relationship  was  in  its  early
    stages, as appeared to be acknowledged by Ms Martinez (see Paragraph 58
    of the Determination).


17. The Appellant claims to have provided a great deal of assistance  to  a
    Mr Dahmani and there was evidence that Mr Dahmani  would  be  adversely
    affected by the Appellant's removal from the UK.   However, this was  a
    matter that the Immigration Judge fully took into account in  Paragraph
    59 of his Determination.  In summary, he was  not  persuaded  that  the
    Appellant's presence in the UK was "essential to Mr  Dahmani's  health"
    but did not dispute that some private life had been  developed  between
    them.

18. The Appellant's own ill-health was dealt with at Paragraph  60  of  the
    Determination.   Although he was on medication, this was not  a  reason
    for preventing his removal to Algeria and did not impact on the Article
    8 dismissal.


19. In the end, having taken into account all  factors  placed  before  the
    Tribunal by the Appellant, the Immigration Judge was not persuaded that
    the decision of the Respondent  to  remove  him  was  disproportionate.
    Wider considerations were involved and no "particular reason" had  been
    given as to why he should be exempt from  immigration  controls.    The
    rules were in place to support the public goal of effective immigration
    control because of the  need  to  control  those  who  are  in  the  UK
    illegally and not paying taxes or contributing  to  the  economy.     I
    find these to be sound reasons for dismissing  the  Appellant's  appeal
    under Article 8 of the  ECHR.     The  Immigration  Judge  was  plainly
    entitled to reach these conclusions on the evidence before him.

(iii)    Material Irregularity relating to the claim of the DVD


20. When Immigration Judge Simpson granted permission  to  appeal  on  this
    ground he identified that the Appellant's representative did  not  seek
    an adjournment, as is clear from Paragraph  10  of  the  Determination.
    He specifically stated that he was happy to "go ahead  without  playing
    the DVD", a position which he maintained  before  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    In any event, the content of the DVD is perhaps not as  significant  as
    the  Grounds  of  Appeal  might  suggest.    It  is  said  to   contain
    photographic  stills  of  the  Appellant  attending  the  Notting  Hill
    Carnival.  According to Mr Lingajorthy, at the hearing before the Upper
    Tribunal, it was unnecessary to play the DVD since the  photographs  on
    the DVD were placed before the Immigration Judge in any event.   In the
    circumstances, I fail to see why this was pursued as a ground of appeal
    at all.     It certainly appears that there is little substance in  the
    allegation of a procedural irregularity arising out of this and I  find
    that the Immigration Judge gave  the  Appellant  every  opportunity  to
    apply for an adjournment if he considered that the viewing of  the  DVD
    was essential before the Tribunal decided the outcome of the appeal.


Conclusion

21. The decision of the First Tier Tribunal was one that it was entitled to
    come to on the evidence presented and the submissions  made.    I  find
    that the Immigration Judge carefully considered the evidence  presented
    before him in a lengthy and detailed determination  and  reached  clear
    fact findings which have not been the subject of effective criticism on
    appeal.   In the circumstances, there is no material error  of  law  in
    the decision of the First Tier Tribunal.


Decision

The decision of the First Tier Tribunal does not contain  a  material  error
of law such that it requires to be set aside.

Accordingly, the decision of the First Tier Tribunal to dismiss  the  appeal
under the Immigration Rules  and  on  human  rights  grounds  stands.    The
present appeal is therefore dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        W E Hanbury           Dated this 22nd day of  August 2014
              Judge of the Upper Tribunal


