
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/50179/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 January 2015                            |On 27 February 2015           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                            Thomas Hagan
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, who is a national of Ghana born 5 January 1978, has been
    granted permission to appeal the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    T R P Hollingworth.  For reasons given in  his  determination  dated  8
    July 2014 the judge dismissed the appeal under the 2006 EEA Regulations
    and on human rights grounds that the appellant had brought against  the
    decision dated 17 November 2013 refusing to issue him with a  residence
    card based on a durable relationship with an EEA national.

 2. Mr Mills readily conceded that there is an error of law in the  judge's
    determination as it appears from [59] that it  was  a  draft  piece  of
    work.  Furthermore he accepted that there was procedural unfairness  in
    that the judge had found that  the  parties  had  not  entered  into  a
    genuine marital relationship despite the absence of such  an  assertion
    in the refusal letter that accompanied the decision.   He  acknowledged
    that the decision of the Upper Tribunal in Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU
    law) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 24 had not been properly applied.   The  issue
    the judge should have asked was whether the marriage  was  valid  under
    Dutch law.

 3. With commendable candour Mr  Mills  also  considered  that  there  were
    aspects of the determination which indicated an  unreasonable  approach
    to the evidence in the light of the challenge  from  the  Secretary  of
    State.

 4. In the light of the extent and nature of matters conceded and the error
    of law correctly identified by Mr Mills, I set aside  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal.  Having regard to the  factual  findings  that
    need to be made, I remit the case to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  its
    consideration; none of the findings of T R P Hollingworth stands.



Signed        Date 26 February 2015
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

