
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/50918/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 19th August 2014                             |On 22nd August 2014        |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                              AFTAB AHMAD BUTT


                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Z Nasim, Counsel, instructed by Visa Wise
                    Immigration Services

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. For convenience I shall refer to the parties as they were known in  the
    First-tier.  The Respondent appeals with permission,  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Warren L  Grant,  promulgated  on  11th  June
    2014, in which he allowed the Appellant's appeal  brought  against  the
    refusal to issue him an  EEA  residence  card.  The  Appellant  is  the
    Pakistani father-in-law of a French national Sponsor.  The Respondent's
    refusal was made on the basis that the Appellant's sponsoring  daughter
    in law was not a qualifying EEA sponsor in the context  of  Regulations
    15 and 6 of The Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006,
    as relevant for permanent residence rights of her  family  members,  as
    she had left work in August 2008, and had not returned  to  work  until
    September 2013, and so did not  have  five  years  exercise  of  treaty
    rights upon which the Appellant could rely.

The Hearing at the First-tier

 2. Judge Grant was persuaded that because  the  French  Sponsor's  husband
    had, in 2012, been granted British citizenship, conditions  as  to  the
    EEA sponsor's length of residence and activity as a  worker,  were  not
    applicable.

The Permission Application and Grounds of Appeal

 3. Permission was granted on the basis that the  issue  of  the  Sponsor's
    husband's British citizenship was not of  relevance.   The  application
    had been made with reference to Regulation 7, ie as a family member  of
    a qualifying EEA national, in this case, the Sponsor, not her  husband,
    and his British citizen status was irrelevant.

The Hearing Before Me

 4. The Appellant's representative Mr Nasim indicated at the  beginning  of
    the hearing that he  did  not  seek  to  defend  the  judge's  decision
    allowing this appeal as the force of the grounds was irresistible.

 5. The representatives were in agreement that the decision should  be  set
    aside, the error being self evidently material. Discussion followed  as
    to the venue for remaking the decision.

 6. Mr Nasim submitted  that although  the Appellant could not  succeed  on
    the basis of the arguments  which  were  developed  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, the fact that the  judge  had  made  an  error  so  that  the
    decision should be set aside, now left the Appellant free  to  re-argue
    the matter  on  the  basis  that  the  Sponsoring  daughter-in-law  has
    obtained  the requisite five years here as  a qualified person  in  the
    context of Regulation 6(1)(b) with reference to (2)(a),  in  particular
    that her qualified status as a worker  continued  from  2008  to  2013,
    uninterrupted by absence of work,  because  the  absence  was   due  to
    pregnancy/maternity and illness  as referred to in the Botwell  Medical
    Centre's letter at page 19 of the Appellant's bundle, so that  in  fact
    the  Appellant  was  able  to  establish   his   sponsor's    5   years
    uninterrupted residence as a worker. Whilst not the argument before the
    First-tier Tribunal, it was an argument open to the  Appellant  on  the
    appeal ground asserting an entitlement based  on  her  having  relevant
    worker status. The judge's determination carried no  findings  of  fact
    relevant to determining the issue. The Appellant was not in a  position
    to proceed before me today because the EEA Sponsor  was  not  at  court
    having recently given birth to a second child. In connection  with  the
    pregnancy of the sponsor in 2008 there was a recent European  court  of
    Justice case, which he did not have to hand, promulgated  on  19  July,
    which gave relevant guidance.

 7. Mr Jarvis was in agreement with the course of  action  proposed  by  Mr
    Nasim because of the absence of any factual findings at the First-tier.

 8.  Although, as I expressed to Mr Nasim at the time, I am  not  sure  how
    the case of preliminary ruling in the case of Jessy Saint Prix (Case C-
    507/12) could assist the Appellant in the context of the chronology  of
    this case, the absence of findings of fact at the  First-tier,  and  of
    the sponsor before me, does mean that I am not in a position to  remake
    the decision today, so that the  Appellant will have an opportunity  to
    better his evidence  although as will be explained to him, it can  only
    be evidence relating to facts  that  predated  the  decision.   I  have
    considered venue.  I am satisfied that in light of the  extensive  fact
    finding exercise to be conducted it is one of those  rare  cases  where
    remittal is the right course.

 9. In short the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  vitiated  by
    material  error  of  law  namely  a  failure  to  apply  the   relevant
    regulations of The Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006.

10. I set the decision aside and remit the case to the First-tier  Tribunal
    to be remade.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge


