
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/50728/2013
                                                               IA/50729/2013
                                                               IA/50730/2013
                                                               IA/50731/2013
                                                               IA/50732/2013
                                                               IA/50733/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 5 June 2014                                |On 23 June 2014              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

            Wilge Velasco Velasco Villavicencio (first appellant)
             Esther Janett Barroso De Velasco (Second Appellant)
                  Barbara Velasco Barroso (Third Appellant)
               Evonne Wilma Velasco Barroso (Fourth Appellant)
                   Wilge Velasco Barroso (fifth appellant)
                 Stephanie Velasco Barroso (sixth appellant)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr P Thoree, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, HOPO

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of State  has  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Pedro allowing the appeals of the
    appellants under Article 8 of the ECHR.

2.   The appellants are citizens of Bolivia.  The second  appellant  is  the
    spouse of the first appellant.  The  third,  fourth,  fifth  and  sixth
    appellants are the children of the first and second appellants.

3.   The first appellant entered the UK on 1 February  2003.   He  was  last
    granted entry clearance as a student valid  until  7  July  2004.   The
    second, third and fourth appellants entered the UK as dependants of the
    first appellant on 20 March 2004.  They were granted  an  extension  of
    leave to remain on 26 August 2004 until 31 December  2005.   The  fifth
    and sixth appellants were born in the UK on  23  December  2004  and  3
    September 2010 respectively.

4.   On 6 March 2012 all the appellants applied for leave  to  remain  under
    Article 8.  Their applications were refused on 16 April  2013.   On  26
    April  2013  the  respondent  received  a  pre-action  protocol  letter
    followed by a judicial review  claim  form  dated  30  May  2013.   The
    consent order was sealed on 8 October 2013 with the respondent agreeing
    to reconsider the decision and set removal directions if  the  decision
    was to be maintained, and to do this by  8  January  2014.   The  final
    decision to refuse their applications was made on 19 November 2013,  by
    which  time  the  new  family  and  private  life  provisions  of   the
    Immigration Rules had come into force on 9 July 2012.  The  judge  said
    that both representatives were in agreement at the commencement of  the
    hearing that given that their applications were made on  6  March  2012
    before the coming into  force  of  the  new  family  and  private  life
    provisions into the Immigration Rules on 9  July  2012,  that  the  new
    provisions were not applicable to the appellants' applications and that
    the decisions under appeal fell to be considered under the  Immigration
    Act Rules as they stood prior to 9 July 2012.   Therefore,  the  family
    life provisions of Appendix FM  and  the  private  life  provisions  of
    paragraph 276ADE of the current Immigration Rules were  not  applicable
    in these appeals.

5.   The appellants' solicitor, Mr Thoree, confirmed to the judge  that  the
    appellants were relying on one ground of appeal only;  being  that  the
    removal of the appellants in consequence of the respondent's  decisions
    would be unlawful under Section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 as being
    incompatible with the appellants' Convention rights under Article 8.

6.   The judge therefore considered the appellants'  Article  8  appeals  in
    line with Razgar and adopted the five step approach.
7.   He said it was not in issue that  all  six  appellants  form  a  family
    unit.  He was not satisfied that the respondent's decision  and/or  the
    appellants'  removal  to  Bolivia  as  one  family  unit  would  be  an
    interference with their established family life  sufficient  to  engage
    Article 8.

8.   The judge was also satisfied that the six appellants  have  established
    private life in the UK.  The first appellant has now been in the UK for
    eleven years.  The second, third and fourth appellants  have  now  been
    here for ten years.  The fifth and sixth appellants were born here  and
    have lived here all their lives, be now aged 9 and 3 respectively.   He
    was satisfied on the evidence produced to him that the first and second
    appellants are in employment and that  they  have  been  in  employment
    since their arrival in the UK, albeit that  such  employment  has  been
    unlawful since at least their leave to remain expired in December 2005.
     He also accepted that the minor appellants are all at school and  that
    all six appellants have made friends  and  acquaintances,  as  well  as
    establishing their lives in  the  UK.   In  the  circumstances  he  was
    satisfied that they have established private lives in the UK  and  that
    the respondent's decisions to remove them  amount  to  an  interference
    with their private lives to a degree of  severity  required  to  engage
    Article 8.

9.    The  judge  then  turned  to  proportionality.   He   considered   the
    immigration history of the first and second appellants and  found  that
    they had an appalling history of blatant  disregard  for  UK  laws  and
    immigration control.  The first appellant arrived on a student visa  in
    February 2003 and arranged for  the  second  appellant  and  their  two
    children to join him as dependants on his student visa in  March  2004.
    When their leave to remain expired on 31 December 2005, the  first  and
    second appellants simply decided to remain in the UK without making any
    attempt to regularise their stay until their current applications  were
    made in March 2012, more than six years after their leave to remain had
    expired.

10.  The judge also found that the first and second appellants  have  worked
    unlawfully in the UK, again  in  blatant  disregard  for  UK  laws  and
    immigration control.  He accepted that although they worked unlawfully,
    they have worked hard to support themselves and their children  in  the
    UK and there was no evidence before him to indicate that they  have  at
    any time taken advantage of public funds, although he  has  taken  into
    account that they have received the benefit of  public  expenditure  in
    relation to all of  their  children  receiving  the  benefit  of  state
    education as well as  the  whole  family  availing  themselves  of  NHS
    treatment as and when required.  The judge found  that  the  manner  in
    which the appellants have conducted themselves in breach of UK laws and
    immigration control is to be condemned and in no way condoned.

11.  The judge then considered the best interests of the children which,  he
    said in light of the guidance of the Supreme Court in  ZH,  must  be  a
    primary consideration.  This means that they must be considered  first.
    He said the innocence of the child appellants in this  appeal  must  be
    given due regard.  At the hearing the third  appellant,  now  aged  16,
    gave oral evidence before him.  She indicated that it was  only  a  few
    months ago in December 2013 that the first appellant discussed with her
    the possibility of them having to return to Bolivia, and that  she  was
    completely shocked by this.  The judge accepted that none of the  child
    appellants were aware that their lives may not be able to  continue  in
    the UK and that they may be forced to return to  Bolivia  until  fairly
    recently.  The third and fourth appellants arrived in  the  UK  at  the
    ages of 6 and 5 respectively and have now been in the UK for  a  period
    of ten years.  The fifth and sixth appellants were born in the  UK  and
    are now aged 9 and 3, having lived all their lives in the UK.  While he
    accepted that the youngest child (the sixth appellant) would  be  going
    to Bolivia with his parents and would be readily able to adapt to  life
    in Bolivia with his parents' support, the judge did not  consider  that
    the same could be said of the third, fourth and fifth appellants.

12.  The judge said it was of interest to know that whilst, for  reasons  he
    has already given in this determination  the  provisions  of  paragraph
    276ADE of the current Immigration Rules are  not  directly  applicable,
    nonetheless it is specifically prescribed in paragraph 276ADE  that  an
    applicant should be considered for leave to remain on  the  grounds  of
    private life under the age of 8 and has lived continuously  in  the  UK
    for at least seven years.  He relied on the Upper  Tribunal's  decision
    in  Azimi-Moayad  and  Others  (decisions  affecting  children;  onward
    appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197 (IAC) which held that seven years  from  the
    age of 4 is likely to be more significant to a  child  than  the  first
    seven years of life.  This factor is even more significant in the  case
    of the second and third appellants who have now been in the UK for  ten
    years since the ages of  6  and  5  and  are  now  16  and  15,  having
    established social and cultural ties as well as being at  an  important
    stage of their education.  The fifth appellant was born in the  UK  and
    is now 9 years old.  He has now been here for a period considerably  in
    excess of seven years and has lived here all his life, albeit that  his
    period of stay in the UK commenced from birth and not from the  age  of
    4.

13.  The judge considered  that  all  four  child  appellants  are  Bolivian
    citizens.  The judge did not accept Mr Thoree's argument  that  in  the
    case  of  the  fifth  appellant  he  will  be  eligible  to  apply  for
    registration as a British citizen in December 2004 at the  age  of  10,
    having lived in the UK continuously since birth.  This was  because  he
    had to consider the position at the date of the hearing  and  therefore
    citizenship was not a factor weighing in their favour.   He  considered
    however that the need and desirability for stability and continuity  of
    social  and  educational  provision,  as  well  as  what  would  almost
    certainly amount to a severe disruption to  the  social,  cultural  and
    educational ties of the child appellants, and  particularly  the  third
    and fourth appellants, have developed in the UK, are factors  which  in
    his view give considerable weight to the best interests of these  child
    appellants remaining in  the  UK,  despite  the  appalling  immigration
    history of their parents.  After careful consideration of the facts  he
    found that the balance just tipped in favour of the appellants  because
    of the best interests of the children.

14.  The judge found that when the appellants came to the attention  of  the
    Home Office by making an application for leave  to  remain  in  the  UK
    under Article 8 of the ECHR, it would appear that  the  respondent  was
    content simply to refuse to grant leave to remain but to take no action
    to remove them from  the  UK.   The  appellants,  through  their  legal
    representative, were forced to issue  judicial  review  proceedings  to
    trigger any removal decision being made.  The judge found that  all  of
    this history did not demonstrate a concern or anxiety on  the  part  of
    the respondent to remove  the  appellants  from  the  UK,  but  instead
    appears to be an indictment of a systemic failure  over  the  years  to
    pursue  the  public  interest  in  maintaining  effective   immigration
    control.  Through a  combination  of  this  systemic  failure  and  the
    appellants' abuse of immigration control, there  has  been  accumulated
    the very lengthy period of time  that  the  child  appellants,  and  in
    particular the third and fourth appellants, have now resided in the  UK
    and developed considerable social, cultural and educational ties  here,
    which in all the circumstances of this case, he considered it would  be
    inappropriate to disrupt in light of the guidance in the  case  law  to
    which he had referred and the particular circumstances of this case  in
    which the child appellants are innocent victims.   He  therefore  found
    that the respondent's decisions in relation to all six appellants  were
    disproportionate.

15.  The respondent was granted permission to argue  grounds  that  arguable
    that the judge erred  in  failing  to  consider  the  guidance  Gulshan
    (Article 8 - new Rules -  correct  approach)  [2013]  UKUT  640  (IAC),
    namely, if there are arguably good grounds for granting leave to remain
    outside the Immigration Rules, is it necessary for Article  8  purposes
    go on to consider whether are compelling circumstances not sufficiently
    recognised under the Rules.  The judge it was argued made  no  findings
    in this regard and proceeded to undertake a  free  standing  Article  8
    assessment.

16.  Mr Wilding relied on the respondent's grounds of appeal.  He said  that
    although the determination on its face was dense  and  detailed,  there
    was little engagement with the process which Gulshan set  for  judicial
    makers looking at Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.  Mr  Wilding
    submitted that the  judge  erred  in  putting  to  one  side  that  the
    appellants do not  meet  the  Article  8  Immigration  Rules  and  then
    embarked on a freewheeling Article  8  analysis.   He  sidetracked  the
    immigration history of the first and second appellants and the negative
    aspects simply because of the children.  MK India states that Article 8
    is a two stage assessment.  Section 55 is not determinative.  It is  to
    be treated as a primary consideration.

17.  I find in this case, as recorded at paragraph 8 of  the  determination,
    that both  the  HOPO  below  and  Mr.  Thoree,  the  appellants'  legal
    representative were in agreement at the  commencement  of  the  hearing
    that because the appellants made their applications  on  6  March  2012
    before the coming into  force  of  the  Article  8  provisions  of  the
    Immigration Rules on  9  July  2012,  the  family  life  provisions  of
    Appendix FM and the private life provisions of paragraph 276ADE of  the
    current Immigration Rules did not apply to these  appeals.   The  judge
    agreed because  he  noted  at  paragraph  20  that  the  provisions  of
    paragraph 276ADE of the current Immigration  Rules  were  not  directly
    applicable. It is therefore not right to argue that the  judge  put  to
    one side that the appellants do not meet the Article  8  provisions  of
    the  Immigration  Rules  and  embarked  on  a  freewheeling  Article  8
    analysis.

18.  The respondent relied on Gulshan but  I  find  that  Gulshan  does  not
    apply to these appeals.  Gulshan made her application  on  5  September
    2012 after the coming into force of the  new  Immigration  Rules.   Her
    application could not succeed under the new/current Immigration  Rules.
    This led the  Upper  Tribunal  to  hold  that  the  judge  should  have
    addressed the Article 8 family aspects  of  an  appellant  through  the
    Immigration Rules  and  the  private  life  aspects  through  paragraph
    276ADE.  It is only if there were arguably good  grounds  for  granting
    leave to remain outside the Rules was it necessary for  the  judge  for
    Article 8 purposes to go on to consider whether there  were  compelling
    circumstances  not  sufficiently  recognised  under  the  Rules.    The
    appellants in this case, however, made their applications in March 2012
    before the coming into force of the new Article  8  Immigration  Rules.



19.  I find that these appeals are more in  line  with  Edgehill  &  Another
    [2014] EWCA Civ 402.  The principal issue in Edgehill was  whether  the
    Upper Tribunal correctly applied the transitional provisions set out in
    the Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules promulgated  on  13  June
    2012.  Those changes in Immigration Rules came into effect  on  9  July
    2012.  Edgehill made her application on 22 August 2011 with a right  of
    abode in the UK on  the  grounds  of  ancestry,  or  alternatively  for
    indefinite leave to  remain  under  Article  8  ECHR.   The  respondent
    refused her application on 7 March 2012.  Her appeal was  dismissed  by
    the First-tier Tribunal on both limbs.  Her essential  argument  before
    the Court of Appeal was  that  the  Upper  Tribunal  erred  in  placing
    reliance on Rule 276ADE  of  the  new  Rules,  since  those  Rules  are
    expressly disapplied in respect of applications  for  leave  to  remain
    made before 9 July 2012.  The Court of Appeal held at [32] "...To adopt
    the language of Lord Browne in Mahad, "the natural and ordinary meaning
    of the words, recognising that they are statements of the Secretary  of
    State's administrative policy", is that the Secretary  of  State  would
    not place reliance on the new Rules when dealing with applications made
    before 9 July 2012."  The Court of Appeal held at [41]  "Major  changes
    to the  Immigration  Rules  came  into  force  on  9  July  2012.   The
    transitional provisions stated that the new rules would  not  apply  to
    applications for leave to remain before that date."

20.  In light of the Court of Appeal's decision in  Edgehill,  I  find  that
    the judge did not err in law in his failure to apply Gulshan.

21.  The judge's decision allowing  the  appeals  of  the  appellants  shall
    stand.



Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

