



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/50068/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London                    |Decision & Reasons         |
|                                                |Promulgated                |
|On 5th June 2015                                |On 24th June 2015          |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts

                                   Between

                           Mr muhammad jahan zaib
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss A Jones, of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,   with  permission,  by  the
    Appellant against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Stokes) in which  it  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision to refuse  him  a  Residence  Card  as  a
    Qualified Person under the EEA Regulations 2006. The Appellant  claimed
    he qualified for a Residence Card because he was entitled to  permanent
    residence in the UK under Regulation 15(1) of 2006 Regulations.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan  born  26th  December  1980.  He
    arrived in the UK in possession of a Student Visa.  His  Sponsor  is  a
    national of Slovakia  who  first  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  in
    September 2004 and has remained here  since;  either  as  an  employee,
    student or job seeker.

 3. The Appellant and the Sponsor met each other  sometime  around  October
    2014 and formed a relationship. In March 2007 their son was born and in
    April 2007 they married. The Appellant was then issued with a Residence
    Card on 1st April 2008.

 4.  On 1st March 2013 he applied for permanent residence.  The  Respondent
    refused that application on 14th November 2013 on the grounds that  the
    Appellant had not provided evidence that he had resided in  the  UK  in
    accordance with the EEA Regulations, for a continuous  period  of  five
    years. It is that refusal which came before the FtT on appeal.

Hearing before the FtT

 5. The FtT dismissed the appeal on the following basis. The Judge accepted
    that the Sponsor had by September 2009, acquired a right  to  permanent
    residence herself having been a qualified person for five  years  prior
    to that point [23].

 6. The FtT then went on  to  say  that  the  Appellant  had  not  acquired
    permanent residence because there was insufficient  evidence  that  the
    Sponsor had  been  a  qualified  person  for  five  years  after  their
    marriage. The Judge therefore dismissed the appeal.

 7. The grant of permission succinctly sets out the discrete  issue  before
    me and the relevant parts are reproduced here.

         "The Appellant seeks permission  to  appeal,  in  time,  against  a
         decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Stokes,  promulgated  on  the
         7th January 2015, to dismiss the  appeal  against  refusal  of  his
         application of a Residence  card  in  recognition  of  his  claimed
         permanent right of residence in the United Kingdom.

         It is arguable that  once  the  appellant's  wife  had  acquired  a
         permanent right of residence in the UK, the  Tribunal  should  have
         treated  the  appellant  as  thereafter  residing  with   her   "in
         accordance with" the 2006 Regulations  regardless  of  whether  she
         continued to be a 'qualified person' for the purposes of Regulation
         6  [noting,  in  particular,  the  contrast  in   wording   between
         Regulations 14  and  15  respectively].  The  contention  that  the
         reasoning in JM(Liberia) [2006] EWCA Civ 1402 is equally applicable
         to a refusal to grant a Residence Card as it is  to  a  refusal  to
         grant leave  to  remain  in  the  UK  is  less  persuasive  but  is
         nevertheless arguable. Permission to appeal is accordingly  granted
         in respect of both grounds contained within this application."

The UT Hearing

 8. Before me Miss Jones on behalf of the Appellant  submitted  that  there
    was only one issue; had the FtT erred in its finding that the Appellant
    had not acquired the right  of  permanent  residence,  because  of  its
    misinterpretation of when the five year qualifying period as  a  family
    member ran? She submitted that  the  grounds  granting  permission  had
    properly set out the argument and on the facts found,  the  FtT,  could
    only have come to the conclusion that the Appellant's appeal should  be
    allowed under Regulation 15. She said that she  accepted  that  grounds
    seeking permission had referred to Article 8, but she was not  pursuing
    that matter.

 9. Mr Nath essentially relied upon his rule 24 response which he  accepted
    appeared on the face of it appeared  to  say  the  Judge  had  directed
    himself correctly but then said the decision was fatally flawed. Whilst
    not conceding the issue he had nothing further to add.

Consideration of Error of Law

10. I accept Miss Jones' submission. I am satisfied that the FtT  erred  in
    its conclusion, because it is clear the Judge has  focussed  solely  on
    Regulation 6(2) and  overlooked  Regulations  14  and  15.  The  latter
    Regulations are the relevant ones in this appeal. That omission renders
    the determination fatally flawed and the decision must be set aside.

Remaking the Decision

11. I find I am in a position to remake the  decision  since  there  is  no
    great challenge to the facts found by the FtT. I accept that  the  Rule
    24 response does appear to make some reference to the FtT's  chronology
    and findings on whether comprehensive sickness  policy  was  available.
    However Mr Nath did not seek to develop those points further.

12. Therefore, the relevant undisputed facts in this appeal are;

     1) The Appellant and his Sponsor married on 2nd April 2007.

     2) The Sponsor acquired permanent residence  on  11th  September  2009
        having been a qualified person for five years prior to  that  date.
        She has not lost her permanent residency and has remained in the UK
        since in accordance with the Regulations

     3) The Appellant has resided continuously with his Sponsor - they have
        a 7 year old child. Regulation 15(1) says:

         "The following persons shall acquire the right  to  reside  in  the
         United Kingdom permanently -

         (a) an EEA national who  has  resided  in  the  United  Kingdom  in
         accordance with these Regulations for a continuous period  of  five
         years;

         (b) a family member of an EEA national who is not  himself  an  EEA
         national but who has resided in the United  Kingdom  with  the  EEA
         national in accordance with  these  Regulations  for  a  continuous
         period of five years."

         Regulation 14 says:

         "(1) A qualified person is entitled to reside in the United Kingdom
         for so long as he remains a qualified person.

         (2) A family member of a qualified person residing  in  the  United
         Kingdom under paragraph (1) or of an EEA national with a  permanent
         right of residence under Regulation 15 is entitled to reside in the
         United Kingdom for so long as he remains the family member  of  the
         qualified person or EEA national.

13. The FtT found at [22] and [23] that the Sponsor was a qualified  person
    from September 2004 until November 2010. There is  a  finding  at  [23]
    that in the light of this the Sponsor acquired the right  of  permanent
    residence in September 2009.  She has not lost that right since she has
    remained in  the  UK  since  that  time  in  accordance  with  the  EEA
    Regulations. Those findings stand unchallenged.

14. It follows therefore, from the date of his marriage on 2nd  April  2007
    until September 2009 the Appellant had a  right  of  residence  as  the
    family member of a qualified person and from September  2009  onward  a
    right of residence as the family member  of  a  person  with  permanent
    residence. Therefore he has resided in accordance with the  regulations
    for a continuous five year period and so by 2nd April 2012 had acquired
    the right of permanent residence.  Accordingly this appeal is allowed.

Decision

15. The decision of the FtT is set aside for  legal  error.  I  remake  the
    decision. The Appellant's appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made


Signature                                             Dated
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Fee Award

As I have allowed the appeal, I make a fee award of any fee which  has  been
paid.


Signature                                             Dated

