
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and  Asylum  Chamber)                           Appeal  Number:
IA/50721/2014

                       IA/19562/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
Heard  at  Field  House,  London                                 Decision  &
Reasons Promulgated
On  7th  March  2016                                                On  31st
March 2016

Before:
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY

Between:
                        MS DANIELA LIANE BONAVENTURA
                          MR MUHAMMAD ZEESHAN RANA
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellants: Miss Dogra (Counsel)
For the Respondent: Miss Brocklesby-Weller (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1. This is the Appellants' appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Abebrese promulgated on the 6th October 2015, in  which
      he dismissed to the Appellants' appeal  under  the  Immigration  (EEA)
      Regulations.


   2. Permission to appeal has been granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce on
      the 10th January 2016 on the grounds that  it  was  arguable  that  in
      reaching the decision of the First-Tier Tribunal failed to have regard
      to material evidence and failed to give reasons for its conclusion. It
      was further stated that it was arguable that the determination  failed
      to engage with the merits of the  decision  taken  against  the  First
      Appellant Ms Bonaventura and that the notice of decision had indicated
      that she faced removal by reference  to  Regulation  19  (3)  on  that
      ground that she had ceased to have the right to reside in the UK under
      the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 and there has been no  findings
      as to whether or not she was exercising Treaty Rights,  and  that  the
      determination simply stated that she had "been made a party  to  these
      proceedings" because of the allegation that the marriage was a sham.


   3. Although it is stated by Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce that there were no
      findings in respect of whether  or  not  Miss  Bonaventura  was  still
      exercising Treaty  Rights,  Ms  Brocklesby-Weller  on  behalf  of  the
      Secretary of State and Ms Dogra on behalf  of  the  Appellants  agreed
      that within the IS.151A Notice given to Ms Bonaventura dated the  15th
      December 2014, the reasons set out  were  specifically  that  she  had
      attempted to enter into a sham marriage with  Muhammad  Zeeshan  Rana,
      and that the Judge was therefore correct in considering her appeal  on
      the basis of whether or not she had entered into a sham marriage.



   4. However, it was conceded, quite properly by Miss Brocklesby-Weller  on
      behalf of the Respondent, that despite the contents of the Respondents
      Rule 24 reply, the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Abebrese  did
      contain a material error of law, in that it  is  not  clear  from  the
      decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Abebrese,  that  he  properly
      considered all of the  evidence  before  him.  Miss  Brocklesby-Weller
      conceded that the First-Tier Tribunal Judge predominantly relied  upon
      what had been stated by the Respondent as  being  the  errors  in  the
      first interviews conducted with the Appellants on  the  15th  December
      2014, and there was no specific  reference  to  the  second  interview
      conducted on the 15th April 2015. Further she agreed that it  was  not
      clear from  the  decision  that  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  had
      properly considered the statements filed on behalf of  the  Appellants
      and the other supporting documents filed in  support  of  the  appeal,
      none of which were specifically referred to in any detail  within  the
      determination. She therefore  conceded  that  there  was  seemingly  a
      failure to take account of material evidence, and that if  the  First-
      Tier Tribunal Judge had taken account of this  evidence,  he  had  not
      specifically set out any consideration of the second interview nor had
      he specifically  set  out  his  consideration  of  the  statements  or
      supporting documents in relation to his findings, despite having  made
      reference to them at [89] of the decision.


   5.  In light of these concessions I  do  find  that  the  Judge  has  not
      properly considered all of the material evidence before him, and  that
      he either has not taken account of the second interview, together with
      the statements and supporting documents filed by the Appellant, or  if
      he has he has inadequately explained why they were not relevant to his
      findings at [13 and 14].



   6. I therefore set  aside  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Abebrese, and remit the  case  back  to  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  of
      rehearing before any First-tier Tribunal Judge other  than  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Abebrese.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Abebrese containing, as  had  been
agreed between the parties, does contain a material error of law, such  that
the decision of First-Tier Tribunal Judge Abebrese is set aside;
The case is remitted back to the First-Tier Tribunal for rehearing de  novo,
before any First-tier Tribunal Judge other than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
Abebrese.

Signed
Dated 7th March 2015

R McGinty
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal McGinty
