
[pic]
IAC-AH-sc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/50780/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2nd October 2015                  |On 12th October 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             DIANA Alvarez Vega
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr  S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Turner of Counsel instructed by Farani Javid
                    Taylor, Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against the decision  of  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Wiseman (the Judge) promulgated on 15th May 2015.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and I will refer to her as the Claimant.

 3. The Claimant is a female Spanish citizen born  26th  January  1980  who
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against the  Respondent's  decision
    dated 19th December 2014 to remove her from  the  United  Kingdom  with
    reference to regulations 19(3)(a), (c) and  21B(2)  and  24(2)  of  The
    Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  (the   2006
    Regulations).

 4. There was no reference  in  the  decision  as  to  why  the  Respondent
    proposed to remove the Appellant and there was no Reasons  for  Refusal
    letter.  There was reference in form IS.151A (EEA) which is a notice to
    a  person  liable  to  removal,  indicating  that  the  Appellant   was
    considered to be a person who had entered into or  attempted  to  enter
    into a sham marriage.

 5. The appeal was heard by the judge on 29th April 2015.  The Secretary of
    State was not represented at the hearing.

 6. The judge considered the bundle of documents submitted on behalf of the
    Secretary of State and found  that  there  was  no  evidence  contained
    therein to indicate that the Claimant had entered into a sham marriage.
     It was the Claimant's  case  that  she  had  entered  into  a  genuine
    marriage with Mehraj Ali, who she had  married  at  Greenwich  Register
    Office on 23rd December 2014.

 7. The judge noted the absence  of  any  interview  record  or  any  other
    document to prove a sham marriage.  The judge found that the  Secretary
    of State had provided no evidence to support the decision that had been
    made,  and  therefore  allowed  the  appeal  pursuant   to   the   2006
    Regulations.

 8. This prompted the Secretary of State to apply for permission to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal.  The grounds contend that the  judge  failed  to
    resolve a conflict.  It was  submitted  that  the  judge  had  made  no
    findings as to whether or not the  Claimant  had  been  involved  in  a
    marriage of convenience and that he had erred in  simply  allowing  the
    appeal  because  the  Secretary  of  State  had  not  provided   enough
    information.  It was submitted that if the  judge  could  not  reach  a
    decision on the evidence  before  him,  he  should  have  directed  the
    Secretary of State to provide such evidence before a decision could  be
    reached.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Mark Davies, who found;

         "The decision is wholly inadequate as the  judge  appears  to  have
         ignored, without any explanation, evidence that was before him that
         the Appellant had entered into a sham marriage.

         The grounds and the determination do disclose an arguable error  of
         law."

10. Following the grant of permission the Claimant did not lodge a response
    pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.  The Tribunal issued directions that  there  should  be  an  oral
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had erred in law such that the decision should be set aside.

Oral Submissions

11. Mr Whitwell relied upon the grounds contained  within  the  application
    for permission to appeal although he conceded that he was unclear as to
    what documents had been submitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  by  the
    Secretary of State.  I indicated that the documents were on file  under
    cover of form ICD.2730 dated 30th January 2015.  I  had  perused  those
    documents and could find no evidence that  related  to  a  marriage  of
    convenience.  I allowed Mr Whitwell the  opportunity  to  consider  the
    documents and he accepted that there was  no  such  evidence.   In  the
    light of that Mr Whitwell accepted that as the burden of proof  was  on
    the Secretary of State, it was  somewhat  difficult  to  criticise  the
    judge in the light of the lack of evidence.  Mr  Whitwell  pointed  out
    that the author of the grounds seeking permission would not  have  been
    aware what documentation was before the First-tier Tribunal.

12. I then heard submissions from  Mr  Turner  who  contended  that  as  no
    evidence had been produced by the Secretary of State, the judge had not
    erred in law.

My Conclusions and Reasons

13. The judge did not err in law.  I respectfully disagree with  the  judge
    granting permission.  I observe that notice of the First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing was given on 14th January 2015 to both parties.  The  Secretary
    of State did not  apply  for  an  adjournment  and  did  not  supply  a
    Presenting Officer.

14. It is common ground that  the  burden  of  proof  in  this  appeal  was
    initially on the Secretary of State.  I find as a fact that the  bundle
    submitted by the Secretary  of  State  did  not  contain  any  relevant
    evidence to support the contention that the Claimant had entered into a
    marriage of convenience.  There  was  no  reasons  for  refusal  letter
    explaining the Secretary of State's decision, and no interview notes.

15. The judge correctly found that there was a complete absence of evidence
    to prove that the Claimant had entered into a marriage  of  convenience
    and made this point in paragraphs 20, 23 and 25 of his decision.

16. In the absence of any application for an adjournment, it is in my  view
    simply wrong to contend that  the  judge  should,  in  the  absence  of
    evidence, have adjourned the hearing to allow the Secretary of State to
    provide evidence.

17. The judge, in my view, would have erred had he adjourned  the  hearing,
    and his decision discloses no error of law.  This is not a  case  where
    the judge failed to resolve any conflict of evidence, as there  was  no
    evidence before him that the Claimant had entered into  a  marriage  of
    convenience.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error  of  law.
The decision therefore stands and the appeal of the Secretary  of  State  is
dismissed.

Anonymity

No anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  There has  been
no request for anonymity, and the Upper Tribunal makes no  anonymity  order.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall    5th October 2015



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands and  therefore  so  does  the
decision to make a fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall    5th October 2015
