
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/50038/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Stoke                                   |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 14th April 2016                               |On 3rd June 2016           |
|                                                 |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  bin chen
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Johnstone, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Timson, instructed by Taylor Rose Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State  I  refer  to  the
    parties as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant, a citizen of China, appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal
    against a decision of the Secretary of State dated 9 December  2014  to
    refuse his application for leave to remain in the UK as the spouse of a
    person with indefinite leave to remain. The application was refused  on
    the grounds that the English language test undertaken by the  appellant
    on 12 December 2012 had been cancelled  and  he  had  therefore  sought
    leave  to  remain  by  deception  and  accordingly  did  not  meet  the
    suitability requirements of Appendix FM of the Immigration  Rules.  The
    appellant's appeal was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Manuel  and
    the Secretary of State appeals with permission to this Tribunal.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal Judge allowed the  appeal  on  the  basis  that
    there was insufficient specific evidence identifying the  appellant  as
    one of the candidates who is alleged to have used a proxy test taker in
    the ETS test. The Judge concluded that the decision of the Secretary of
    State was not in accordance with the law and allowed the appeal.

 4. In her grounds of appeal the Secretary of State contends that the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge erred in failing to provide  adequate  reasons  for
    finding that the Secretary of State has not discharged  the  burden  of
    proof upon her to establish that this appellant used deception.  It  is
    contended that, when read in conjunction with one another,  the witness
    statements  detail  the  investigations  undertaken  by  ETS  on   this
    appellant's case and the process  of  identifying  those  tests  to  be
    invalid.

 5. At the hearing before me Ms Johnstone submitted that the reasons  given
    by the  judge  in  paragraphs  16,  17  and  18  of  the  decision  are
    inadequate. She relied on the ETS SELT Source Data document at Annex  A
    of the bundle beginning with the witness statement of Hilary  Rackstraw
    which, she submitted, related to this appellant. Although she  accepted
    that the version before the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not show  the
    appellant's name, she submitted that his passport number was on it. She
    submitted that the judge erred in failing to refer  to  that  document.
    She relied on the decision in SM and Qadir v Secretary of State for the
    Home Department (ETS - Evidence - Burden of Proof) (which has yet to be
    reported) and submitted that it was for  the  appellant  to  rebut  the
    evidence submitted by the Secretary of State.

 6. Mr Timson submitted that the ETS source data document is a red  herring
    as those print outs were available  to  the  Tribunal  in  Qadir  where
    concerns were raised about the quality of the evidence submitted as  to
    the allegation of  deception.  He  highlighted  the  issues  raised  in
    relation to the generic evidence at paragraph 63  of  the  decision  in
    Qadir. He submitted that the judge in this case  took  account  of  the
    appellant's evidence, including the evidence  as  to  the  other  tests
    taken and the fact that the appellant gave evidence in English.

Error of law

 7. In my view it is clear from reading the decision as a  whole  that  the
    judge took account of all of the evidence submitted by the  respondent.
    Whilst I accept that the judge did not specifically refer  to  the  ETS
    source data document she refers to  the  witness  statement  of  Hilary
    Rackstraw to which it was appended. Further, the copy appended to  that
    witness statement is poor and does not identify the appellant  by  name
    nor does it state that his test results were invalid  or  give  reasons
    for any such conclusion and was therefore of limited evidential  value.
    Any failure to refer to that document  was  not  therefore  a  material
    error here.

 8. Also, it is clear that the judge took account of  the  appellant's  own
    evidence including the evidence as to  the  further  English  tests  he
    undertook in January 2013 and July 2014.

 9. I am satisfied that the  judge  considered  all  of  the  evidence  and
    reached a conclusion open to her on the basis of this  evidence.  There
    is no material error in the judge's consideration of this evidence.

10. The grounds of appeal put forward by the Secretary of  State  have  not
    been made out. I conclude that there is no material error of law in the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Conclusion

11. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of a material error on a point of law.

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

13. I make no anonymity direction.


Signed                                       Date: 14 April 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I maintain the fee award made by the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed                                       Date: 14 April 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

