
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/50197/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 10 July 2014                                 |On 20 August 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                            Elise Brianne Hagman
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms C Record of Counsel


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The respondent, Elise Brianne Hagman, was born on 7 March 1989 and is a
    female citizen of Canada.  I shall hereafter refer to the respondent as
    the appellant and to the Secretary of State as the respondent (as  they
    were respectively before the First-tier Tribunal).  The  appellant  had
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Maciel) against the decision
    of the respondent dated 23 October 2013 to refuse her leave  to  remain
    outside the Immigration Rules.  The First-tier Tribunal had allowed the
    appeal under Article 8 ECHR.

 2. Mr Whitwell, for the respondent, explained that there are  two  grounds
    of appeal.  First, referring to Gulshan [2013] UKUT  00640  (IAC),  the
    judge had  failed  to  identify  compelling  circumstances  to  justify
    considering the appeal under Article 8  ECHR  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.  Mr Whitwell did not seek to persuade  me  that  the  judge  had
    failed to adopt a two-stage process as indicated in Gulshan.  At  [17],
    the judge had indicated that she found that there were  "good  reasons"
    to consider Article 8; Mr Whitwell submitted that that  the  judge  had
    not particularised those  "good  reasons".   Secondly,  the  Article  8
    assessment itself was flawed.  The judge  had  failed  to  have  proper
    regard to the fact that the appellant had previously returned to Canada
    in order to apply for leave  and  that  her  absence  from  the  United
    Kingdom applying for entry clearance out-of-country was likely to be  a
    very short one.

 3. I find that the judge  did  not  err  in  law.   I  have  reached  that
    conclusion for the following reasons.  Mr Whitwell is  correct  to  say
    that the judge was well aware that he needed to identify  good  reasons
    for going on to consider Article 8 ECHR where both parties agreed  that
    the appellant  could  not  succeed  under  the  Immigration  Rules.   I
    disagree with Mr Whitwell's submission that the judge failed to specify
    the  "good  reasons".   First,  at  [17]  the  judge  found  that  "the
    circumstances of the appellant [are] not  covered  by  the  Immigration
    Rules."  At [5], the judge had found that the appellant, who had  begun
    work as a teacher at a primary school in Southampton, had  intended  to
    return to Canada in the summer vacation of 2013 to apply for a new visa
    out-of-country.  However, the  appellant  had  been  let  down  by  her
    immigration agent.  As the judge wrote,

         The appellant made desperate attempts  with  the  school  and  they
         sought to process an application for her Tier 2 visa but this could
         not be done prior to her return to the UK to commence the new term.
          Accordingly, the appellant returned and commenced teaching in  the
         new academic year on the valid Tier  5  visa  that  she  had.   She
         thereafter had no option but to seek leave to remain outside of the
         Immigration Rules.  This is because she would  need  to  leave  the
         country to secure a Tier 2 visa and in that intervening time  there
         would be an indefinite period during which the students she teaches
         will be deprived of her care and skill.

    Again, at [17], when discussing the existence of good reasons  for  her
    to continue with an Article 8 analysis, the judge wrote, "I  find  that
    there are 25 children who are dependent  upon  the  appellant  teaching
    them to the end of the academic year and I find that the disruption  in
    her leaving the UK is  now  a  compelling  circumstance."   Whilst  the
    Secretary  of  State  may  disagree  that  the  circumstances  of  this
    particular appellant were compelling, the judge has  provided  her  own
    reasons for finding that compelling circumstances  did  exist  in  this
    case.  The children whom the appellant teaches in Southampton  live  in
    an inner city, economically deprived area of the  city  and  there  was
    evidence before the judge from the headmaster of the  school  that  the
    appellant had "succeeded  in  creating  a  safe  and  positive  working
    environment for the children."  Examples are given in the  headmaster's
    letter of 16 October 2013 of the positive  impact  upon  the  lives  of
    individual children (including a child from Mexico, who  speaks  little
    English) of the appellant's teaching.  The headmaster  also  writes  of
    the efforts made by the school  to  obtain  local  education  authority
    sponsorship for the appellant.  Whilst that sponsorship was sought  too
    late to assist her, a resident labour market test was undertaken to see
    whether the appellant's teaching position could be filled by  a  United
    Kingdom national.  The result of that test was that it was  "abundantly
    clear that [the appellant] far outshone [other candidates] in terms  of
    experience."  In the light of  these  observations,  I  find  that  the
    judge's decision that  there  were  compelling  circumstances  in  this
    instance was open to her.  The judge was right to find that  there  was
    no Immigration Rule to cover the circumstances of  this  appellant  and
    that factor, combined with the detrimental impact which the appellant's
    cessation of her teaching duties would have  upon  vulnerable  children
    was  sufficient,  in  my  opinion,  to  constitute  compelling  reasons
    justifying the judge carrying out an Article 8 analysis.

 4. Further, I find that the Article 8 ECHR analysis itself is  not  flawed
    by legal error.  The judge considered all the relevant  facts  and,  in
    assessing proportionality, had regard to those  factors  which  weighed
    against the appellant as well as those in her favour.   The  judge  had
    regard to the best interests of the children in the appellant's primary
    school  class  (see  Section  55  of  the  Borders,   Citizenship   and
    Immigration Act 2009)  and found  that  the  appellant  was  "providing
    stability, care, love and support to each child in circumstances  where
    they are often from broken  homes  and/or  have  special  needs  and/or
    behavioural issues."  The judge concluded that "the balancing  exercise
    is overwhelmingly in the appellant's  favour  principally  because  the
    best interests of the children in her care." [25].  That was a  finding
    which was clearly open to her on the evidence.

 5. Curiously, at [21] the judge states that "the respondent considers [her
    decision] to be necessary in pursuance of the  legitimate  aim  of  the
    prevention of crime and disorder."  I cannot find any reference to such
    a public interest in the respondent's refusal letter and, in any event,
    it seems more  likely  that  the  public  interest  would  be  that  of
    maintaining immigration  control  as  part  of  securing  the  economic
    wellbeing of the country.  Having said that, the grounds  do  not  take
    issue with this apparent misstatement of the public interest.   Rather,
    the grounds submit that the appellant's job could have been  kept  open
    for her pending the resolution  of  her  immigration  status  and  that
    supply teachers could cover her class whilst she returned to Canada  to
    apply for entry clearance.  In his oral submissions, Mr  Whitwell  made
    it clear that the Secretary of State has no objection to this appellant
    continuing to teach her class in Southampton; her only objection is  to
    the appellant seeking to do so without first  returning  to  Canada  to
    apply for the necessary visa from there.

 6. I acknowledge that  the  public  interest  in  maintaining  immigration
    control is a strong one but the weight attaching to the public interest
    will vary from case to case.  The  public  interest  in  this  case  is
    conditioned by the fact that the respondent has  no  objection  to  the
    appellant's presence here and, indeed, shares with the appellant a wish
    that the appellant carry on teaching and assisting the children in  her
    class in Southampton.  In the light of that fact, the  judge's  finding
    that the proportionality "balancing exercise is overwhelmingly  in  the
    appellant's favour" because of the disruption which would be caused  to
    the children in her care by her absence was clearly open to  her.   Any
    error on the part of the judge in misstating  the  public  interest  is
    not, on the particular facts of this case, material.

 7. In the circumstances, this appeal is dismissed.

DECISION

 8. This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 18 August 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
