
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/50219/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 24 August 2015                    |On 27 August 2015                     |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                                  Mr C S O
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr F Khan, Counsel (instructed by CTM Immigration &
                    Welfare Legal Centre)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1.     The Appellant appealed to the  Upper  Tribunal  with  permission
         granted by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini on 29 May 2015 against
         the decision and reasons of First-tier Tribunal Judge Foulkes-Jones
         who had dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the refusal on  25
         September 2014 of his  application  for  further  leave  to  remain
         outside the Immigration Rules on human rights grounds  (Articles  3
         and 8 ECHR).  The  decision  and  reasons  was  promulgated  on  29
         October 2014.

    2.     The Appellant is a national of Nigeria, born on 20 November 1970
         and so is now 44 years of age.    The  Appellant  had  entered  the
         United Kingdom as a student, and had most recently been granted DLR
         until 14 October 2013 to complete his  PhD  at  the  University  of
         Sussex.  He had sought further leave to remain on  health  grounds,
         namely his Hepatitis B.  The judge found that the Appellant had not
         lost his ties to Nigeria  and  could  not  meet  paragraph  276ADE.
         Medical treatment was available in Nigeria, the Appellant was  able
         to care for himself and there were  no  exceptional  circumstances.
         The Article  3  ECHR  threshold  was  by  no  means  reached.   The
         interference with the respect due to his private life  pursuant  to
         Article 8 ECHR was proportionate.

    3.     Permission to appeal was granted by Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge
         Saini of his own motion and  "reluctantly"  because  he  considered
         that there  was  a  R  v  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department, ex p Robinson [1997] 3 WLR 1162 point  that  there  may
         have been insufficient consideration of the evidence concerning the
         availability of medical  treatment  in  Nigeria.   GS  (India)  and
         Others  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  40,  promulgated  after  the  First-tier
         Tribunal  judge's  decision,  required  consideration  against  the
         Article 8 ECHR analysis, given that this was a health case.

    4.     Standard directions were made by the tribunal.  A rule 24 notice
         in the form of a letter dated 15 June 2015 had been  filed  on  the
         Respondent's behalf opposing the onwards appeal.

    Submissions

    5.     Mr Khan for the Appellant relied on the grant of  permission  to
         appeal by the Upper  Tribunal.   He  submitted  that  [111]  of  GS
         (India) and Others (above) was relevant, in that the continuity  of
         treatment was important for the Appellant's health.  There would be
         complications arising from the change  of  regime  and  there  were
         issues about the availability of drugs in Nigeria, not  to  mention
         the quality of the drugs supplied.   This  would  have  a  negative
         effect on the Appellant's health and would disrupt treatment  which
         had  been  effective.   The  determination  had  not   sufficiently
         addressed that issue in an Article 8 ECHR context.

    6.     Ms Fijwala for the Respondent relied on the rule 24 notice.  She
         submitted that there was no error  of  law  and  the  determination
         should stand.  The COIS showed  that  treatment  was  available  in
         Nigeria, as the judge had found.   The  judge  had  considered  and
         addressed continuity of treatment.  The judge had been  correct  to
         find that there was no exceptionality.  The onwards  appeal  should
         be dismissed.

    7.     In reply, Mr Khan submitted that the  judge  had  insufficiently
         considered the exercise of discretion by the Secretary of State.

    8.     The tribunal indicated at the conclusion of submissions that  it
         reserved its determination, which now follows.

    No error of law finding

    9.     The tribunal is bound to say that it has had some difficulty  in
         understanding why the Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge  encouraged  the
         onwards appeal.  The points taken  by  the  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
         Judge had not been raised in the grounds, and seem unfortunately to
         the tribunal to be clutching at straws and promoting  false  hopes.
         In the tribunal's view, the refusal  of  permission  to  appeal  by
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Cox on  16  December  2014  was  entirely
         right: "I fail to see how the judge arguably erred, materially  and
         in law, in any of the respects advanced.  Treatment for Hepatitis B
         is available in Nigeria - it is unfortunately  a  common  condition
         there - and the judge was right to have regard to N v  SSHD  [2005]
         UKHL 31.  Her assessment under Article 8 ECHR, within  and  without
         the Rules, was in my view impeccable and her  conclusion,  I  would
         have thought, inevitable".

    10.    Mr Khan for the Appellant thus had a distinctly uphill struggle,
         and it was hard for him to avoid re-arguing aspects of  the  appeal
         which  had  already  been  fully  and  properly  determined.    The
         determination  is  comprehensive  and  logically   rigorous.    The
         paragraph numbering is in sections and does not follow the practice
         of the IAC, which is continuous and sequential.  But that does  not
         amount to an error of reasoning.   Mr  Khan  drew  attention  to  a
         typographical error at [5.5], where the judge  cited  the  relevant
         part of a letter from Dr  Sumita  Verma,  one  of  the  Appellant's
         consultants.  The correct date of Dr Verma's letter is 14 September
         2013, not 12 September 2013.  But nothing turns on that minor slip.

    11.    The letter itself was an important piece  of  evidence,  as  the
         judge recognised by citing it and also a later letter from Dr Verma
         dated 12 May 2014 which stated that the Appellant was  asymptomatic
         and  remains  stable  from  a  liver  perspective.    Six   monthly
         surveillance was recommended.  Quite plainly the judge had in  mind
         the continuity of treatment issue.  She addressed the point in  the
         Article 3 ECHR context at [5.14] and in the Article 8 ECHR  context
         at [5.19(ii)] and [5.19(vi) to (ix)].  Thus the judge had evaluated
         this element of the Appellant's case in accordance with [111] of GS
         (India) and Others (above), effectively anticipating the  reasoning
         of the Court of Appeal.

    12.    The evidence before the judge  concerning  the  availability  of
         health care in Nigeria for Hepatitis B sufferers was adequate.  The
         14 June 2013 COIS was  in  the  Appellant's  bundle  and  was  also
         referred to in the reasons for refusal letter.  The  judge  plainly
         took that evidence into account.  It is  relevant  that  the  judge
         found that the Appellant would be likely to be  in  a  position  to
         afford  private  health  care.   It  is  also  relevant  that   the
         Appellant's condition is unfortunately common in  Nigeria,  because
         that means that medical practitioners will  be  familiar  with  it,
         i.e., it is not a rare condition  with  no  medical  literature  or
         treatment options.  That such treatment might be inferior  to  that
         available in the United Kingdom was not in issue in the light of  N
         (above).

    13.    The tribunal accordingly holds that there was no error of law in
         the decision and reasons and there is no basis for interfering with
         the judge's decision.

    DECISION

    The making of the previous decision did not involve the  making  of  an
    error on a point of law and stands unchanged




    Signed Dated


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
