
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/50478/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 October 2014                            |On 7 November 2014            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

                          mr Loxley Alphonso Beech
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Turner (Direct Access Immigration)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Allen (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This matter comes before me for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law disclosed in the  determination.   The
    determination promulgated on 24 July 2014  before  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Buckwell) dismissed the appeal on  immigration  grounds  and  on
    human rights grounds.

2.   The appellant was born on  16  March  1970  and  he  is  a  citizen  of
    Jamaica.

Background

3.   The appellant appealed against a decision made by the respondent on  21
    November 2013 to make a deportation order  against  him  under  Section
    5(1) of the Immigration Act 1971.

4.   The appellant entered the UK on 10 October  1990  having  been  granted
    six months leave as a visitor.  That leave expired on  10  April  1991.
    On 17 April 1991 the appellant  applied  for  leave  on  the  basis  of
    marriage to  Janet  Palmer  who  was  a  British  citizen.   Leave  was
    initially granted until 2 January  1993.   A  further  application  for
    indefinite leave was refused on the basis that it was not believed that
    the marriage was subsisting.  The appellant applied for  asylum  on  25
    May 1996.   His application was withdrawn on  17  July  1996.   He  was
    informed on 8 August 1996 that a deportation order was being considered
    and asked to  provide  further  information.   A  decision  to  make  a
    deportation order was served on the appellant on 8  July  1998  and  an
    appeal dismissed on 10 May 1999.  A subsequent  Upper  Tribunal  appeal
    was dismissed and the appellant absconded.  At some point the appellant
    left the UK but returned on an unknown date having travelled to Jamaica
    on 1 February 2008 using a fraudulent passport  in  the  name  of  Zane
    Cain.  On 8 December 2011 he was served with a notice as an  individual
    liable to removal.  On 12 December 2011 he was convicted for possession
    of false or improperly obtained documents and sentenced to  six  months
    imprisonment.

5.   It was the appellant's claim that  he  lived  continuously  in  the  UK
    since 1990 and established family life with a Maria Clunis and with his
    children. He claimed that he has established a private life in the  UK.



6.   The case for the Secretary of State was  that  the  appellant  posed  a
    serious risk to the community, that he should not  be  granted  further
    periods of leave and that his removal from the UK was conducive to  the
    public good.  He had been convicted on three occasions.  He used  false
    identities and  displayed  unacceptable  character  and  conduct.   The
    respondent relied on evidence from the police who provided a long  list
    of criminal behaviour including where no charges were preferred.

7.   Neither the appellant nor his representative attended  for  the  First-
    tier hearing on 27 June 2014  at  Taylor  House.   The  respondent  was
    represented. The Tribunal proceeded to hear the appeal in  the  absence
    of the appellant and his representative.

8.   The determination set out the procedural history as follows. There  was
    a Case Management Review (CMR) hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Designated Judge Peart on 20 February 2014 followed by a  further  Case
    Management Review hearing on 21 May 2014. At that time the date for the
    full hearing was 27 June 2014.  The determination records at [3]:

         "Whilst a substantive hearing date of  27  June  2014  remained  in
         place, the Tribunal file indicated that potentially an  alternative
         date might be fixed.  In that respect the file shows that  attempts
         were made to make contact with the representatives and with Counsel
         direct.  There was no response.  Accordingly no further  notice  of
         hearing was issued and the notice of hearing issued on 27  February
         2014 stands."

9.   Further consideration was given by the  Tribunal  to  the  arrangements
    for the hearing of the appeal in [16]-[20].  The Tribunal  referred  to
    Rule 46 Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005  and
    concluded that appropriate notice had been served on  the  parties  and
    that there was no basis for any party to believe  or  expect  that  the
    notified hearing date of 27 June 2014  would  not  be  effective.   The
    Tribunal were urged to proceed with the  hearing  by  the  respondent's
    representative.  The Tribunal found that the notices of hearing  issued
    on 27 February 2014  were  valid  and  remained  valid.   The  Tribunal
    referred to Rule 19(1) of the 2005 Procedure  Rules  and  proceeded  to
    hear the appeal in the absence of the appellant and any representative.



10.   In a clear and detailed determination the Tribunal set out  in  detail
    the procedural history  of  the  appeal,  the  appellant's  immigration
    history, the nature of the appeal, documentation, arrangements for  the
    hearing of the appeal, submissions, evidence of DC Petrov together with
    the law and findings of fact and conclusions.

Grounds of Appeal

11.  The appellant submitted grounds of appeal seeking either permission  to
    appeal or an order setting aside the decision  under  Rule  59  of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.  The grounds of
    appeal argued that there was a  procedural  irregularity.  At  the  CMR
    Counsel for the appellant understood that the  hearing  dated  27  June
    2014 had been vacated. This was  the  understanding  of  the  appellant
    also.  Details of the procedural history  according  to  the  appellant
    were set out at length in the grounds of appeal.

Permission to Appeal

12.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Chambers granted permission on  23  September
    2013 concluding that the grounds arguably disclosed  an  administrative
    error or error of law depriving the appellant of a fair hearing.

Rule 24 Response

13.  The respondent opposed the appeal.

Error of Law Hearing

14.  I heard brief submissions from Mr Turner and from Mr  Allen  concerning
    in particular the procedural history in this matter in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Mr Allen confirmed that  he  represented  the  Secretary  of
    State at the CMR hearing on 21 May 2014.   He confirmed that  his  note
    on the file recorded that "the hearing dated 27 June 2014 was vacated".
     He produced a further note confirming that Mr Paul Turner  of  Counsel
    was acting by way of Direct Access for the appellant.  He referred to a
    further note made by him again confirming his clear understanding  that
    the hearing for 27 June had been vacated. He accepted that no  official
    formal notification had been received from the Tribunal to that effect.

15.  Mr Turner relied on the grounds of appeal and the confirmation made  by
    Mr Allen as to the agreement reached  at  the  CMR  on  21st  May.   He
    indicated that the appellant and his witnesses were  in  attendance  at
    the Upper Tribunal and that he was prepared for the hearing to proceed.



Discussion and Decision

16.  I have read the detailed grounds of  appeal  and  have  been  helpfully
    assisted by the brief submissions given this afternoon by Mr Allen.   I
    am satisfied that Mr Allen recorded his  clear  understanding  of  what
    took place at the CMR hearing , namely that the hearing  fixed  for  27
    June 2014 was vacated.  Whilst I appreciate that  it  would  appear  no
    further notice of hearing was sent out to alter that date, it  was  the
    clear understanding of the Home office presenting  officer,  Mr  Turner
    and the appellant that that date had been vacated. Without  more  I  am
    satisfied that there is sufficient evidence before me to establish that
    for whatever reason there was a misunderstanding  arising at the CMR on
    21st May as to whether or  not  the  hearing  date  was  vacated.   The
    Tribunal  file  records  that  there  was  some  possibility  that   an
    alternative date would be arranged but failure to make contact with the
    relevant parties resulted in no new Notice of hearing being issued [3].
     It is not clear why the Tribunal considered that an  alternative  date
    for  listing  was  to  be  considered.  There  may  have  arisen   some
    miscommunication because Mr Turner was acting by way of  direct  access
    and so the representatives were no longer in the picture following  the
    CMR.


17.  Throughout these proceedings the appellant has been represented  by  Mr
    P Turner - on 20 February 2014, and on 21  May  2014.   The  notice  of
    hearing giving the date for 27 June 2014 was issued on 27 February 2014
    prior to the CMR hearing on 21 May  2014.   In  light  of  Mr  Turner's
    understanding at the CMR hearing (which has now been  confirmed  by  Mr
    Allen), I find that Mr Turner would have no reason to expect  that  the
    notice of hearing issued on 27 February 2014 would be regarded as valid
    and the hearing effective.

18.    The determination does not record any attempts to contact either  the
    appellant or Mr Turner direct  on  the  day  of  the  hearing.  Counsel
    submits that some contact was made with his clerk who then followed  up
    by a faxed letter attaching  counsel's  attendance  note  for  the  CMR
    indicating that the date was vacated.

19.   I find that there was a  material  error  of  law  in  the  Tribunal's
    decision that arose by way of procedural  irregularity  such  that  the
    hearing proceeded in the absence of him and his representatives.  I  am
    satisfied that the appellant was deprived of the opportunity of a  fair
    hearing. He indicated his wish for an oral  hearing,  an  intention  to
    attend and was throughout legally represented.  He has an arguable case
    under Article 8 ECHR. Furthermore he did not have  the  opportunity  to
    challenge the oral evidence given by DC Petrov.

20.  Although Mr Turner was ready to proceed with  the  hearing  before  the
    Upper Tribunal, it was clear that this case was  complex  and  required
    the attendance of a police officer.  It would require  listing  for  at
    least half a day in my view.  I had regard to the President's  practice
    statement and considered that the only course of action was  a  hearing
    de novo.

Notice of Decision

I find a material error of law by way of procedural irregularity.

The determination is set aside.

The appeal is listed for hearing de novo at Taylor House  (excluding  Judges
Buckwell and Peart) on 8 April 2015.

No anonymity order made


Signed                                  Date 6.11.2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 6.11.2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black


