
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
IA/50275/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |       Decision & Reasons           |
|                                       |Promulgated                         |
|On 19th April 2016                     |       On 29th April 2016           |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE

                                   Between

                  ahmed moheb abedelhay abdelaziz ellawaty
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Aghayere
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This Egyptian Appellant born on 2nd September 1984 and so 41 years  old
    now, appeals a decision of 15 September  2015  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Parkes dismissing  his  appeal  against  a  refusal  to  issue  a
    residence card on the basis of his claimed durable relationship with an
    EEA  national.  Judge  Parkes  found  that  the  relationship  was  not
    established as genuine and subsisting.

 2. Permission was granted on the basis that it was arguable:

      a)  "the judge has misdirected himself in not considering whether  the
         parties are in a durable  relationship  in  light  of  an  existing
         child."

Background

 3. The case was first listed on 23rd July 2015 when it  was  adjourned  to
    provide further time for preparation after which the  Appellant's  then
    representatives UK Law withdrew on the basis  that  the  Appellant  had
    withdrawn  instructions  and  the   current   representatives   Lawland
    Solicitors were instructed.   The matter came for hearing before  Judge
    Parkes on 7th September.  Judge Parkes took the findings of Judge  Khan
    made in August 2014 as his starting point, in accordance with the  case
    law of Devaseelan.

 4. This previous application had  been  made  on  the  basis  of  a  proxy
    Egyptian marriage to the same EEA national in 2013, and resulted  in  a
    dismissed appeal promulgated on  8th  August  2014.   Judge  M  A  Khan
    recorded that the Appellant had attended before him and told  him  that
    his wife was in hospital with their child who was ill, and so unable to
    attend to support his appeal.  The case was put back  in  the  list  to
    provide an opportunity for supporting evidence  to  be  obtained.   The
    Appellant invited the court usher to speak to his wife and she told the
    court usher that she had not been to hospital but at home all  morning.
    On resuming the hearing the Appellant asked for more time, telling  the
    court that his wife was now on her way to court, and would be  arriving
    no later than 3.00pm.  The judge agreed to put the case further back in
    his list. When his list otherwise ended, it being after 3  o'clock  and
    the wife having not appeared, the case began.  The Appellant gave  oral
    evidence. By the end of the case the wife had still not appeared.

 5. On the issue of a durable relationship Judge Khan found that  the  oral
    evidence of the Appellant, to the point that the couple had met in July
    2012, and started living together in October 2012, had a child together
    born on 10th August 2013 as shown on a  birth  certificate  naming  the
    Appellant as the child's father, had married on an unknown date in 2013
    at the Egyptian Embassy, his wife was currently on maternity leave with
    the couple managing financially with the assistance of friends and  the
    Appellant's brother in the UK and child benefit, supported by documents
    received following the hearing including; his and his claimed partner's
    pay slips, documents concerning the ceremony at the Egyptian Consulate,
    bank statements, BT bills to both at various addresses  was  inadequate
    to meet the burden.   The judge concluded that  at  their  highest  the
    documents showed that the Appellant and his EEA national spouse had  at
    some time lived together previously, but was insufficient to show  that
    they were then in a durable relationship, particularly bearing in  mind
    the failure of the Sponsor to attend  the  court  and  the  conflicting
    information given by the Appellant as to her whereabouts on the morning
    and day of hearing.  Judge Khan concluded that the evidence of a  valid
    marriage was inadequate being a proxy  marriage  entered  into  at  the
    Egyptian Embassy in London, to the point that  there  was  insufficient
    evidence to establish its validity in Egyptian law or under the  French
    EEA national sponsors' law.

 6. In respect of the validity of  the  marriage  Judge  Parkes  noted  the
    evidence submitted to Judge Khan in August 2014.  That decision was not
    appealed  and  Judge  Parkes   correctly   identified   that   it   was
    determinative of the issue of durable relationship  as  at  that  date,
    unless good reasons were provided for departing from it.  Judge  Parkes
    records no additional evidence was brought forward, for example to show
    that French law recognised the marriage as per the case of Kareem,  and
    found that the position had not changed since the earlier hearing,  and
    that the Appellant continued to fail  to  demonstrate  that  he  was  a
    spouse of an EEA national.

 7. In respect of whether there was durable relationship Judge Parkes noted
    that the Appellant's partner was not at court, although the  Appellant,
    the Sponsor and the child had travelled up for the hearing in July 2015
    when  the  matter  was  adjourned.   The  Judge  took  account  of  the
    Appellant's explanation that his partner was not at the hearing because
    her brother had been involved in an accident and she had had to  go  to
    France about a week before the  hearing.   There  was  no  evidence  to
    support that position beyond the bear assertion.  The judge  noted  new
    evidence before him at paragraph 16 and 17, including BT bills in joint
    names which stopped in February 2015, wage slips for  the  Sponsor  for
    31st October and 7th November 2014, which indicated  that  payment  was
    made by way of BACS, although no bank statements  were  provided.   The
    sponsor's employment contract was dated 22nd October 2014 and there was
    a copy of a letter from the claimed employers dated 2nd September  2015
    confirming she is a full time employee.  In  addition  there  were  two
    photographs, one of which shows the Appellant, Sponsor and their child.



 8. The judge took account that the explanation for the failure to  provide
    additional  documentation  was  that  the  Appellant   and   his   wife
    concentrated on their child and, as the Appellant  is  not  allowed  to
    work, nothing more could be afforded, and so no other documentation had
    been generated.  The judge took account  that  the  Appellant  and  his
    Sponsor and child attended the hearing on 23rd July.  The  judge  noted
    the absence of easily obtainable supportive evidence of the explanation
    offered for the Sponsor's, and that there was  no  application  for  an
    adjournment for the Sponsor to attend, all of which he found surprising
    in the context of the history of the previous appeal.

 9. All-in-all the  judge  found  that  the  position  of  the  Appellant's
    evidence showed no significant improvement from that before Judge  Khan
    and concluded that the Appellant still failed to discharge  the  burden
    of proof to establish that he was currently in a relationship  with  an
    EEA national, let alone that it was a durable relationship.  The  judge
    concluded that there was no family life established  so  as  to  engage
    Article 8 although in the event as this was an EEA claim the matter did
    not arise as the Appellant had  not  made  any  separate  human  rights
    claim.



The challenge to Judge Parkes's decision

10. Mr Aghayere for the Appellant relied on the grant of permission arguing
    that the fact of the existence of the child, particularly in  light  of
    the finding that  the  partner  and  child  had  attended  the  earlier
    adjourned hearing should have carried more weight, and that given  that
    the Appellant had obtained a stay on his removal in order to remain  in
    the country and be present at his appeal hearing because Judge  Latter,
    who had dealt with his judicial review of the removal  directions,  had
    indicated that it was appropriate that he should be in-country so as to
    ensure that a thorough consideration of the best interests of the child
    could be undertaken by the judge, it was surprising that the judge  had
    not dealt in more detail with the child's best interests.  It was trite
    law that the best interests of the child are to be  with  both  of  his
    parents  and  in  those  circumstances  there  was  evidence  that  the
    Appellant  was  in  a  durable  relationship  sufficient  to  meet  the
    requirements of the EEA Regulations.

11. With all due  respect  to  Mr  Aghayere  there  is  no  merit  in  that
    submission.  The judge took into account all of the evidence  that  was
    before him.  The reality is that it  was  scant.   The  fact  that  the
    Appellant and his partner are named as the parents on a  child's  birth
    certificate issued on 10th August 2013, and the Sponsor's  and  child's
    attendance at the adjourned hearing in July 2015 was weighed as part of
    the overall evidence by the judge.  None of  the  evidence  before  the
    judge was determinative of the existence of  a  continuing  or  durable
    relationship.  The judgement of Judge Latter in respect of the stay  of
    removal takes the case no further, merely indicating to  the  Appellant
    that he is being afforded  an  opportunity  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom in order to be able to  more  easily  obtain  the  evidence  to
    support his appeal.  In the event the evidence  of  the  Appellant  was
    found insufficient to establish his claim.

12. The complaint that the judge failed to expressly assess best  interests
    and set out the impact of removal on the  child  is  similarly  without
    merit.  There was no evidence before the judge upon which to  make  any
    such assessment, it is for  the  Appellant  to  establish  the  factual
    matrix of any impact upon which he seeks to rely.

13. The Appellant has failed to establish any error of law  in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal's decision  dismissing  the  Appellant's  appeal  on  EEA
    Regulation grounds.

14. I pause briefly to deal with the issue in respect of Article 8. This is
    an EEA case where there had been no Article 8 application  and  so  the
    matter was not before the judge.  However judge Parkes found that there
    was no family life so as to engage Article 8, to the  point  that  even
    if, as the Appellant's representative submits, Article 8 ought to  have
    been considered, the judge's finding can  only  result  in  the  ground
    being dismissed.

Notice of Decision

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge reveals no error  of  law
    and the decision dismissing the Appellant's appeal stands.

16. No anonymity order has been requested or directed and I see  no  reason
    to make one now.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the Appellant's appeal so that the issue of fees  does  not
arise.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge

