
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/50808/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Upper Tribunal Birmingham   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 June 2015                      |On 15 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               tHE Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     T G
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person, assisted by Mr Antwi-Boasiako (McKenzie
Friend)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent, T G, is a citizen of Ghana who was born in  1981.   She
    came to the United Kingdom as a working holidaymaker with a visa  which
    was valid until 31 July 2015.  She then made an invalid application (no
    valid fee) for leave to remain on the basis of human rights in December
    2011 and a further application under the Immigration (European Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006 in July 2013.  She has  three  children  all  of
    whom are  British  citizens  (deriving  their  nationality  from  their
    father).  That application was refused by the appellant on 12 September
    2013.  The respondent appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Obhi)
    which, in a determination promulgated on 3  September  2014,  dismissed
    the appeal under the EEA Regulations but allowed the  appeal  on  human
    rights (Article 8).  I shall hereafter refer to the  appellant  as  the
    respondent and the  respondent  as  the  appellant  (as  they  appeared
    respectively before the First-tier Tribunal).

 2. The grounds of appeal are short:

         'The First-tier Judge considered the facts of the case by reference
         to the Immigration Rules even though the SSHD [Secretary  of  State
         for the Home Department] did not make a decision in respect of  the
         Rules.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge has failed to state precisely
         which  Immigration  Rule  was  applicable  at  the  relevant   time
         particularly given the changes to the Rules on 28 July 2014.  There
         is no consideration of the suitability requirement and  eligibility
         requirement i.e. ELTRPT2.2 and 2.4  and  in  particular  ELTRPT3.1-
         3.2.'

 3. The appellant applied for a right of residence under Regulation 15A  of
    the 2006 Regulations:

         'Permanent right of residence

         15. - (1) The following persons shall acquire the right to reside
         in the United Kingdom permanently-

             (a) an EEA national who has resided in the United Kingdom in
             accordance with these Regulations for a continuous period of
             five years;

             (b) a family member of an EEA national who is not himself an
             EEA national but who has resided in the United Kingdom with
             the EEA national in accordance with these Regulations for a
             continuous period of five years;

             (c) a worker or self-employed person who has ceased activity;

             (d) the family member of a worker or self-employed person who
             has ceased activity;

             (e) a person who was the family member of a worker or self-
             employed person where -

                  (i) the worker or self-employed person has died;

                  (ii) the family member resided with him immediately before
                  his death; and

                  (iii) the worker or self-employed person had resided
                  continuously in the United Kingdom for at least the two
                  years immediately before his death or the death was the
                  result of an accident at work or an occupational disease;

             (f) a person who-

                  (i) has resided in the United Kingdom in accordance with
                  these Regulations for a continuous period of five years;
                  and

                  (ii) was, at the end of that period, a family member who
                  has retained the right of residence.

         (2) Once acquired, the right of permanent residence under this
         regulation shall be lost only through absence from the United
         Kingdom for a period exceeding two consecutive years.

         (3) But this regulation is subject to regulation 19(3)(b).'

 4. The judge had the opportunity of hearing evidence from  the  appellant.
    She made a number of findings of fact at [21] et seq.  The judge  found
    that the appellant's three children are British  citizens.   She  found
    that the whereabouts  of  the  children's  father  were  known  to  the
    appellant and that he is  in  a  position  to  care  for  them  if  the
    appellant has to return to Ghana.  She found the appellant had not been
    frank about the position of the appellant's father.   The  judge  found
    that the father

         "... was quite clear that if he required to  assume  responsibility
         for the care of the children, he would.  Therefore I  am  satisfied
         the appellant is not the sole carer for her  children,  she  cannot
         therefore  meet  the  requirements  of   Regulation   15A(7)(b)(2).
         Accordingly I am satisfied that the decision of  the  Secretary  of
         State with regard to the application under the EEA Regulations  was
         correct."

 5. The judge went on to deal with Article 8 ECHR which had been pleaded by
    the appellant.  As part of her analysis she said this:

         "I considered  the  appellant's  family  life  under  Appendix  FM.
         Paragraph ELTRP2.1 provides that the appellant must not be  in  the
         UK in breach of the immigration laws (disregarding  any  period  of
         overstaying for a period of 28 days or less) unless  paragraph  EX1
         applies.

         EX1 applies to an individual  who  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         parental relationship with a child who is under the age of 18 years
         and is a British national who is in the UK  and  it  would  not  be
         reasonable to expect  the  child  to  leave  the  UK.   It  is  not
         reasonable to expect the children to leave the  United  Kingdom  as
         they have  a  subsisting  relationship  with  their  father  and  a
         separation over a prolonged period will damage  that  relationship.
         Accordingly  I  am  satisfied  that   the   appellant   meets   the
         requirements of the Immigration Rules in relation to family life."

 6. Mr  Mills,  for  the  respondent,  drew  my  attention  to  Schedule  1
    (Regulation 26(7)) of the 2006 Regulations:

         '1. The following provisions of, or made under, the 2002  Act  have
         effect in relation to an appeal  under  these  Regulations  to  the
         First-tier Tribunal as if it were an appeal against a  decision  of
         the Secretary of State under  section  82(1)  of  the  2002  Act(6)
         (right of appeal to the Tribunal) -

             section 84(7) (grounds of appeal), as though the sole
             permitted ground of appeal were that the decision breaches the
             appellant's rights under the EU Treaties in respect of entry
             to or residence in the United Kingdom ("an EU ground of
             appeal");

             section 85(8) (matters to be considered), as though-

                  (i) the references to a statement under section 120(9) of
                  the 2002 Act include, but are not limited to, a statement
                  under that section as applied by paragraph 4 of Schedule 2
                  to these Regulations; and

                  (ii) a "matter" in subsection (2) and a "new matter" in
                  subsection (6) include a ground of appeal of a kind listed
                  in section 84 of the 2002 Act and an EU ground of appeal;

             section 86(10) (determination of appeal);

             section 105 and any regulations made under that section; and

             section 106 and any rules made under that section.

         2. Tribunal Procedure Rules have  effect  in  relation  to  appeals
         under these Regulations'

 7. He submitted that the  judge  had  erred  by  considering  whether  the
    appellant met the requirements of the Immigration Rules  at  all.   She
    was precluded from doing so by Regulation  26(7).   Her  decision  was,
    therefore, flawed.

 8. I am not entirely clear why the judge has considered HC 395 at all.  It
    could be argued that her observations as to  the  relationship  between
    the children and their father and whether it was reasonable  to  expect
    the children to leave the United Kingdom and, in  effect,  severe  that
    relationship, are matters relevant to the proper analysis of an  appeal
    on Article 8 ECHR grounds.  However, it is clear from the decision that
    the judge considered that the fact that, on her analysis, the appellant
    could satisfy the Immigration Rules (which were  not  relevant  and  to
    which she should have had no regard in this instance) directly led  her
    to allow the  appeal  on  Article  8  grounds.   The  judge  made  this
    absolutely clear at [27] where she went on to say that:

         "I therefore dismiss the appeal under EEA Regulations but allow  it
         under human rights."

 9. It is clear from reading [26] and  [27]  that  the  judge  allowed  the
    appeal because she  believed  that  the  appellant  could  satisfy  the
    requirements of Appendix FM of HC 395.  At the very  least,  the  judge
    has referred  to  the  Immigration  Rules  unnecessarily  and  has,  in
    consequence, obscured the reasoning which led her to allow the  appeal.
    It is not clear that she would have allowed the  appeal  on  Article  8
    grounds if she had considered that the Immigration  Rules  were  of  no
    relevance in this appeal.

10. Mr Mills raised the wider (and  much  discussed)  question  of  whether
    Article 8 ECHR may operate as a ground in an appeal brought  under  the
    2006 Regulations.  It is my understanding that that is  a  matter  upon
    which the Upper Tribunal will shortly adjudicate.  However, I find that
    the issue does not arise in this appeal.  I say that  by  reference  to
    the refusal letter of 12 September 2013.  This states as follows:

         'You have stated that you also wish to rely on  family  or  private
         life  established  in  the  UK  under  Article  8  of   the   ECHR.
         Immigration Rules now include provisions for applicants wishing  to
         remain in the United Kingdom  on  the  basis  of  their  family  or
         private life.  These Rules are located at Appendix FM and paragraph
         276ADE respectively.  If you wish the Home Office  to  consider  an
         application  on  this  basis  you  must  make  a  separate  charged
         application using the appropriate specified  application  form  ...
         since  you  have  not  made  a  valid  application  for  Article  8
         consideration, consideration has not been given as to whether  your
         removal  from  the  UK  would  breach  Article  8  of   the   ECHR.
         Additionally it is pointed out that the decision  not  to  issue  a
         residence card/permanent residence card does  not  require  you  to
         leave the United Kingdom if you can otherwise demonstrate you  have
         a right to reside under the Regulations.'

11. The appellant made an application under the 2006 Regulations and I have
    found  that  the  Secretary  of  State  was  correct  to  refuse   that
    application for the reasons stated in the refusal  letter.   I  am  not
    satisfied that the appellant is even remotely likely to be removed from
    the United Kingdom in consequence of  the  decision  to  refuse  her  a
    residence card; the refusal letter makes that plain.  As a result, I am
    not satisfied that the appellant may legitimately rely upon  Article  8
    ECHR as a ground of  appeal.   I  consider  that  she  should  make  an
    application as is clearly stated in the refusal letter should she  wish
    to remain in the United Kingdom for reasons connected with  her  family
    or private life.  In the circumstances, I find that (i)  the  appellant
    cannot succeed under the 2006 Regulations; (ii) Article 8 ECHR does not
    arise as a valid ground in this appeal and (iii) even if it did  arise,
    First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in law by  allowing  the  human  rights
    appeal by reference to HC 395.  I therefore set  aside  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's decision and have remade the decision  dismissing  the
    appellant's appeal against the refusal of the  Secretary  of  State  to
    issue her with a residence card.

Notice of Decision

The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which  was  promulgated  on  3
September 2014 is set aside.  I have remade the decision.   The  appellant's
appeal against the decision of the respondent dated  12  September  2013  is
dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed   Date 10 July 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

