

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/50344/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 15 January 2016                  |On 13 September 2016                  |
|                                    |                                      |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                BABAFEMI [F]
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss U Miszkiel, Counsel, instructed by Jein
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal  brought  by  the  Secretary  of  State  against  the
    decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Veloso  who  heard  an  appeal
    brought by Mr [F] against the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  of  27
    November 2014 seeking to remove him from the United  Kingdom.   I  will
    retain the titles of the parties as they were  before  the  First-tier,
    that is Mr [F] is referred to the Appellant and the Secretary of  State
    shall be referred to as the Respondent.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of  Nigeria  who  has  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom since 2000. During his stay in the United Kingdom he has become
    the father to three children with a partner, SW. The children  are  JF,
    born in May 2003, and twins HF and SF born in January 2006.

 3. Representations were made on behalf of the Appellant on  17  June  2014
    seeking leave to remain in the United Kingdom on family  life  grounds.
    Those representations from Jein Solicitors asserted that the  Appellant
    was the father of the children, made assertions that  he  resided  with
    the children and that he played an active  role  in  their  upbringing.
    There were documents  submitted  together  with  those  representations
    which included a copy  of  SW's  passport,  the  original  of  a  birth
    certificate of one of the children and copy birth certificates for  the
    other two. It would also appear that letters of  support  from  friends
    and family were submitted (see refusal letter, paragraph 27),  although
    I have not had sight of these.

 4. In the decision of 27 November 2014 the Respondent  considered  whether
    the Appellant satisfied any relevant Immigration Rule under Appendix FM
    and concluded that he did not.  In relation to leave  to  remain  as  a
    partner the Respondent stated at paragraph 11:

         "It is considered that your client's  partner  does  not  meet  the
         definition of partner given above because your client has  provided
         no evidence that he has a genuine and subsisting  relationship with
         and has been living with his partner for at least two  years  prior
         to the application."

 5. The Respondent also refused the application for leave to remain on  the
    grounds of family life as a parent on the grounds, at paragraph  17  of
    the decision:

         "It is considered that your client does not  meet  the  eligibility
         requirements for limited leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a
         parent under E-LTRP2.2 to 2.4 and 3.1 because your client  has  not
         provided any evidence that he has  any  contact  with  his  British
         children in the United Kingdom."

 6. In considering the Appellant's right to remain in  the  United  Kingdom
    under Article 8 in the alternative, the Respondent's  position  was  as
    follows:

         "27.     In support of your client's claim, your client states that
             while he has been in the United Kingdom he has fathered  three
             British children.  This claim has  been  considered.   However
             your client had not provided any evidence that he has  contact
             with the children. Acceptable evidence would be from  official
             sources such as schools, GP, dentist  which  state  that  your
             client  attends  events  and/or  appointments.  Letters   from
             friends and family  have  been  provided  but  these  are  not
             acceptable as official evidence.

         28.      Your client has provided one  original  birth  certificate
             and two photocopies of birth  certificate  for  the  children.
             These are however insufficient evidence that your  client  has
             any contact with his children."

 7. The Appellant appealed against that decision resulting in  the  hearing
    before a judge on 9 June 2015.

 8. The judge allowed the appeal not on substantive grounds but on  grounds
    that the Respondent's decision was not in accordance with  the  law;  a
    power then still available to the Tribunal, under saved  provisions  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002.   She  did  so  on
    grounds set out at paragraphs 27 to 33 of her  decision.   In  summary,
    those reasons were (para 27) that the Respondent had failed to consider
    Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 as part
    of its decision on the Appellant's case, and stated  in  particular  as
    follows:

         "28.   I  accept  Mr  Slatter's  submission  in  closing  that  the
             respondent was aware of the appellant's children as  far  back
             as 2009 as shown by the contents of an extract from a  GCID  -
             Case Record Sheet (page 30A) which notes the following  in  an
             entry dated 30 January 2009:

                 '**Please note applicant has three UK  born  children.  At
                this stage it is not clear whether they  are  residing  with
                the applicant/partner.  More info will be required.'

         29.  Whilst  the  onus  on  the  appellant  to  provide  supporting
             documentary  evidence  with  his  application,  there  is   no
             indication in the papers before me that any request  was  made
             for  further  information  with  regards  to  the  appellant's
             children in accordance with the 2009 entry in the respondent's
             file.  Mr  Slatter  submitted  in  closing  that  no   further
             information was sought."

 9. The judge also said as follows from paragraph 31

         "31. The letters from friends and family referred to  at  paragraph
             27 of the respondent's refusal letter are not included in this
             bundle or in the respondent's appeal bundle.  Mr  Slatter  was
             not aware of the contents of these letters or who had  written
             them.

         32.      I note that the eldest child in  this  appeal  is  now  12
             years of age and therefore old enough to express her own views
             and wishes; the same no doubt applies to the  twins  aged  9�.
             The appellant's bundle does not however  include  any  letters
             from them.

         33.      Considering the points set out above I find I do not  have
             the  necessary  evidence  to  conduct  a   properly   informed
             assessment of the children's best interests (MK (Sierra Leone)
             [2015] UKUT 00223 (IAC)).

         The appellant's appeal is consequently allowed as not in accordance
         with the law."

10. The Respondent appeals against that decision on grounds that the  judge
    had failed to properly engage with the  contents  of  the  Respondent's
    Reasons for Refusal Letter which stated that although the Appellant had
    provided some evidence for the  existence  of  children  this  did  not
    demonstrate  that  he  enjoyed  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
    relationship with those children so as  to  bring  these  relationships
    within the ambit of the Rules.  It  was  also  argued  that  the  judge
    referred to the  Respondent's  awareness  of  the  existence  of  these
    children back in 2009 as a basis to support  the  conclusion  that  she
    should have contacted the Appellant for evidence of these children  and
    their circumstances.  The Respondent  asserts  that  this  position  is
    misconceived.  It is clear that in 2009 the  Appellant  had  failed  to
    provide any evidence of a genuine and subsisting parental relationship.
     Hence the reference to it being unclear whether the Appellant  resided
    with these children.  As the judge acknowledged at paragraph 29, should
    the Appellant now wish to rely on those ties he  should  have  properly
    evidenced his case, the grounds argue.

11. Permission was granted on those grounds  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Grimmett on 9 November 2015 on the basis that it was  arguable
    that the judge erred in her  consideration  of  Section  55  where  the
    Appellant has failed to show he had a relationship  with  the  children
    prior to the hearing.

12. I have heard submissions from both parties today which are set  out  in
    the record of proceedings.

13. My finding is  that  the  First-tier  decision  does  not  contain  any
    material error of law.

14. There are two key reported decisions which deal with the obligations of
    the Secretary of State when considering the best interests of children.
    They are JO and Others (Section 55 duty) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 517 and MK
    (Section 55 - Tribunal options) Sierra Leone [2015] UKUT  00223.   Both
    of these are by the President.

15. In JO and Others the President gave guidance as to the  duties  on  the
    Secretary of State in determining the best interests of the children. I
    quote from the head note as follows:

         "(1) The duty imposed by Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and
             Immigration  Act  2009  requires  the  decision  maker  to  be
             properly informed of the position of a child affected  by  the
             discharge of an immigration etc function. Thus  equipped,  the
             decision maker must  conduct  a  careful  examination  of  all
             relevant information and factors.

         (2)      Being adequately  informed  and  conducting  a  scrupulous
             analysis are  elementary  prerequisites  to  the  interrelated
             tasks of identifying  the  child's  best  interests  and  then
             balancing them with other material considerations.

         (3)      The question whether the duties imposed by Section 55 have
             been duly performed in any given case will  invariably  be  an
             intensely fact sensitive and contextual one. In the real world
             of litigation, the tools available to the  court  or  tribunal
             considering this question will frequently be confined  to  the
             application or submission made to the Secretary of  State  and
             the ultimate letter of decision."

16. It is my view that there are no specified forms of evidence that may be
    required by the Respondent in  order  to  be  satisfied  that  a  given
    individual has a parental  relationship  with  a  child.   No  specific
    evidential requirement within any Immigration Rule has been drawn to my
    attention which justified  the  approach  of  the  Respondent   in  the
    decision letter, which appeared to require specified forms of evidence,
    from 'official sources'. The assertion  that  the  Appellant  had  'not
    provided any  evidence'  was  used  on  several  occasions  within  the
    decision letter. This seems contrary to the Respondent's acknowledgment
    at paragraph 27 of the refusal letter that she had  seen  letters  from
    friends and family. The Respondent appears to have given no  weight  to
    these matters on  the  grounds  that  there  were  'not  acceptable  as
    official evidence'. The  Respondent  erred  in  failing  to  take  such
    evidence into account, and evaluating its content. This is, in essence,
    the judge's point at paragraph 31.

17. I find that the Respondent  in  taking  such  an  approach  misdirected
    herself by not complying with the duty upon her  under  Section  55  to
    have regard to all  material  matters  and  all  relevant  evidence  in
    determining the best interests of children affected by  an  immigration
    decision.

18. The judge also noted at para 29 that the Respondent was  aware  of  the
    existence  of  the  children  since  2009,  and  accepted   that   more
    information would be required in relation to the children, but there is
    no evidence that the Respondent took any steps  to  seek  such  further
    information. There was indeed no reference to s.55 in the  decision  at
    all. The First-tier Tribunal was of  the  view  at  para  27  that  the
    Respondent had failed to consider s.55 as part of its decision  on  the
    Appellant's case,  and  I  find  that  the  challenge  brought  by  the
    Respondent to this Tribunal has not demonstrated  that  there  was  any
    error in the First-tier Tribunal Judge's approach.

19. The judge had a number of options available to her, having  ruled  that
    the Respondent's decision was contrary to her duties under s.55.  Those
    options are set out in  the  second  of  the  above-mentioned  reported
    decisions, in the case of MK.  In summary the President gives  guidance
    as to what outcomes are available in cases such as  these.   The  Upper
    Tribunal points out that both the First-tier and  Upper  Tribunals  are
    capable of exercising their case management powers  in  any  way  which
    seems fair in given circumstances.

20. A number of scenarios were considered at paragraph 36 of the case of MK
    as follows:

         "36.     In examining these issues, we consider it  appropriate  to
             reflect on the realities of the scenario of an appeal in which
             either the FtT or the Upper Tribunal decides that the impugned
             decision of the Secretary of State is unlawful by virtue of  a
             failure to perform either or both of  the  duties  imposed  by
             section 55 of the  2009  Act.   The  following  are  typically
             recurring scenarios in practice:


             (a) In some cases (such  as  the  present)  the  Appellant  is
                  neither present nor  represented.   In  this  category  of
                  appeals, no further evidence bearing on the best interests
                  of  any   affected   child,   nor   any   elucidation   or
                  amplification of extant relevant evidence, will be adduced
                  by or on behalf of the Appellant.


             (b) In other cases, the Tribunal  might  be  informed  by  the
                  Appellant or  his  representative  that  further  relevant
                  evidence can be adduced, giving rise to an application  to
                  adjourn the final determination of the  appeal.   In  some
                  instances  of  this  kind,  the  source  of  such  further
                  evidence not infrequently includes an expert in the  field
                  of medicine or psychiatry or psychology or social care.


             (c) A third, and  different,  scenario  is  one  where  it  is
                  evident to the experienced member/s of the  Tribunal  that
                  the Secretary of State has failed to assemble relevant and
                  available evidence in making the impugned  decision.  Such
                  evidence may include a sentencing transcript,  a  criminal
                  record, a pre-sentence report, a post-sentence  prison  or
                  probation report or  extant  social  services  reports  or
                  records.  As a general rule, evidence of this kind  is  in
                  the  custody  of  other  public  authorities  and  can  be
                  obtained by the Secretary of State on request.


             (d) There is another realistic scenario, namely one wherein it
                  may appear to the Tribunal that the impugned  decision  of
                  the Secretary of State was undermined and impoverished  by
                  a failure to give effect to the requirement in Part  2  of
                  the  statutory  guidance  that,  in   appropriate   cases,
                  children should be consulted and their wishes and feelings
                  should be taken into account "wherever  practicable":  see
                  [19] above.  This is most likely to occur in  cases  where
                  it appears  to  the  Tribunal  that  the  information  and
                  representations put forward on  behalf  of  the  Appellant
                  invited  further  enquiries  or  elucidation  or  evidence
                  gathering of this kind on the part  of  the  Secretary  of
                  State.


            These scenarios are not designed to be  exhaustive.   They  are,
             rather, typical of the realities  of  immigration  and  asylum
             appeals in contemporary litigation.  Furthermore, none of them
             is self-sealed: depending on the  context  of  the  individual
             case, some may partake of the ingredients of others."

21. I find that the judge's decision that  there  was  inadequate  evidence
    before the First-tier to conduct a best  interests  assessment  was  an
    approach that was permitted according to the guidance provided  by  the
    President at para 36 and paragraph 39(b) of MK:


         "39(b) However, there may be cases where  the  Tribunal  forms  the
         view that the assembled evidence is insufficient for this  purpose.
         In such cases, two options arise.  The first is  to  consider  such
         further relevant evidence as the Appellant  can  muster  and/or  to
         exercise case management  powers  in  an  attempt  to  augment  the
         available evidence.  The second is to determine  the  appeal  in  a
         manner which requires the  Secretary  of  State  to  make  a  fresh
         decision. While eschewing prescription, we observe that this course
         may well be appropriate in cases where it appears to the  appellate
         tribunal that a thorough  best  interests  assessment  may  require
         interview of an affected child or children in accordance with  Part
         2 of the Secretary of State's statutory guidance."

22. The latter course of action considered in para 39(b) of MK was  exactly
    the outcome which the First-tier Judge ruled in favour  of.   There  is
    nothing argued before me which succeeds in demonstrating that the First-
    tier erred procedurally or otherwise in electing that course of action.



Notice of Decision

23. I therefore rule that the making of the  First-tier  decision  did  not
    involve the making of any material error of law and I uphold the First-
    tier decision. Whether or not the oldest  child  of  the  appellant  or
    indeed the younger twins are interviewed by the Secretary of State is a
    matter to be determined between the  appellant  and  the  Secretary  of
    State, applying the guidance set out in the abovementioned cases.

24. This decision was given in ex tempore form before the  parties  on  the
    date of hearing. The Tribunal regrets the time taken  for  promulgation
    of this written decision.


Signed:


[pic]

Date: 11.9.16

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan
