
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/50929/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent   |Notice sent                  |
|On: 2nd August 2016                           |On : 3rd August 2016         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                              Mr Muhammad Saqib
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

                          NOTICE OF WITHDRAWAL AND
                   REASONS FOR THE TRIBUNAL GIVING CONSENT

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born 5th May 1982.  He  appealed
    to the First-tier Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of State
    dated 4th December 2014, refusing to vary his leave to remain as a Tier
    1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant and to remove him to Pakistan.. The First-tier
    Tribunal dismissed this appeal in a determination  promulgated  on  2nd
    November 2015. Judge Landes granted the appellant permission to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. By way of a letter to the Upper Tribunal  dated  1st  August  2016  the
    appellant's  representatives  request  permission   to   withdraw   the
    appellant's appeal before the Upper Tribunal.

 3. Consent of the Upper Tribunal is required for a party to  withdraw  its
    case. Having carefully considered the facts of this appeal as a  whole,
    I give consent to the appellant to withdraw his case.

 4. Accordingly with my consent, and pursuant to rule 17(5) of the Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008,  this  appeal  is  recorded  as
    "Withdrawn with the consent of the Upper Tribunal". This  is  a  Notice
    pursuant to rule 17(5) to inform the parties that the appellant's  case
    is withdrawn.

 5. The effect of the appellant's  case  being  withdrawn  from  the  Upper
    Tribunal is that the proceedings before the Upper Tribunal  are  at  an
    end. There is no appeal before the Upper Tribunal  and  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision shall stand.


Signed:


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

Date: 2nd August 2016


