

                                    [pic]


The Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal number: IA/50707/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                |Determination Promulgated          |
|On November 10, 2014               |On November 11, 2014               |
|                                   |                                   |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                             MRS FAZEELAT BEGUM
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Salem (Legal Representative)
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, born January 1, 1947  is  a  citizen  of  Pakistan.  She
    applied for leave to remain under paragraph 317 HC 395 as  a  dependent
    relative of a person present and settled in  the  United  Kingdom.  The
    respondent refused her  application  on  November  6,  2013  under  the
    Immigration  Rules  and   found   no   exceptional   or   compassionate
    circumstances to allow the appeal outside the Rules. At the  same  time
    she decided she should be removed under section 47 of the  Immigration,
    Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 2. The appellant appealed both decisions to the First-tier Tribunal  under
    Section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  on
    December 2, 2013.

 3. On March 21, 2014 Judge of the First Tier Tribunal McCall  (hereinafter
    referred to as the "FtTJ")  heard  her  appeal  and  refused  it  in  a
    determination promulgated on April 8, 2014.

 4. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal on April 17, 2014 and on May 16,
    2014 Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Pooler  granted  permission  to
    appeal finding it arguable the FtTJ had possibly erred by:

     a. Considering the article 8 appeal in accordance with the Immigration
        Rules in force at the date of  decision  as  against  the  date  of
        application.


     b. Arguably failing to give adequate  consideration  to  all  material
        factors.

    Although the other grounds were raised he found they probably  did  not
    disclose an error in  law  but  nevertheless  gave  permission  on  all
    grounds.

 5. The respondent filed a Rule 24 response dated June 4, 2014 in which she
    opposed the appeal and  submitted  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Pooler himself had erred in his interpretation of the Court  of  Appeal
    decision of Edgehill v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 402.

 6. The matter was listed on the above  date  and  the  appellant  and  her
    family were present. An  interpreter  translated  the  content  of  the
    hearing to the appellant.

    SUBMISSIONS


 7. Mr Salam adopted his grounds  of  appeal  and  submitted  there  was  a
    material error in law for the following reasons:


     a. The FtTJ erred in his approach  to  the  evidence  in  relation  to
        paragraph 317 HC 395. Evidence had been given  regarding  financial
        dependency and the FtTJ speculated and erred by making the findings
        he did. Reliance was placed on paragraph 11.137 of MacDonald.


     b. The FtTJ decided the article 8  application  with  regard  only  to
        paragraph 276  ADE  HC  395  and  he  should  have  considered  the
        application outside  of  the  Rules  because  the  application  was
        submitted prior to July 9, 2012. He failed to have  regard  to  the
        Court of Appeal decision of Edgehill v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 402.

     c. The FtTJ  speculated  on  what  money  was  used  for  and  reached
        irrational conclusions.

     d. The FtTJ had regard to matters that were not  relevant  for  either
        paragraph 317 HC 395 or article 8 ECHR.

     e. He placed too much reliance on the Rules and  this  amounted  to  a
        material error.

     f. Leave should be given to admit the  unreported  decision  that  had
        been served.

 8. Mr McVeety submitted there was no material error. He stated  that  both
    Mr Salam and Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Pooler  were  wrong  in
    their approach to Edgehill. The appellant's representative  had  argued
    this appeal before the FtTJ on paragraphs 317 HC 395 and 276ADE HC 395.
    The "Edgehill" argument was wholly misplaced for two reasons:


     a. The transitional provisions A277-A277C make clear that any  article
        8 claim outstanding when the Rules changed was caught  by  the  new
        Rules namely paragraph 276ADE and Appendix FM.


     b. Edghill was fact specific and related to paragraph 276ADE(iii)  and
        had no relevance to this current appeal.

     c. The decision of Haleemudeen -v- SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ  558  confirms
        that the FtTJ was correct in his approach.


    The FtTJ had full regard to all the evidence  and  reached  conclusions
    that were open to him regarding the finances  and  the  extent  of  any
    financial support.


    He did not speculate with his findings  but  considered  the  oral  and
    written evidence and made findings open to him. He refused  the  appeal
    under paragraph 317 HC 395 and gave reasons and in particular found the
    witnesses to be evasive and vague.
    The FtTJ then properly  considered  the  appeal  under  the  Rules  for
    paragraph 276ADE purposes and made findings open to him.


    The Court of Appeal decision of Haleemudeen was a binding decision  and
    no regard should be had to the decision that Mr Salam sought to adduce.




 9.  Mr  Salam  responded  and  submitted  that   the   fact   the   former
    representatives had argued the case on the new Rules  did  not  prevent
    him arguing an error of law based on Edgehill  as  that  decision  made
    clear the correct approach and  the  fact  the  parties  approached  it
    incorrectly did not negate the Tribunal's responsibility to address the
    matter correctly.


10. I reserved my decision.

    MY FINDINGS ON ERROR IN LAW

11. The appellant submitted an application on  July  7,  2012.  That  date,
    according to Mr Salam, is significant because it pre-dated the  changes
    in the Immigration Rules brought about by HC 194 on July 9, 2012.


12. The respondent considered the appellant's application and refused it on
    November 6, 2013.

13. In her refusal letter the respondent considered the  application  under
    paragraph 317 HC 395-this being the Rule  in  force  at  the  date  the
    application was made. Having decided the appellant did not satisfy this
    Rule the respondent then outlined the change in the  Rules  and  stated
    that family and private life were to be considered  under  Appendix  FM
    and paragraph 276ADE.

14. The first ground of appeal  challenges  the  FtTJ's  finding  that  the
    appellant did not satisfy the requirements of paragraph 317 HC 395.

15.  The  appellant  was  sixty-five  years  old  when  she  submitted  her
    application for indefinite leave to remain as a dependent parent on the
    grounds she satisfied  paragraph  317(i)(a).  However,  the  respondent
    refused her application because he  was  not  satisfied  she  satisfied
    paragraphs 317(iii) and (v) HC 395.

16. When the matter  came  before  the  FtTJ  he  took  evidence  from  the
    appellant, Muhammad Aamir Latif (her son), Raheela Kaukab  and  Sajeela
    Sohail (her daughters). He made a number of  findings  on  whether  the
    appellant was wholly or mainly dependent on her son and whether she had
    any close relatives in Pakistan to whom she could turn to for financial
    support and these are recorded between paragraphs [20] and [35] of  his
    determination.

17. Mr Salam has today submitted that these findings  are  speculative  and
    were not open to  the  FtTJ  and  he  referred  me  to  an  extract  in
    MacDonald.

18. The FtTJ had found-

     a. The appellant remained  in  Pakistan  for  four  months  after  her
        husband's death in accordance with her religious beliefs.


     b. He accepted the appellant's son supported  his  mother  immediately
        following his father's death by  sending  her  money  to  meet  the
        funeral expenses, her travel to the United Kingdom and her  day-to-
        day expenses until her pension and  her  day-to-day  expenses  were
        resolved.

     c. The appellant had been evasive and deliberately vague in regard  to
        her account of the sale, the value of the sale and what happened to
        the proceeds because she knew disclosure  of  such  evidence  would
        undermine her case.

     d. The appellant's account of her husband's employment and income  was
        both vague and inconsistent.

     e. Mrs Kaukab knew more than she was willing  to  disclose  about  the
        sale proceeds and her evasive and vague responses  also  undermined
        the appellant's case.

     f. Mrs Sohail was not living with her mother as she  was  living  with
        her in-laws and she knew little about the sale of the property  and
        he found her account vague.

19. I am satisfied all the findings made by the  FtTJ  were  findings  that
    were open to him. He heard the  evidence  and  had  an  opportunity  to
    assess them as witnesses and after hearing all the evidence  (oral  and
    written) he made the findings he did.


20. The FtTJ considered why the money had been sent  and  he  rejected  the
    appellant's claim it was general support but found it  was  money  sent
    for specific purposes and he rejected her claim that she was wholly  or
    mainly financially dependent on her son. I am satisfied that all  those
    findings were open to him and the submissions made to me  today  are  a
    mere disagreement with those findings. The FtTJ was entitled to  reject
    the application under paragraph 317 HC 395.


21. Having refused the  application  for  indefinite  leave  the  FtTJ  was
    required to consider the claim for family/private life. It is here that
    the main legal argument arose with Mr McVeety submitting that  the  new
    Rules covered the article 8 aspect of the claim and Mr Salam submitting
    the FtTJ materially erred by predominantly considering the claim  under
    the new Rules as against article 8 ECHR (outside of the Rules) and that
    any article 8 assessment in paragraph [44] was inadequate.

22. I have been referred to the two Court of Appeal decisions of Edgehill v
    SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 402 and Haleemudeen -v- SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 558.

23. In Edgehill v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 402 in determining  appeals  against
    refusals to grant the appellants indefinite leave to remain it was held
    that,  subject  to  one  caveat,  it  was  not  lawful  to  reject   an
    application, made before 9 July 2012 under Article 8 of the Convention,
    in reliance upon the applicant's failure to achieve 20 years' residence
    as specified in paragraph 276ADE(iii) of the new Immigration  Rules  as
    introduced by the Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules which  came
    into effect on 9 July 2012. The caveat was that "mere passing reference
    to the 20 years requirement in the new rules will not have  the  effect
    of invalidating the Secretary of State's decision.  The  decision  only
    becomes unlawful if the decision maker relies upon rule 276ADE (iii) as
    a consideration materially affecting the decision".

24. In Haleemudeen v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 558 the Court of Appeal  appeared
    unbothered by the fact that paragraph 276ADE had been  considered  even
    though the application  preceded  the  new  rules.  It  was  said  that
    paragraph 276A could not be disregarded even once it was clear that the
    case did not fall within the Immigration Rules, because although it was
    not dispositive, it provided guidance about the  Secretary  of  State's
    policy in the same way as paragraph 276ADE and Appendix FM.

25. The Court in Haleemudeen reached its  findings  having  regard  to  the
    Supreme Court decision of Odeola [2009] UKHL  25.  However,  that  case
    involved a  change  to  the  Immigration  Rules  with  no  transitional
    provisions whereas HC  194  contained  transitional  provisions.  These
    transitional provisions are set out in Paragraphs A277 to A277C.

26. Paragraph A277 states:

         "From 9 July 2012 Appendix FM will apply  to  all  applications  to
         which Part 8 of these rules applied on or before 8 July 2012 except
         where the provisions of Part 8?are preserved and continue to apply,
         as set out in paragraph A280."

27. Paragraph A277A states


         "Where the Secretary of State is  considering  an  application  for
         indefinite leave to remain to which Part 8 of these rules continues
         to apply (excluding an  application  from  a  family  member  of  a
         Relevant Points Based System Migrant), and where the applicant:


         a) does not meet the requirements of Part 8 for indefinite leave to
            remain, and


         b) continues to meet the requirements for limited leave  to  remain
            on which the applicant's last grant of limited leave  to  remain
            under Part 8 was based, further limited leave  to  remain  under
            Part 8 may be granted of such  a  period  and  subject  to  such
            conditions as the Secretary of State deems appropriate. For  the
            purposes of this sub-paragraph an applicant last granted limited
            leave to enter under Part 8 will be considered as  if  they  had
            last been granted limited leave to remain under Part 8; or

         c) if the applicant does not meet the requirements of  Part  8  for
            indefinite leave to remain as a bereaved  partner  only  because
            paragraph 322(1C)(iii) or 322(1C)(iv) of  these  rules  applies,
            the applicant will be granted limited leave to remain under Part
            8 for a period not exceeding  30  months  and  subject  to  such
            conditions as the Secretary of State deems appropriate."


28. Paragraph A277B states:


         "Where the Secretary of State is considering an application for
         indefinite leave to remain to which Part 8 of these rules continues
         to apply (excluding an application from a family member of a
         Relevant Points Based System Migrant) and where the application
         does not meet the requirements of Part 8 for indefinite leave to
         remain or limited leave to remain:

      a) the application will also be considered under paragraphs R-
         LTRP.1.1.(a), (b) and (d), R-LTRPT.1.1.(a), (b) and (d) and EX.1.
         of Appendix FM (family life) and paragraphs 276ADE to 276DH
         (private life) of these rules;


      b) if the applicant meets  the  requirements  for  leave  under  those
         paragraphs of Appendix FM or paragraphs 276ADE to 276DH (except the
         requirement  for  a  valid  application  under  that  route),   the
         applicant will be granted leave under those provisions; and


      c) if the applicant is granted leave under those provisions, the
         period of the applicant's continuous leave under Part 8 at the date
         of application will be counted towards the period of continuous
         leave which must be completed before the applicant can apply for
         indefinite leave to remain under those provisions.

         Except sub-paragraph (c) does not apply to a  person  last  granted
         leave as the family  member  of  a  Relevant  Points  Based  System
         Migrant."


29. Mr Salam handed to  me  Chapter  8.  Section  2.1  of  the  Immigration
    Directorate Instructions on the Transitional Provisions. This says-


         Applicants granted or who applied for leave under the rules  before
         July 9, 2012 states-
         "A person who meets the following criteria, in one of the
         categories specified below, will remain subject to the Immigration
         Rules in force as at 8 July 2012 until settlement (the grant of
         indefinite leave to remain) even where the application is granted
         on or after 9 July 2012:
      i) to a person who made an application before 9 July 2012 under Part 8
         of the Immigration Rules which was not decided by 9 July 2012; and
     ii) to applications made by a person who is in the UK and had been
         granted entry clearance or limited leave to remain under Part 8
         following an application for initial entry clearance or leave to
         remain under Part 8 submitted before 9 July 2012 and this leave is
         extant where this is a requirement in Part 8.
         ... Transitional provisions under Part 8 will apply through to
         indefinite leave to remain to those persons who were granted in one
         of the following categories (on the basis of an application
         submitted before 9 July 2012):
         ... adult dependent relative...."
30. A perusal of these Instructions and  Rules  would  support  Mr  Salam's
    submission that the transitional provisions  would  have  covered  this
    application.


31. In considering the correct approach it seems the Court of  Appeal  have
    given conflicting decisions because the Court in  Haleemudeen  did  not
    consider the Court of Appeal decision in Edgehill.


32. Mr McVeety's submission was that the decision in Edgehill only  applied
    to cases  covered  by  paragraph  276ADE(iii)  because  that  case  and
    Haleemudeen were about long residence and paragraph 276ADE(iii) relates
    to a an applicant who is seeking to  remain  on  the  grounds  of  long
    residence.


33. I am satisfied that Edgehill is not restricted to  merely  cases  under
    Paragraph 276ADE(iii). That was the issue argued before  the  Court  of
    Appeal but it was the general principle that was  under  appeal  namely
    whether an application made before July 9, 2012  should  be  considered
    under the old Rules or new Rules. I am also satisfied that  Haleemudeen
    was decided on a case which had no transitional provisions  and  failed
    to consider Edgehill  and  consequently  it  does  not  "overrule"  the
    decision of Edgehill. My understanding is that the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    Haleemudeen has accepted that Edgehill applies and that the matter  has
    to be decided on the basis of the pre-July 2012 Rules.

34. The Court of Appeal in Edgehill made it as clear as it could in stating
    that any application under the Rules made prior to July 9, 2012  should
    be dealt with by the Rules in place at the  time  the  application  was
    made.

35. Returning therefore to the original hearing the  FtTJ  correctly  dealt
    with the application under  paragraph  317  because  he  considered  it
    having regard to the provisions of that Rule. For the reasons  set  out
    above I have already found that  there  is  no  error  of  law  in  his
    approach to that issue.

36. It is well established respondent practice that paragraph  276ADE  sets
    out her approach to article  8  ECHR  namely  that  article  8  is  now
    enshrined in the Rules. At the original hearing the parties  approached
    the case under Paragraph 276ADE and in the alternative article 8 ECHR.

37. The FtTJ made a number of findings about the appellant's  private  life
    and whilst they were made when he was examining paragraph  276ADE  that
    does not in itself create an error in law.  The  findings  he  made  on
    medical issues, ties and finances were findings he would have  to  make
    in any proportionality assessment. The FtTJ stated at paragraph [44] of
    his determination he followed the Razgar approach and consequently this
    would have led to him having to make a proportionality  assessment  and
    he concluded-

         "Finally, even if the appellant's appeal did fall to be  considered
         under article 8 ECHR and adopting the  test  referred  to  by  Lord
         Bingham in Razgar I do find for the reasons set out above that  her
         removal  from  the  UK  and  her  return  to  Pakistan   would   be
         proportionate."

38. In other words the FtTJ considered as part of his  assessment  all  the
    factors that should be considered and ultimately  found  the  appellant
    could not succeed under article 8 at all.

39. The Edgehill point confirms that the Tribunal must consider  this  case
    having regard to the old Rules and this is exactly what the  FtTJ  did.
    The fact he considered the case under paragraph 276ADE does not  amount
    to an error in circumstances where  he  has  had  addressed  article  8
    outside of the Rules.

40. If the FtTJ had dismissed the appeal under paragraphs  317  and  276ADE
    and made no assessment under Razgar then Mr Salam's submission may have
    had some merit.

41. However, this is not what happened in  this  appeal  because  the  FtTJ
    considered the arguments that arise on private life  and  at  paragraph
    [44] he found it was proportionate to require the  appellant  to  leave
    the country and that was a decision he was entitled  to  reach  on  the
    evidence.

42. Mr Salam's submissions on ties and money are  mere  disagreements  with
    the FtTJ's decision and fail to address the  fact  they  were  findings
    open to the FtTJ who was then entitled to rely on those findings in his
    proportionality assessment. The FtTJ was not  dealing  with  an  appeal
    where a person had  come  to  the  United  Kingdom  with  a  legitimate
    expectation that she would be allowed to stay. She  came  as  a  family
    visitor with the intention to leave within six months.

43. I am therefore satisfied that there was no error of law in  either  his
    approach to paragraph 317 or article 8 ECHR.



    DECISION


44. There was no material error of law. The  original  decision  dismissing
    the appeal under both the Immigration  Rules  and  human  rights  shall
    stand.

45. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended) the  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No
    order was made in the First-tier Tribunal and I see no reason to  amend
    that Order now.


Signed:                           Dated: 27 February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



TO THE RESPONDENT

No fee award request was made and I do not make one in those circumstances.



Signed:                           Dated: 27 February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
