
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA507192014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 9 May 2016                             |On 24 May 2016                    |
|Determination given orally at the hearing.|                                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                            MR DAVID DELA SEGLAH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Waheed, Counsel instructed by Solomon Shepherd
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen  of  Ghana,  who  asserts  that  he  entered
    Britain in 1997. He appeals against a decision of Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Andonian  who,  in  a  determination  promulgated  on  28
    September 2015 dismissed his appeal against a  refusal    of  leave  to
    remain on long residence grounds.  The  assertion  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal was that the judge should have applied  the  "old  rules"  which
    would have entitled the appellant to leave to remain   after 14  years,
    despite the fact that the decision in this  case  had  been  made  long
    after the coming into force of  the  "new  rues"  in  July  2012.   The
    argument appears to be based on the fact that the appellant had made an
    application in 2009 which had been refused the following year.

2.     I consider there is no merit in this appeal.  This is an appeal of  a
    man who came here, remained illegally and was removed.  Notwithstanding
    the fact that that had happened, he then returned to Britain and  again
    lived here without authority.  An application for leave to  remain  was
    refused in 2010 and he still did not  leave.   Further  representations
    were made which resulted in the decision made in  December  2014.   The
    reality is that given the date of the decision this  is  a  case  which
    falls squarely under the guidance in Singh and Khalid [2015]  EWCA  Civ
    74 and the "new rules" which came into force in 2012 are  the  relevant
    rules. There is simply no possible argument that somehow  the  decision
    in 2010 was being challenged in this appeal.  There is nothing to  show
    that the decision in 2010 was in any way unreasonable or  not  open  to
    the Secretary of State and indeed it could have been challenged at  the
    time but it was not challenged.

3.   The judge in considering the Article 8 issues did  properly  apply  the
    law, he was correct to refer to the terms of  Section  117.   The  fact
    that there are some  factors  under  Section  117B  which  are  in  the
    applicant's favour is not determinative and  that  is  clear  from  the
    judgment in Bossade  [2015]UKUT  415  (IAC).   The  clear  guidance  in
    Section 117 is that private life built up when an individual is  living
    in Britain without authority should not  be  taken  into  account  when
    considering the proportionality of removal.

4.   The decision of the Judge of the First-tier was entirely  open  to  him
    and there was no material error of law therein.


Signed                                  Date 24th May 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
