
IAC-fH-ck-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/50078/2013
     IA/50086/2013
     IA/50091/2013
     IA/50097/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 3 December 2014                         |On 16 December 2014            |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             ms Phyruz Jelaldeen
                               ms Farha Jaward
                            mr Saranhassen Jaward
                               ms Naiya Jaward
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr E Raw, Counsel instructed by AKL Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The respondents in this case are all citizens of Sri Lanka.  Ms  Phyruz
    Jelaldeen's date of birth is 7 September  1956.   The  three  remaining
    respondents are her adult children.  Mr Saranhassen  Jaward's  date  of
    birth is 7 July 1984. Ms Naiya Jaward's date of  birth  is  12  January
    1986. Ms Farha Jaward's date of birth is 19 April 1992.  I shall  refer
    to the respondents as the appellants as they were before the First-tier
    Tribunal and to Ms Phyruz Jelaldeen as the main appellant.

2.   The appellants arrived in the UK in 2001 and made  an  application  for
    asylum which was refused in a decision dated 23 July  2001.   The  main
    appellant married an EEA national in July 2004 and on 15 June 2005  the
    Secretary of State issued residence cards to all the  appellants  which
    expired on 5 July 2012.  They applied for permanent residence  pursuant
    to Regulation 15 of the 2006 Regulations and  these  applications  were
    refused on 21 October 2013.

3.   The main appellant's marriage to the EEA national came  to  an  end  in
    February 2012 and a decree absolute was pronounced  on  4  April  2013.
    The EEA national returned to Sweden  in  February  2012.   It  was  not
    accepted by the Secretary of State  that  the  EEA  national  had  been
    exercising treaty rights at the date of the divorce.

4.   The appellants appealed and their appeals were allowed by Judge of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Keane in a decision  that  was  promulgated  on  13
    October 2014 following a hearing at Taylor House on 10 September  2014.
    Judge Keane dismissed the appeal under the 2006 Regulations but allowed
    it under Article 8.

5.   Permission was granted to the Secretary of State to appeal against  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
    McCarthy in a decision of 3 November 2014.  Thus the matter came before
    me.

The Findings of the FtT

6.   The material findings of Judge Keane are found in paragraphs  8  and  9
    of the determination:

         "8.  In resolving the human rights appeals I have borne in mind the
             determination of the Upper Tribunal in Gulshan and judgment of
             the Court of Appeal (not  cited  to  me  at  the  hearing  but
             resting within the public domain) of  R  (MM)  Lebanon  v  The
             Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2014]  EWCA  Civ
             985.   I  have  borne  in  mind  that  the  amendment  to  the
             Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  by  way  of  the
             introduction of a new Part 5A does not apply  to  the  instant
             appeals.  In resolving the human rights appeal I have observed
             the 'Razgar-style' approach.  I find that the  appellants  did
             not establish family life under Article 8 of the Human  Rights
             Convention.  I am entirely satisfied that very strong feelings
             of love and affection  bind  the  individual  members  of  Mrs
             Jelaldeen's family  to  each  other.   The  evidence  did  not
             disclose  additional  elements  of  dependence   which   might
             transform such relationships into relationships attracting the
             protection of Article 8.  The remainder of  this  analysis  of
             the human rights issue is based on the  premise  that  such  a
             finding is in error.  The appellants established private  life
             under Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights  Convention.   It  is
             convenient for me to consider the nature and  extent  of  that
             private life later in this determination.  The removal of  the
             appellants from the United Kingdom  would  not  amount  to  an
             interference by the respondent with the appellants'  right  to
             respect for family life because they would  be  removed  as  a
             family unit and mindful of her duty under  Section  6  of  the
             Human  Rights  Act  1998  the  respondent  would  not   remove
             individual appellants so  as  to  break  up  the  family  unit
             constituted by all of the  appellants.   The  removal  of  the
             appellants would amount to an interference by  the  respondent
             with their right to respect for private life.   The  immediate
             consequence of  the  implementation  of  the  removal  of  the
             appellants  from  the  United  Kingdom  would  be  the  abrupt
             cessation  of  the  private  life  which  each  appellant  has
             developed for him and herself in the  United  Kingdom  over  a
             period greater than thirteen years.  Such  consequences  I  am
             only prepared to characterise as consequences of such  gravity
             as potentially would engage the operation of Article  8.   The
             respondent discharged the burden of proving to the balance  of
             probabilities that the interference posed to  the  appellants'
             right to respect for private life was in accordance  with  the
             applicable legislation and necessary in a  democratic  society
             for the maintenance of an effective immigration control.

         9.   In finding that  the  instant  appeals  disclosed  exceptional
             circumstances which meant that the refusal of the applications
             for  permanent  residence  resulted  in  unjustifiably   harsh
             consequences for the appellants I find that the  decisions  to
             refuse to grant permanent residence were not proportionate  to
             the  legitimate  aim  of  the  maintenance  of  an   effective
             immigration control for reasons which I now give.  First,  the
             appellants have resided continuously in the United Kingdom for
             a period greater than  thirteen  years.   That  was  surely  a
             lengthy period of time.  Second, for significant parts of  the
             period of their residence in the United Kingdom they have  had
             leave from the respondent.  The respondent  granted  residence
             documents to the appellants on 8 July 2005 and their residence
             cards issued on 5 July 2007 expired on 5  July  2012.   For  a
             significant period in which  the  appellants  developed  their
             private lives in the United Kingdom they had  settled  status.
             Third, it was no  part  of  the  respondent's  case  that  Mrs
             Jelaldeen's marriage to Mr Farook was  not  at  its  outset  a
             genuine and sincere union or that Mrs Jelaldeen was in any way
             responsible for the breakdown of the  marriage.   I  draw  the
             inference  that  when  Mrs  Jelaldeen   married   she   fairly
             entertained the hope that she would be  able  to  continue  to
             reside in the United Kingdom as the spouse of an EEA  national
             exercising treaty rights.   I  draw  the  inference  that  the
             remaining appellants entertained  on  reasonable  grounds  the
             hope that as the family members of an EEA national  exercising
             treaty rights in the United Kingdom they too would be able  to
             continue to reside  in  the  United  Kingdom.   Fourth,  I  am
             satisfied that the appellants' private  lives  in  the  United
             Kingdom are deep and extensive and do not merely  reflect  the
             long period of  their  residence.   The  appellants  have  not
             returned to Sri Lanka Mrs Jelaldeen and Saranhassen  are  each
             employed, Farha is married and has two children, Naiya, if her
             immigration status is clarified, would  like  to  read  for  a
             degree in nursing.   The  appellants  individually  and  as  a
             family unit are well-integrated into the life and  culture  of
             the  United  Kingdom.   Finally,  I  am  satisfied  that   the
             appellants  lack  meaningful  contacts  and  connections  with
             persons resident in Sri Lanka.  Mrs Jelaldeen was  commendably
             honest in volunteering that  she  still  has  friends  in  Sri
             Lanka.   I  am  loath  to  overstate  the  importance  to  the
             appellants of such contacts given the length of the period  in
             which they have been absent from their country of  origin  and
             given the strong private life ties which they have established
             in the United Kingdom.  For all such reasons I find  that  the
             instant  appeals  disclosed  exceptional  circumstances  which
             rendered  the  respondent's  decisions  to  refuse  to   grant
             permanent residence to them disproportionate.  The appeals  on
             human rights grounds (Article 8) are allowed."


The Grounds of Appeal and Submissions


7.   The Secretary of State's grounds to appeal assert that the  Judge  made
    a material misdirection of law in relation to Section 117 of  the  2014
    Immigration Act in concluding that  it  did  not  apply  in  this  case
    because the appeals were brought under the EEA Regulations.

8.   The second ground of appeal argues that the Judge erred in relation  to
    Article 8 in allowing the  appeal  on  the  basis  of  the  appellants'
    private lives as this was inconsistent with Section 117B(5) of the 2014
    Act and inconsistent with established jurisprudence including Nasim and
    others (Article 8) [2014] UKUT 00025.

9.   I heard oral submissions from both Mr Walker  and  Mr  Raw.  Mr  Walker
    indicated that the ground he was relying on primarily  was  the  second
    ground of appeal relating to the Judge's assessment of the  appellants'
    private lives.

Conclusions

10.  The facts in this case are that  the  appellant's  now  adult  children
    came here when they were aged 9, 14 and 16 and  that  they  have  lived
    here continuously since then.  They have been here lawfully  since  the
    main appellant was married in July 2004 until 21 October  2013.   There
    was no assessment of Article 8 in the Reasons for Refusal Letter and it
    is not clear what  submissions  the  Presenting  Officer  made  at  the
    hearing before Judge Keane, but it was not argued in the  grounds  that
    it was not open to the Judge to determine the appeal under  article  8.
    This was not an argument advanced by Mr Walker before me.

11.  The first issue that arises is whether  the  Judge  made  an  error  in
    deciding that Section 117 of the 2014 Act did not apply  to  an  appeal
    under the 2006 Regulations.  However, it is not  necessary  for  me  to
    determine that issue because in my view the assessment under Article  8
    conducted by Judge Keane is not flawed.

12.  The Judge  clearly  found  that  the  first  three  of  Lord  Bingham's
    questions in the case of Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 should  be  answered  in
    the affirmative.  He considered necessity and proportionality correctly
    and identified the issues, namely whether the  decision  was  necessary
    and proportionate to the legitimate aim  which  he  identified  as  the
    maintenance of effective immigration control (see [8} and  [9]  of  the
    determination.

13.  The Judge correctly identified the relevant issues and  understood  the
    balancing  exercise  to  be  conducted  and  that  the  maintenance  of
    immigration control is a legitimate aim.  He found  that  the  decision
    was not proportionate in this case for a number of reasons.  I asked Mr
    Walker to identify what the Judge failed to  consider  which  he  would
    have considered should he have applied Section 117B but he was not able
    to do so.

14.  It is accepted that the appellants were  lawfully  in  the  UK  between
    2004 and 2013.  They were not settled and the  Judge  was  wrong  about
    that, but they were here with a lawful  right  to  be  here  and  their
    status was not precarious.  This point was conceded by Mr Walker.

15.  It was accepted by the Judge that the family is  self-sufficient.   The
    main appellant works as a carer. Her son is employed.  The  appellant's
    eldest daughter is married and lives with  her  husband  and  the  main
    appellant's  youngest  daughter  intends  to  study  having  relatively
    recently completed compulsory  education  in  the  UK.  They  all  live
    together in private rented accommodation.  The family owns  a  property
    which they rent out. There is no suggestion  that  the  family  is  not
    assimilated and integrated or that there are language problems.  .

16.  Had the Judge applied section 117B  he  would  have  reached  the  same
    conclusion.  There are weighty factors in favour of the appellants  and
    the facts are wholly different to those in the case of Nasim.  The main
    appellant did not come here to study.  They have all been here for many
    years  and  have  clearly  developed  significant  private  lives.   In
    addition the three youngest appellants came to the UK as children.

17.  This was an appeal under the 2006 Regulations and not  the  Immigration
    Rules, but it is worth noting that the  youngest  appellant  meets  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE(v) of the  Rules  and  the  two  other
    adult children would have in my  view  strong  claims  under  paragraph
    276(vi).  The eldest daughter's unchallenged evidence is that  she  has
    two children who at the date of the main appellant's witness statement,
    5 September 2014, were aged 6 and 7.  There was no  evidence  that  was
    adduced about these children and I assume that  neither  is  a  British
    citizen but there is a reasonable prospect that at least one of them is
    a qualified child under 117B (5).At some time all the  appellants  have
    been family members of an EEA national and on the face of it it appears
    to me that the main appellant and her youngest daughter have a right of
    permanent residence under paragraph 15(b) of the 2006 Regulations.

18.  There is a possibility that the Court of Justice of the European  Union
    will decide that the requirements under the  2006  Regulations  for  an
    appellant to establish that a third party spouse was exercising  treaty
    rights in the host member state at the time of their divorce is not  in
    accordance with Article 13(2) of Directive  2004/38/EC.   This  is  the
    question that was posed by the Court of Appeal to the CJEU in NA v SSHD
    [2014] EWCA Civ 995. This was the only reason for the  refusal  of  the
    appellants' applications under the 2006 Regulations.

19.  The decision granting permission raises the CJEU's decision  in  Dereci
    (case number C-256-11, 15 November 2011)  with  specific  reference  to
    paragraphs 70 to 74 but I understand this to relate to the  117B  issue
    and it is not necessary for the purpose of this decision  to  determine
    whether or not part 5 of the 2002 Act amended applies to this appeal.

20.  In my view there is no material error of law and the  decision  of  the
    Judge to allow the appeal under Article 8 of  the  1950  Convention  on
    Human Rights is maintained.

The Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed and the decision of the  First-
tier Tribunal is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 16 December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

