
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/51687/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 13 August 2014                               |On 9 October 2014          |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE conway

                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                linda nUAmah
                        (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Bramble
For the Respondent:    In person

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Linda Nuamah is a citizen of Ghana born in 1973.  She appeals against a
    decision of the Secretary of State made on 16 November 2013  to  refuse
    to issue a residence card as confirmation of a right of residence as  a
    family member of Mr Augustus Ofosu-Ochere, a Dutch national  exercising
    treaty rights in the UK.

 2. The application was considered under  Regulation  7  and  8(5)  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

 3. Although in proceedings  before  me  the  Secretary  of  State  is  the
    Appellant, for convenience I will refer to the  parties  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal, thus Linda Nuamah is the Appellant  and
    the Secretary of State is the Respondent.

 4. In refusing the application the Respondent for various reasons given in
    the refusal letter was not satisfied that  the  customary  marriage  by
    proxy of the Appellant  and  Mr  Ofosu-Ochere  on  15  April  2012  was
    registered in accordance  with  the  Ghanaian  Customary  Marriage  and
    Divorce (Registration) Law 1985.

 5. The Respondent also concluded that she had not established that she  is
    in a durable relationship (per Regulation 8).

 6. She appealed.

 7. Following a hearing at Richmond on 17 March 2014 Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal M R Oliver allowed the appeal.

 8. His reasoning is at paragraph [10] where he states:

         'The Respondent has assumed in the refusal that once  an  Appellant
         chooses to register her marriage, a practice that is voluntary, the
         registration must comply with local law in order for an application
         such as the instant application for a registration card to succeed.
          Under NA (Customary  marriages  and  divorces  -  evidence)  Ghana
         [2009] UKAIT 00009) this is to ask the  wrong  question.   What  is
         required is not  compliance  with  the  local  law  but  sufficient
         further evidence to show that the marriage, not  the  registration,
         was valid under local law.  I have  nothing  to  suggest  that  the
         marriage, carried out by  proxy,  was  not  valid  and  nothing  to
         suggest that this is a marriage of convenience.   The  evidence  of
         cohabitation goes back to the joint bank account in March 2012  and
         the  tenancy  agreement  from  July  2012.   Although  the   cross-
         examination was not extensive the husband  emerged  as  a  credible
         witness.  I find that the proxy marriage was valid under local law.
          Even if I were wrong in that I am satisfied that the  parties  are
         in a durable relationship.  I find both parties to  be  honest  and
         accept the evidence that they have already tried unsuccessfully  to
         have a child together.'

 9. The Respondent sought permission to appeal which was granted by a judge
    on 24 June 2014.

10. At the error of law hearing before me the Appellant  attended  with  Mr
    Ofosu-Ochere.  I noted a letter (7 August 2014) from  Dias,  Solicitors
    stating that although they continued to act they would not be attending
    the hearing.  I sought to explain to the Appellant  why  she  had  been
    invited to attend and  what  the  issues  were.   They  were  happy  to
    proceed.

11. Mr Bramble in brief submissions adopted the grounds seeking permission.
     The First-tier Tribunal Judge  had  looked  at  the  position  of  the
    marriage in terms of the law of Ghana.  In determining the validity  of
    the marriage the judge should have first established whether this  type
    of customary marriage by proxy was recognised in the EEA state  of  the
    Sponsor, namely, the Netherlands.   As  for  the  conclusion  that  the
    parties are in a durable relationship the judge had failed to  identify
    the evidence relied on and offer adequate reasons for that finding. The
    Appellant had nothing to add.

12. I agreed with Mr Bramble.

13. In paragraph 11 of its determination  the  Tribunal  in  Kareem  (Proxy
    marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT 00024 (IAC), which was  promulgated  in
    January 2014, recognised that the  question  of  whether  a  person  is
    married is a matter governed by the national  laws  of  the  individual
    Member States.

14. Moving forward to paragraph 16, the Tribunal once again observed that:

         '... where there are issues of EU law that involve the  nationality
         laws of Member States, then the law that applies will be the law of
         the Member State of the nationality and not the host  Member  State
         ...'

15. The reasoning continues in paragraph 18:

         'Within EU law, it is essential that Member States  facilitate  the
         free movement and residence rights  of  Union  citizens  and  their
         spouses.  This would not be achieved if it  were  left  to  a  host
         Member State to decide whether a Union  citizen  has  contracted  a
         marriage.  Different Member States would be able to reach different
         conclusions about that Union citizen's marital status.  This  would
         leave Union citizens unclear as to whether their spouses could move
         freely with them; and might mean that the Union citizen could  move
         with greater freedom to one Member State (where the marriage  would
         be recognised) than to another  (where  it  might  not  be).   Such
         difficulties would be contrary to fundamental  EU  law  principles.
         Therefore, we perceive EU law as requiring  the  identification  of
         the legal  system  in  which  a  marriage  is  said  to  have  been
         contracted in such a way as to  ensure  that  the  Union  citizen's
         marital status is not at risk of being  differently  determined  by
         different  Member  States.   Given  the  intrinsic   link   between
         nationality of a Member State and free movement rights, we conclude
         that the legal system of the nationality of the Union citizen  must
         itself govern whether a marriage has been contracted.'

16. That such was the position was made clear  in  TA  and  Others  (Kareem
    explained) Ghana [2014] UKUT 00316 (IAC).  The headnote reads:


         'Following the decision in Kareem ... the determination of  whether
         there is a marital relationship for the purposes of the Immigration
         (EEA) Regulations 2006 must always be examined in  accordance  with
         the laws of the Member State from which the Union  citizen  obtains
         nationality.'

17. In the case of the Union citizen Mr Ofosu-Ochere is a national  of  the
    Netherlands. The judge failed to engage in  any  consideration  of  the
    applicable  legal  provisions  in  Mr   Ofusu-Ochere's   homeland   and
    consequently, in my conclusion the determination is flawed by an  error
    on a point of law.

18. The judge did go on to look at whether in the alternative  the  parties
    had shown that they were in a durable relationship.   His  comments  on
    that issue at [10] are extremely brief stating merely  that  he  'found
    both parties to be honest  and  accept  the  evidence  that  they  have
    already tried unsuccessfully to have a child together'.

19. I agreed with Mr Bramble's submission that the  judge  failed  to  give
    adequate reasons for reaching his conclusion that there was  a  durable
    relationship and that such also amounted to an error of law.

20. I set aside the determination.  In the letter from Dias, Solicitors  it
    was stated that in the event of the Upper Tribunal finding an error  of
    law 'the case should be remitted back to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
    Hearing' and that remittal would allow the Appellant to obtain  further
    evidence on the validity of the marriage under Dutch law.

21. Mr Bramble opposed that proposed course of action.  I agreed.

22. The Senior President's Practice Statement (25 September 2012) (at  7.1)
    states that where the Upper Tribunal  finds  that  the  making  of  the
    decision concerned involved the making of an error on a point  of  law,
    the Upper Tribunal may set aside this decision and, if it does so, must
    either remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal or proceed  to  remake
    the decision.

23. It continues at 7.2:

         'The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to  proceed  to
         remake the decision, instead of remitting the case  to  the  First-
         tier Tribunal, unless the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

         (a)  the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
             First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for
             that party's case to be put to and considered  by  the  First-
             tier Tribunal; or

         (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial  fact  finding  which  is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-
             made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-
             tier Tribunal.'

24. Also, '7.3 Remaking rather than remitting will nevertheless  constitute
    the normal approach to determining appeals where an  error  of  law  is
    found, even if some further fact finding is necessary.'

25. In this case there has been no deprivation of a  fair  hearing  nor  is
    fact finding a significant issue.

26. In addition I noted the Direction to Parties which stated:

         '2.      The parties shall prepare for the forthcoming  hearing  on
             the basis that if the Upper Tribunal decides to set aside  the
             determination  of  the  First-tier   Tribunal,   any   further
             evidence, including  supplementary  oral  evidence,  that  the
             Upper Tribunal may need to consider if it  decides  to  remake
             the decision, can be considered at that hearing.'

27. The Appellant made no adjournment request.  I  concluded,  accordingly,
    that the appropriate course was to proceed to remake  the  decision  at
    the hearing.

28. Having explained my decision to the Appellant she did not wish to  give
    evidence.  Mr Bramble simply stated that in the absence of any evidence
    as to the relevant Dutch law in respect of such a marriage  the  appeal
    had to fail on that aspect of the appeal.  He left the issue of durable
    relationship to me.  The Appellant  told  me  they  were  not  able  to
    present any evidence about the position under Dutch law.  In respect of
    a durable relationship  they  simply  sought  to  rely  on  the  bundle
    submitted for the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

29. Having no evidence before me that Dutch law recognises the  Appellant's
    marriage as a valid marriage, and the burden of proving the  fact  that
    it is a valid marriage is on the Appellant, I find that  the  Appellant
    and Mr Ofosu-Ochere are not to be treated  as  being  married  for  the
    purposes of the  2006  Regulations  and,  therefore,  that  she  cannot
    establish that she is a family member for the purposes of Regulation  7
    of these Regulations.

30. However, I must also consider Regulation  8  of  the  2006  Regulations
    which regulates those persons who can be  considered  to  be  'extended
    family members' of EEA nationals.  Pursuant to Regulation 8(5)

         'A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if the  person
         is the partner of an EEA national and can  prove  to  the  decision
         maker that he is in a durable relationship with the EEA national.'

31. 'Durable relationship' is not defined in the Regulations, and whether a
    person is in a durable relationship is a matter to be determined  on  a
    case-by-case basis.

32. The Respondent in the  refusal  letter  stated  that  a  joint  tenancy
    agreement dated  30  July  2012  and  photographs  had  been  provided.
    However, that evidence merely  showed  that  they  lived  in  the  same
    residence and  could  simply  be  tenants  rather  than  in  a  durable
    relationship.

33. I have perused the Appellant's bundle (28  March  2014).   It  includes
    statements by the Appellant and Mr Ofusu-Ochere.  These are  in  brief,
    similar terms to the effect that the parties continue to live  together
    and plan to do so for the rest of their lives.   Both  state  that  the
    Appellant was previously pregnant but that she  miscarried.   They  are
    trying for a family.

34. As for the documentary evidence, as the Respondent  noted  there  is  a
    tenancy agreement in joint names dated July 2012 for an address  at  53
    Talland Avenue, Milton Keynes, the address where they are still living.
     I agree with the Respondent that such in itself does  not  necessarily
    show that they are cohabiting but could be  merely  tenants.   However,
    there is other evidence in support, particularly, bank statements  from
    Barclays, namely an Everyday Saver account from March 2012 (thus, prior
    to the date of the customary marriage certificate) to March 2014 and  a
    current account from October 2012 to March 2014. Both show the  address
    and are in joint names. I  find  those  to  be  compelling,  long  term
    evidence of a durable relationship. There are other  documents  showing
    the names of the Appellant and Mr Ofusu-Ochere at  the  address  albeit
    not in joint names, as there are utility  and  other  bills.   I  note,
    further, council tax notices in joint names. Also, photographs  showing
    the couple together. In  addition,  medical  letters  (September  2013)
    indicating that the Appellant suffered the loss of a pregnancy.

35. There was no suggestion that I should not rely on the contents of these
    documents. On  the  evidence  before  me,  looked  at  cumulatively,  I
    conclude that the relationship between  the  Appellant  and  Mr  Ofosu-
    Ochere is  genuine  and  subsisting  and  it  may  be  that  they  have
    undertaken a marriage  ceremony  albeit  one  not  shown  that  it  was
    recognised as a valid marriage in the Netherlands.

36. They have shown that they are in a durable relationship for the purpose
    of Regulation 8(5) and thus that she is an 'extended family member' for
    the purposes of the EEA Regulations.

37. Regulation 17(4) of  the  Regulations  provides  a  discretion  to  the
    Secretary of State to issue a residence card  to  an  'extended  family
    member'.  In the Appellant's case the Secretary of State  has  not  yet
    considered the exercise of such discretion.  It is not open  to  me  to
    consider the exercise of such discretion absent the Secretary of  State
    first doing so.  In such circumstances I am constrained  to  allow  the
    Appellant's appeal on the basis that the Respondent's decision was  not
    in accordance with the law.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error on a point of  law
and is set aside.

The decision is remade as follows: the appeal is allowed to the extent  that
the application for an EEA residence card  remains  outstanding  before  the
Secretary of State.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Date



Upper Tribunal Judge Conway


