
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/51427/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 September 2015                 |On 9 November 2015                   |
|Prepared 15 September 2015           |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MRS KURSHID BEGUM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Kandola, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr N S Ahluwalia, Counsel, instructed by Ratner & Co



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In this decision the Appellant is  referred  to  as  the  Secretary  of
    State and the Respondent is referred as the Claimant.

2.   The Claimant, a national of Pakistan, date of  birth  1  January  1944,
    appealed against the Secretary of State's decision to  refuse  to  vary
    leave to remain, pursuant to an application on 16 October 2013, and  to
    make  removal  directions  with  reference  to  Section   47   of   the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  The Reasons for  Refusal
    Letter is dated 21 November 2013 and refusal was made with reference to
    the Immigration Rules, particularly Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE.

3.   The central elements of Appendix FM that came  to  be  considered  were
    limited but essentially did not address  what  had  become  a  critical
    issue, namely the deterioration in the health of the Claimant with  the
    onset of Parkinson's disease.  Other medical problems are not  material
    because they pre-existed the events following the claimant's arrival in
    the United Kingdom in 2013.

4.   The matter came before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Col  who  promulgated
    her decision [D] on 18 December 2015 by which she dismissed the  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules but allowed the appeal on  Article  8  ECHR
    grounds.

5.   By an application dated 24 March 2015 the Secretary of State sought  to
    challenge the judge's decision and argued four principal points. First,
    that the judge had failed to consider whether it would be  unreasonable
    for any of the Claimant's children to return to Pakistan with  her  and
    thereafter provide the necessary personal care that she needed  because
    of the deterioration in her health.

6.   Secondly, issue was taken with that the judge had  failed  to  consider
    whether it was reasonable for a lady, the  Claimant's  daughter-in-law,
    to be expected to return to care for the Claimant.

7.   Thirdly, it was said that the  judge's  assessment  of  proportionality
    had failed to properly take into account the requirements  of  Appendix
    FM particularly at paragraphs ECDR.1.1 and ECDR.2.1 to ECDR2.5.

8.   Finally it was said that the judge had failed to properly consider  the
    evidence concerning the availability of other family  members  to  whom
    the Claimant might turn to for assistance on a return to Pakistan.

9.   Mr Kandola's arguments  essentially  addressed  those  matters  and  by
    reference to the judge's decision sought to support the view that there
    was sustainable criticism which demonstrated material errors of law.

10.  It is to a degree self-evident that the person who settled the  grounds
    can only have had the judge's decision before them.  It certainly  does
    not appear from the format of the grounds that the person drafting them
    had been aware of what had transpired at the hearing before  the  judge
    in a number of particular matters  pertinent  to  the  grounds  seeking
    permission.

11.  The position, therefore, was notwithstanding the  relative  brevity  of
    the reasons for refusal, a great deal of evidence was provided  to  the
    judge upon which it is fair to say she made  a  number  of  cogent  and
    clear findings.  The application for permission came before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Cheales who granted the Secretary of State permission to
    appeal.  Mr Ahluwalia sent a Rule 24 notice  and  indexs  of  documents
    that had been produced before the First-tier Tribunal and at least  one
    afterwards.  For ease of reference I  have  followed  the  headings  or
    bullet points made by Mr Ahluwalia.  In relation to the first ground, I
    am satisfied that the judge was aware of  the  status  of  the  various
    family members in the United Kingdom.  The fact is it was not argued on
    behalf of the Presenting Officer, as is accepted by  Mr  Kandola,  that
    any of the Claimant's children should return to Pakistan to look  after
    her.

12.  It is clear from the judge's decision  that  the  same  issue  was  not
    raised in the Reasons for Refusal Letter, it  was  not  raised  by  the
    Presenting Officer at the hearing by way  of  cross-examination  or  in
    submissions:  The matter was quite simply not taken up with the  judge.
    I reached the firm view that the  judge  really  cannot  be  criticised
    about an issue which was not pursued by the Secretary of State; when it
    was plainly open to her to do so.  Further, it does not seem to me that
    this was a Robinson obvious point because  if  it  was  so  obvious  it
    plainly would have been taken by the parties  at  the  hearing  but  it
    never was.  It was not suggested  that  anything  in  the  Reasons  for
    refusal Letter which gave rise to that being an issue pursued.

13.  The status of one of the Claimant's children, Khalid,  therefore  makes
    no difference to the point.  Quite simply there was nothing to  suggest
    there was any evidence to show he had the necessary skills to care  for
    the Claimant on return nor to supervise  employed  staff  in  providing
    that care.

14.  Accordingly, I find there is no substance in the  first  ground  raised
    by the Secretary of State.

15.  The second ground and the possibilities of  Rukshana  Inayat  returning
    to Pakistan, and the person drafting it misunderstood that Miss  Inayat
    had not recently entered the United Kingdom but had been here for about
    three years having previously resided in Pakistan supervising the  care
    of the Claimant.

16.  There was, as previously pointed  out,  nothing  to  suggest  that  the
    Secretary of State was arguing, Miss Inayat should return to  Pakistan.
    Secondly, the judge was clearly aware, from reading [D33}, the  history
    of her presence in Pakistan and the  circumstances  in  which  she  had
    finally come to  the  United  Kingdom  following  separation  from  her
    husband in December 2000.  Accordingly it really was not argued that it
    would be reasonable for her  to  return  to  Pakistan.  Therefore,  the
    absence of consideration of the matter by the judge did not  constitute
    an error of law.

17.  The third ground essentially argued a number  of  matters  that  go  to
    some  extent  the  heart  of  the  claim,  namely  the  assessment   of
    proportionality.  The judge  plainly  had  a  range  of  considerations
    about the accommodation, the care, the needs of the  Claimant  and  the
    circumstances in which she would find herself on return  without  care,
    without suitable accommodation, with the grave difficulties, as already
    had been established, in seeking to find an employee of  quality,  able
    to consistently provide the care required and the absence  of  suitable
    care homes, care facilities and the lack of suitable  elderly  care  or
    senior citizens homes in Pakistan.  Those matters were all addressed in
    the decision amongst other things [D7, 30, 35, 42 and 47].

18.  It is plain, I find, from a fair reading  of  the  decision,  that  the
    judge understood and cited relevant law relating  to  the  relationship
    between the Immigration Rules, the need for exceptional  or  compelling
    circumstances and the context in which one  might  in  the  appropriate
    case consider the issue of Article 8 ECHR outside of the Rules.

19.  I am satisfied that the judge's reasoning made plain  why  she  reached
    the view  she  did  bearing  in  mind  she  must  have  understood  the
    relationship between the Rules and their applicability with Article  8.
    In the circumstances I do  not  find  the  third  ground  of  challenge
    amounts to more than a disagreement  with  the  findings  of  fact  and
    conclusions driven from them by the judge.  Accordingly, ground 3  does
    not disclose any arguable error of law.

20.  In relation to ground 4,  this  again  returns  to  the  issue  of  the
    existence of family in Pakistan and to what extent that family could be
    turned to for assistance.

21.  Mr Ahluwalia recited in his Rule 24  response  the  evidence  given  by
    Iqbal  Inyiat  concerning  the  Claimant's  siblings  who  were   dead,
    established by the witness statements,  confirmatory  evidence  in  the
    witness statement of Amir Inyiat.  The judge having heard the  evidence
    and assessed the credibility of the witnesses, reached  the  conclusion
    witch is not actually challenged in the grounds that the Claimant  "...
    has no close relatives living left in Pakistan".  [D 48].

22.  In the circumstances it seemed to me that ground 4 has no merits.   The
    judge plainly addressed that matter and it was open to argument on that
    issue which the judge evidently considered and reached  the  conclusion
    that she did.  In any event, given the judge  was  entitled  to  choose
    which evidence she preferred, the decision simply did  not  demonstrate
    an error of law by  the  judge  so  much  as  a  disagreement   by  the
    Secretary of State with a finding made by the judge.

23.  Accordingly having considered these matters I am satisfied that  ground
    4 has no merits and does not disclose any arguable error  of  law.   In
    the circumstances I can find no other material challenge  of  substance
    to the decision under Article 8 of the ECHR.  The  Original  Tribunal's
    decision stands.

24.  No anonymity order was made nor is one necessary or required.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.


Signed   Date 2 November 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
