
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/51159/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 17 August 2016                             |On 31 August 2016            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MATOTA MACHESE TUZIZILA
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Not represented


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
The Appeal

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of  State  against  a  determination
    dated 3 February  2016  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Traynor  which
    allowed  the  respondent's  appeal  against   deportation   under   the
    Immigration Rules.

 2. For the purposes of this determination, I refer to Mr Tuzizila  as  the
    appellant and to the Secretary of State as the  respondent,  reflecting
    their positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The appeal comes before me on a very  limited  basis  as  although  the
    respondent sought  to  challenge  Judge  Traynor's  decision  on  three
    grounds, she was granted permission on only one of them  in  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Kelly in his  decision  dated  12  July  2016.  The
    respondent did not seek to renew the grounds found to be without  merit
    by Judge Kelly and Ms Isherwood made submissions only  in  relation  to
    the  single  ground  on  which  permission  had   been   granted.   The
    respondent's concern is that Judge Traynor wrongly concluded  that  the
    appellant was not a "foreign criminal" as defined  in  legislation  and
    that he therefore erred in stating  that  paragraphs  398-399A  of  the
    Immigration Rules should be applied here.

 4. The background to this matter is that the appellant came to the UK from
    the Democratic Republic of Congo at the age of 5 weeks in 1996. He  was
    granted indefinite leave in 2005. On 16 December  2016  the  respondent
    made a decision to deport  him  and  revoke  his  indefinite  leave  to
    remain. The respondent maintained that he was a foreign criminal liable
    to automatic deportation as he  had  caused  serious  harm  and  was  a
    persistent offender, bringing him within the  provisions  of  paragraph
    398 (c) of the Immigration Rules. The decision was made  on  the  basis
    that the appellant had committed five offences between  2011  and  2015
    (none of which attracted a custodial sentence), he  had  been  involved
    with the  criminal  authorities  on  at  least  20  occasions  and  the
    respondent considered that he was a member of a criminal gang.

 5. Judge Traynor records at [19] that the appellant did  not  dispute  the
    respondent's case as  to  his  involvement  with  the  police  on  many
    occasions.  The  judge  was  also  clearly  aware  of  the  appellant's
    offences, setting them out at [20]. Judge Traynor heard  evidence  from
    the police as to the appellant's involvement in a criminal gang but  at
    [142] did not find that part of the respondent's case to be  made  out.
    The respondent has not sought at any point to challenge that finding.

 6. At [131] to [138] Judge Traynor considered the provisions of paragraphs
    398-399A of the Immigration Rules which apply to a  "foreign  criminal"
    subject to deportation. He states at [131] that  the  appellant  "is  a
    persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for the law",  the
    requirement  in  paragraph  398  which  leads  to  the  application  of
    paragraphs 399  and  399A.  Judge  Traynor  went  on  to  conduct  that
    assessment in [132]-[138]. He concluded at [138] that the appellant met
    the requirements of paragraph 399A(c) as there were  "very  significant
    obstacles" to his reintegration in the DRC. Judge Traynor repeated this
    finding at [151]:

         "... I find that his appeal should succeed under  paragraph  276ADE
         as well as paragraph 399A."

 7. The reference to both paragraph 276ADE and paragraph 399A arose because
    at [139]-[153], Judge Traynor conducted an  alternative  assessment  on
    the basis that the appellant was not a "foreign criminal" as defined in
    section 32 of the UK Borders Act. That part of his decision  considered
    the appellant's claim without reference to the  deportation  provisions
    in the Immigration Rules  but  considered  Appendix  FM  and  paragraph
    276ADE. Having already found paragraph 399A(c) met, he also found  that
    the "very significant obstacles" test under paragraph 276D (vi) was met
    and allowed the appeal on that alternative basis under the  Immigration
    Rules also.

 8. The only  ground  of  appeal  before  me,  as  above,  limited  by  the
    permission decision, was referred to as "Ground one - Making a material
    misdirection of law" and is set out in paragraphs 1 - 4 of the grounds.
    Paragraph 1 states:

         "It  is  respectfully  submitted  that  the  Tribunal  have   (sic)
         materially erred in their assessment at paragraph 127-130 that  the
         appellant cannot be considered to be a "foreign  criminal"  because
         the provisions of Section 32 of the 2007 Act are not met  and  that
         his case  should  have  been  considered  in  accordance  with  the
         provisions of Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE of  the  Immigration
         Rules."

 9. Paragraph 2 goes on to state:

         "It is submitted that the Tribunal  has  had  no  consideration  to
         Section 117D (2)  (iii)  or  398(c)  and  whether  the  appellant's
         offending has  caused  serious  harm  or  that  they  are  (sic)  a
         persistent offender wo shows a particular disregard for the law."

10. It should be clear from [5]  and  [6]  above  that  Judge  Traynor  did
    conduct an assessment as if the  appellant  was  a  "foreign  criminal"
    finding paragraph 399A(c) met and that the appeal  therefore  succeeded
    under the Immigration Rules. His consideration addressed  the  material
    evidence and applied the  correct  legal  matrix  and  found  that  the
    appellant would face very significant obstacles to reintegration. There
    is no perversity or adequacy of reasons challenge  to  that  assessment
    before me.

11. Even if the respondent is right as Judge Traynor's  legal  analysis  at
    [130] that the appellant was not a "foreign criminal" being  incorrect,
    no materiality arises where he conducted the correct assessment in  any
    event as an alternative at [131]-[138]. For these  reasons,  I  do  not
    find that the respondent's ground has merit and her appeal is refused.

12. At the hearing Ms Isherwood informed me that further  criminal  charges
    have been laid against  the  appellant  since  the  decision  of  Judge
    Traynor.  The  appellant  must  therefore  not  be  surprised  if   the
    respondent reviews his case and, if she deems it appropriate,  makes  a
    further deportation decision against him relying  on  those  additional
    new matters. He should be aware that where the facts are different,  he
    cannot expect to rely on the outcome of this appeal to defeat that  new
    decision.

Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error on a
    point of law and shall stand.


Signed:[pic]                                 Date: 26 August 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
