
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/51577/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4 September 2014                           |On 22 September 2014         |
|Prepared 4 September 2014                     |                             |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               AVNISH PUSHPALA

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Parkinson, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:      Mr R Singer, Counsel, instructed by Bhattarai & Co
                    Immigration Practice


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   In this determination the Appellant is referred to as the Secretary  of
    State and the Respondent is referred to as the Claimant.

2.   The Claimant, a national of India, date  of  birth  16  December  1986,
    appealed against a  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  dated  20
    November 2013, to refuse leave to  enter  and/or  remain  and  to  make
    removal directions under Section 47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006.

3.   The claimant's appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Majid  who,
    on 29 July 2014, allowed the appeal.  The Secretary  of  State  applied
    for permission to appeal which was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Reid on 19 August 2014.  The  grounds  essentially  complain  that  the
    judge had  failed  to  properly  address  the  Claimant's  position  in
    relation to meeting the requirements of the Immigration Rules  and  the
    judge had then gone on, without further ado to address Article  8  ECHR
    outside of the Rules. Finally that the judge had failed  to  adequately
    reason the basis on which he had allowed the appeal.

4.   It is fair to say that the judge's decision starts  from  the  premise,
    as is recited in paragraph 3 of the Determination, that he had borne in
    mind the relevant legal provisions of the relevant  paragraphs  of  the
    Immigration Rules and  meticulously  borne  every  provision  of  those
    paragraphs  in  mind  during   the   assessment   of   the   Claimant's
    [Appellant's] case.  The judge also said he had taken into account  the
    new changes in the Rules brought  into  force  on  9  July  2012  which
    radically changed the application of Article 8 of the ECHR.

5.   The judge then throughout paragraphs 6, 7, 17, 18, 19, 20 and 21  makes
    references to a selection of case law, the relevance of some  of  which
    is extremely hard to see and does have the appearance of being part  of
    a formatted determination.

6.   The judge as set out in the determination simply moves from  a  general
    consideration of factors plainly pertinent to  an  Article  8  case  to
    directly considering Article 8 by itself and it  seems  to  me  a  fair
    point that the parties make, for Mr Singer appeared before  the  judge,
    that it was no part of his case that  the  Appellant  came  within  the
    Immigration Rules in terms of meeting the relevant  requirements.    It
    is therefore somewhat surprising that the judge set out in paragraph 27
    of the determination by  reference  to  various  matters  and  said  as
    follows:

         "Accordingly, in my deliberations in the preceding  paragraphs  and
         having taken into account all of the oral and documentary  evidence
         as well as the submissions at my disposal, cognisant  of  the  fact
         that the burden of proof is on the Appellant and  the  standard  of
         proof is the balance of probabilities,  I  am  persuaded  that  the
         Appellant merits the benefits of the Immigration Rules, as amended.
          Of course, the Appellant also benefits from the humane protections
         of the ECHR."

7.   It is said, by Mr Parkinson, that that is manifestly wrong,  not  least
    when the claimant was not putting his case  reliant  upon  meeting  the
    requirements of the Rules.  Mr Singer therefore  submits  that  really,
    since everyone knew the proper basis on which the appeal was coming  to
    be considered, that the judge's remarks  simply  demonstrate  an  error
    which is not ultimately material to the outcome of the  appeal.   There
    might be some force in that submission if the judge had not  added  the
    words "of course, the Appellant also benefits from ..." which tends  to
    suggest that the primary basis for the decision was that the  Appellant
    did succeed under the Rules, notwithstanding the way the case had  been
    advanced to him. I consider the lack of clarity of  reasoning  provided
    by the judge is a  material  error  of  law.   It  is  trite  law  that
    determinations are expected to be of  sufficiency  without  necessarily
    tackling all the points the parties would like so as  to  set  out  the
    proper basis for the judge's decision, see R (Iran) [2005]EWCA Civ  982
    and E  and  R  [2004]  QB  1044  CA,  which  demonstrate  the  kind  of
    considerations expected of  a  determination  and  which  had  even  by
    subsequent case law not been materially changed.

8.   The judge also in my view moved to consider Article 8 in  circumstances
    that  do  not  demonstrate  notwithstanding  what  was  relied  in  the
    determination, namely that he has considered and/or  applied  the  case
    law in being at the time, namely MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ  1192  or
    Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) or indeed  the  implications  of  or  the
    necessary considerations that need to be addressed  to  show  that  the
    judge  had  properly  considered  whether  there  were  the   kind   of
    circumstances, compelling or otherwise as may have been  expressed,  so
    as to show that Article 8 should be considered outside  of  the  Rules.
    As to the Article 8 decision itself, in one sense the judge, albeit  in
    terse fashion, does address the  Razgar  considerations  and  concluded
    that  the  Appellant  has,  although  it  is  less  than   fulsome   in
    description, a private  life  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  judge
    accepted the recent, as Mr Parkinson reminded  me,  relationship  which
    the Appellant had  entered into of a matter of  some  two  and  a  half
    months.

9.   The judge nevertheless concluded there was a  private  life,  that  the
    effects of interference were significant, and although the  judge  does
    not expressly deal with the third question in Razgar, drifts  into  the
    fourth question to a degree but in less than clear  terms.  Making  the
    best of it, it seemed to me that one could regard questions 1 to  4  of
    Razgar being answered in the affirmative.

10.  The judge undoubtedly concluded  that  the  Respondent's  decision  was
    disproportionate - see paragraph 22 - although I have to say that there
    is a significant lack of  reasoning  as  to  why  that  conclusion  was
    reached  in  the  factual  context  before  the  judge  at  that  time.
    Although it is not a point taken  by  the  grounds  of  appeal,  it  is
    relevant, looking at the care given to the determination  as  a  whole,
    and looking to the materiality of the way the judge's  errors  bear  on
    the outcome, that the judge never addressed the public interest or even
    expressed the part it played in the balanced judgment  to  be  made  in
    dealing with the fifth  question  raised  in  Razgar:  Namely  is  such
    interference proportionate to the legitimate public interest.

11.  In these circumstances with considerable regret  that  it  should  have
    occurred, and with some sympathy for the Claimant, much good that  will
    of itself do, it seems to me that the reasoning in the determination is
    so inadequate that it really cannot stand. The judge's mistakes  simply
    are not remediable or to be dismissed as non-material. To do  so  would
    leave a very inadequate decision which I would for my part be unwilling
    to conclude, was sustainable.

12.  In these circumstances the decision will have to be remade.



Signed                                  Date 9 September 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

