
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/51258/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 30 January 2015                        |    On 5 February 2015           |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER

                                   Between

                             MR MD FAKRUL ISLAM
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Mr Islam is a citizen of Bangladesh whose date of birth is recorded  as
    1 January 1985.  He first landed in the United Kingdom on  25  February
    2009, in possession of a visa conferring leave to  enter  until  1  May
    2012 subject to a condition  restricting  employment  and  recourse  to
    public funds.  On 26 September 2012 further leave to remain was granted
    until 21 February 2014. On  1  July  2013  that  leave  was  curtailed,
    however, so that it was to expire on 30 August 2013.  On 29 August 2013
    the Appellant made a combined application for leave to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant under  the  Points
    Based System and for a biometric residence permit. On 21 November  2013
    a decision was made to refuse that application on the  basis  that  the
    application submitted was for study at London School of Technology  but
    a check by the Secretary of State found no confirmation  of  acceptance
    for studies ('CAS') assigned to him.   There  was  a  CAS  assigned  by
    Milburn College of Professional Studies but that had been withdrawn  by
    the Sponsor and in any event no new application for variation of  leave
    was received by the Secretary of State from Mr Islam in respect of that
    Sponsor.

 2. Mr Islam appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and on 19 August 2014  his
    appeal was heard  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Blake.   He
    dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules having regard to  sub-
    paragraphs 245ZX(c) and (d) noting that Mr Islam accepted that  he  had
    acted contrary to his leave in changing college without permission.

 3. Though the appeal was dismissed  under  the  Immigration  Rules,  Judge
    Blake went on to consider whether to allow the appeal in respect of the
    decision to  remove  Mr  Islam  from  the  United  Kingdom  by  way  of
    directions, pursuant to  Section  47  of  the  Immigration  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006, on human rights grounds.  After consideration  of
    various authorities Judge Blake came to the view that the  decision  of
    the Secretary of State was  disproportionate  to  the  public  interest
    considerations and allowed the appeal pursuant to Article 8 ECHR.

 4. Not content with that decision, by Notice dated 24 September  2014  the
    Secretary of State made application for permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  The grounds submit that  Judge  Blake  had  failed  to
    identify why Mr Islam's circumstances  were  so  compelling  so  as  to
    amount  to  exceptional  circumstances  warranting  leave  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.  Reference was  made  to  the  guidance  in  Gulshan
    [2013] UK UT00640 (IAC) and  Nagre  [2013]  EWHC  720  Admin.   Further
    reference is made to Section 117B of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 which  provides  statutory  guidance  in  the  case  of
    Article 8 appeals.

 5. On 10 December 2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Nicholson  granted
    permission.  He, very helpfully, set out rather fully a pointer to  the
    error of law which was arguable in this case and  went  on  to  say  at
    paragraph 8 of his Grant of Permission:-

         "However, [Mr Islam's] private life at [Milburn College]  had  been
         established at a time when he had no right to be  there  and  at  a
         time when his immigration status  was  extremely  precarious.   The
         judge was bound by Section 117B to give it little weight  in  those
         circumstances.  Even if CDS (PBS:  "Available"  Article  8)  Brazil
         [2010] UK UT00305 is still good law, it concerned a case  in  which
         the applicant had previously been lawfully admitted on a course  of
         study at a recognised UK institution for higher education  who  had
         built up a relevant  connection  with  the  institution  -  not  an
         applicant who had built up a connection with a college where he was
         not entitled to be studying.  In those circumstances it is arguable
         that the judge failed adequately to explain how  [Mr  Islam]  could
         succeed on private life grounds.  Permission to appeal is granted."

 6. In his Statement of Reasons, Judge Blake made reference to the guidance
    in CDS (PBS: "Available" Article 8) Brazil [2010] UK  UT0030.   However
    it was made plain in CDS that:

         "Article 8 does  not  give  an  Immigration  Judge  a  freestanding
         liberty to depart from the Immigration Rules, and  it  is  unlikely
         that a person will be able to show an Article 8 right by coming  to
         the United Kingdom for temporary purposes.  But  a  person  who  is
         admitted to follow a course that has not yet ended may build  up  a
         private life that deserves respect,  and  the  public  interest  in
         removal before the end of the course may be reduced where there are
         ample financial resources available."

 7. The caveat which made reference to the possibility of building  private
    life deserving of respect is to be read in the context of  the  factual
    matrix of that particular case and I can do no better than  refer  back
    to the observations of Judge Nicholson when permission  to  appeal  was
    granted.

 8. In the instant appeal, Mr Islam failed to meet the  Immigration  Rules.
    That was not in issue.  This appeal again raises  the  question  as  to
    when it is appropriate to depart from those  rules  and  determine  the
    appeal under Article 8 ECHR but I do not need to address that  question
    in determining whether or not there has been an error of  law  in  this
    case because I find that even if were appropriate to consider the issue
    of proportionality, the finding of Judge Blake simply cannot stand.

 9. In the case of MM (Tier 1 PSW; Art; "Private Life") Zimbabwe [2009]  UK
    AIT00037, the Upper Tribunal panel said as follows:

         "1)  Whilst respect for private life in Article 8 does not  include
             a right to work or study per se, social ties and relationships
             (depending upon their duration  and  richness)  formed  during
             periods of study or work are capable of constituting  "private
             life" for the purposes of Article 8.

         2)   In determining a Tier 1 (Post Study) worker case where Article
             8 is relied upon, the five stage approach in Razgar should  be
             followed.

         3)   When determining the issue of proportionality in  such  cases,
             it will always be important to  evaluate  the  extent  of  the
             individual's  social  ties  and  relationships  in   the   UK.
             However,  a  student  here  on  a  temporary  basis   has   no
             expectation of a right to remain in  order  to  further  these
             ties and relationships as the criteria  of  the  Points  Based
             System are not met.  Also, the character  of  an  individual's
             "private life" relied upon is ordinarily by its very nature of
             a type which can be formed elsewhere, albeit through different
             social ties, after the individual is removed from the UK.   In
             that respect, "private life" claims of this kind are likely to
             advance  a  less  cogent  basis  for  outweighing  the  public
             interest in proper and effective immigration control than  are
             claims based upon "family life" (or quasi family life such  as
             same sex  relationships)  where  the  relationships  are  more
             likely to be unique and cannot be replaced once the individual
             leaves the UK."

10. Judge Nicholson in granting permission questioned whether the  guidance
    in the case  of  CDS  was  still  good  law.  He  may  have  made  that
    observation because that authority was one of  a  line  of  authorities
    which suggested that there were circumstances  in  which  it  would  be
    disproportionate to make an adverse decision in respect of an applicant
    where there was, "a near miss."  That issue has firmly been resolved by
    the guidance in the case of Miah v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2012] EWCA Civ 261.  The guidance in the case of Patel  and
    Others v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2013]  UK  SC72
    affirming the principle that there  was  no  near  miss  did,  however,
    accepted that, "the practical  or  compassionate  considerations  which
    underlie the policy are also likely to be  relevant  to  the  cases  of
    those who fall just outside it, and to that extent may  add  weight  to
    their  argument  for  exceptional  treatment".  That   was,   "somewhat
    different to saying that there arises any  presumption  or  expectation
    that the policy will be extended to embrace an applicant".

11. As I already adumbrated it is not necessary for me to consider  whether
    it were open to Judge Blake to go on and take  the  Razgar  five  stage
    approach because in my judgment it simply was not open to  him  on  the
    facts of the case to find  the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State
    disproportionate.

12. At paragraph 74 of the Statement of Reasons Judge Blake said:-

         "74.  I  however  took  into  account  that  all  of  [Mr  Islam's]
             subsequent actions were to  pursue  his  course  of  study  at
             another college.  I found that the  application  he  had  made
             which resulted in the  refusal,  giving  rise  to  the  appeal
             before me was in keeping with his explanation that he believed
             his college had regularised his stay.

          75.  I found on the peculiar circumstances of facts  of  the  case
             that it was an exceptional one. I found that  [Mr  Islam]  had
             been admitted to the United Kingdom for the purpose  of  study
             and in fact he had pursued his study diligently and  succeeded
             in it in the course of his stay. "

13. One is bound to ask what was so exceptional about the circumstances  in
    which Mr Islam found himself.  He had applied to a  college  which  had
    had its licence revoked and so he sent to the Secretary of State a  CAS
    in respect of another college without making a fresh application.   But
    what I ask, rhetorically, were the private life factors  so  worthy  of
    respect which weighed in Mr Islam's favour?

14. By section 117A of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    Judge Blake was required to have regard  to  the  factors  set  out  in
    section 117B when considering the public  interest  question.   section
    117B provides that the interest considerations applicable in all  cases
    are:

         "1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls is  in  the
         public interest.

         2)   It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic wellbeing  of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English -

              a)  Are less of a burden on the tax payers, and

              b)  Are better able to integrate into society.

         3)   It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic wellbeing  of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent because such persons -

              a)  Are not a burden on tax payers, and

              b)  Are better able to integrate into society.

         4)   Little weight should be given to:

              a)  A private life, or

             b)   A relationship formed with a qualifying partner  that  is
                  established by a person at a time when the  person  is  in
                  the United Kingdom unlawfully.

        5)   Little weight should be given to private life established by a
             person  at  a  time  when  person's   immigration   status   is
             precarious.

        6)   In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the persons removal when

         a)  The person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
                  with a qualifying child, and

         b)  It would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
                  United Kingdom."

15. Mr Islam's case was plainly a private life case which  required  little
    weight to be given to it.  Of course, the statutory provision does  not
    say that no weight should be given to private  life  so  that  in  that
    sense Judge Blake was right to look for something  exceptional  in  the
    sense that additional factors were required so as to enhance that  side
    of the scale which was to weigh in favour  of  Mr  Islam.   In  reality
    however, all that was advanced before Judge Blake was the desire on the
    part of Mr Islam to pursue his studies, which he could do  legitimately
    in his home country.  Mr Islam had not, as Judge Nicholson pointed out,
    embarked upon a course at a particular college which, for example,  was
    close to an end but rather, without even seeking  permission,  intended
    to pursue a course at the later  college  which  in  the  event  was  a
    college whose licence was revoked.

16. I find a material error of law in the decision of Judge Blake  and  set
    it aside.

Remaking of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal

17. I am reinforced in my view that there is  an  error  of  law  from  the
    evidence of Mr Islam.  Although he has had some successes  since  2009,
    he first began a course at London International  College  but  did  not
    finish it because his English was not good enough; he was not permitted
    to finish.  He then pursued a number of courses but after 2011, went to
    a number of colleges where the licences  in  each  case  were  revoked.
    Contrary to what is set out at paragraph 74 of the  decision  of  Judge
    Blake in which it is said that Mr Islam believed that his  college  had
    regularised his stay, Mr Islam told me that that was not  part  of  his
    evidence.  After listening to what Mr Islam had to say I asked  him  if
    he could confirm my understanding that the reality of his  entire  case
    was based on his hope that he  might  continue  his  education  in  the
    United Kingdom because an English degree was perceived as more valuable
    than one from his own country. Mr Islam confirmed that that was  indeed
    his position.  I then asked Mr Islam if there was anything else that he
    would wish to be placed in the scales  which  might  favour  his  being
    allowed to remain in the United Kingdom; he said that there was not.

18. In my view, putting aside the issue as to whether  or  not  one  should
    depart from the Immigration Rules, on the factual matrix in this  case,
    proportionality clearly favours the Respondent.  The factors in Section
    117B clearly point the way. The  Secretary  of  State  is  entitled  to
    effective immigration control; it is in the public interest.  Mr  Islam
    did speak English and no issue was  taken  concerning  his  ability  to
    finance himself.  His private life however was established  at  a  time
    when  there  was  no  promise  that  he  would  be  allowed  to  remain
    indefinitely in the United Kingdom and absent any other  interpretation
    as to what is meant by the term "precarious", I leave  the  observation
    as I have made it.  To say Mr Islam should be allowed to remain in  the
    United Kingdom outside of the Immigration  Rules  simply  because,  "He
    would prefer to obtain a degree from a United Kingdom university rather
    than one from his own country." is simply insufficient reason  to  find
    in his favour.

19. In remaking the appeal of the First-tier Tribunal, it is dismissed.

Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  allowed.   The
decision of the First-tier Tribunal is remade and dismissed on all  grounds.


No anonymity direction is made.

As the appeal has been dismissed no fee award is made.

Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker
