

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/51970/2013




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Determination Promulgated |
|On 29 September 2014                   |On 6 October 2014         |
|                                       |                          |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                               MR UMAIR AHMED
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Ms A Nazimi (Counsel)
For the Respondent:     Mr S Kandola  (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


       1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  He applied for  leave  to
          remain in the United Kingdom ('UK') as A Tier 4 (General)  Student
          Migrant  but  this  was  refused  on  22  November  2013  by   the
          respondent, who also gave directions for his removal.



Procedural history



       2. This is a matter that has previously  been  considered  by  First-
          tier Tribunal Judge Hembrough in a  determination  promulgated  on
          25 July 2014.   The Judge considered the issues  in  dispute  with
          the   representatives   before   hearing   from   the   appellant.
          Irrelevant issues were ruled out and the Judge made it clear  that
          a  key  issue  to  be  determined  was  whether  or  not  a  false
          representation was made [10-13].



       3. The Judge considered the explanation provided  by  the  appellant,
          having directed himself to the relevant authorities and  concluded
          that the appellant had  deliberately  and  dishonestly  failed  to
          declare his  criminal  conviction  in  his  application  form  and
          dismissed his appeal [23].




       4. The appellant appealed against this decision  arguing  inter  alia
          that the Judge had erred in his approach to the  burden  of  proof
          and dishonesty, and permission was granted by First-tier  Tribunal
          Judge McDade for the reasons identified in the grounds of  appeal.



       5. The matter now comes before me  to  decide  whether  or  not  the
          determination contains an error of law.

Hearing

       6. At the hearing Ms Nazimi focused on the Judge's failure to direct
          himself to the burden of  proof  resting  on  the  respondent  to
          establish dishonesty. Mr Kandola asked me to find that the  Judge
          was entitled to reach his findings of fact and there was no error
          of law.

       7. I reserved my decision, which I now provide with reasons.

Findings

Ground 1 - 320(7A)

       8. Throughout the determination the Judge referred to  rule  320(7A).
          This applies to entry  clearance  applications  when  the  present
          application was made  in-country.   The  identical  provision  for
          such applications is rule 322(1A).  The Judge  has  clearly  erred
          in referring to the wrong  rule  but  I  accept  the  respondent's
          submission that this is not a material error of  law.   The  Judge
          clearly had in mind that this was an in-country  applicant  and  a
          key issue for him to determine was whether or  not  the  appellant
          had dishonestly made a false  representation  in  his  application
          form such that a mandatory refusal was justified.

Ground 2-4 - Burden of proof / dishonesty

       9. I accept that the Judge could have been  clearer  in  relation  to
          the burden of proof where dishonesty is in issue.  I bear in  mind
          that the Judge did not refer to the burden of proof in any  detail
          and at [8]  wrongly  implied  that  the  burden  rested  with  the
          appellant to establish  the  facts  in  relation  to  all  of  the
          grounds of appeal.  It should however be recalled that the  burden
          of proof was on the appellant in relation  to  rule  245ZX(a)  and
          the Judge found in the appellant's  favour  in  relation  to  this
          aspect of the appeal.

      10. In Shen (Paper appeals: proving dishonesty) [2014] UKUT 236  (IAC)
          the Upper Tribunal gave guidance on the way in  which  the  burden
          of proof operates where there  is  an  allegation  of  dishonesty.
          The relevant parts of the headnote state as follows:

              "(1) In terms of the approach that a  tribunal  should  adopt
              towards  decisions  of  the  Secretary  of  State  in   which
              dishonesty or deception is alleged against an  applicant  for
              leave to remain, the starting point should be, as  the  Court
              of Appeal in Adedoyin (formerly AA (Nigeria) v  SSHD)  [2010]
              EWCA Civ 773 have made clear, that pursuant to paragraph  322
              of the Immigration Rules,  the  reference  to  "false"  means
              "dishonestly" false.

              (2) Where an application form etc is false in a material way,
              this may be relied on by the  Secretary  of  State  as  prima
              facie evidence  establishing  dishonesty.  The  inference  of
              deliberate deception can be strengthened by other  facts:  eg
              if a criminal conviction (not disclosed  in  an  application)
              occurred shortly before completion of the  application  form.
              Here, the conviction must have been high in  the  applicant's
              mind and any  explanation  based  on  oversight  would  carry
              little weight. But it is  always  open  to  an  appellant  to
              proffer an innocent explanation and if that explanation meets
              a basic level of plausibility, the burden  switches  back  to
              the Secretary of State to answer that evidence. At the end of
              the day the Secretary of State bears the  burden  of  proving
              dishonesty."

      11. It would have been more helpful for the Judge to have referred  to
          Shen when making his factual findings.  He does not seem  to  have
          been referred to Shen by either party.  However,  I  am  satisfied
          that the Judge has adopted an approach  that  is  consistent  with
          Shen and has not committed an  error  of  law.   His  approach  is
          summarised below.

              i) The  appellant's  representative  and  the  appellant  were
                 clearly told by the Judge that the appellant's  reason  for
                 not disclosing his conviction in his application  form  and
                 the issue of the use of dishonesty were in issue.  That  is
                 clear from the summary of the discussion at  the  beginning
                 of the hearing [12-13].  Before me Ms Nazimi accepted  that
                 the Judge was entitled to consider the issue of  dishonesty
                 (but she submitted it was how he approached the issue  that
                 she objected to).


             ii) The appellant's application form is false in a material way
                 in that it makes no reference  to  the  appellant's  recent
                 criminal conviction.  This may  be  relied  upon  as  prima
                 facie evidence which assists in establishing dishonesty.

            iii) The Judge heard evidence  from  the  appellant  as  to  his
                 explanation for not disclosing the conviction [14 and  15].
                 The Judge referred to his contradictory responses  and  did
                 not accept his explanation [22].  He took into account that
                 at the time of submitting his application he  had  been  in
                 the  magistrates  court  on  two  occasions  regarding  the
                 offence and was  convicted  a  mere  six  days  previously,
                 before concluding  that  his  failure  to  declare  it  was
                 deliberate and dishonest [23].  The inference of  deception
                 in this case is strengthened by reference to other facts  -
                 recent attendance at the magistrates' court and  conviction
                 shortly  prior  to  the  time  when  the  application   was
                 submitted meant that the conviction must have been high  on
                 the appellant's mind.

             iv)  The  Judge  regarded  the  explanation  advanced  by   the
                 appellant as contradictory and unreliable.  No  doubt  that
                 if the parties had  directed  the  Judge  to  Shen  at  the
                 hearing (the decision was referred to  in  the  grounds  of
                 appeal drafted some two weeks after the hearing) the  Judge
                 would have found the appellant's explanation  devoid  of  a
                 basic level of plausibility.

      12. Whilst  the  SSHD  generally  bears  the  burden  of  proof  where
          dishonesty is alleged, this is a case in  which  the  Judge  found
          prima facie evidence to establish dishonesty.  This is not a  case
          in which the Judge found there to be an  innocent  explanation  or
          could reasonably find there to be an  innocent  explanation.   The
          relevant  question  in  the  application  form   was   clear   and
          straightforward 'Have you ever  been  convicted  of  any  criminal
          offence in the UK or any other country?'.  The appellant  answered
          'no'.  He accepted this was false.  He told the Judge that he  did
          not understand whether to answer the question.  This is  a  wholly
          implausible explanation.  The appellant did not  leave  the  space
          for this question blank but answered no.  He effectively  said  he
          was not sure whether to answer the question but then answered  the
          question falsely.  The Judge was entitled to find that he  did  so
          dishonestly in all the circumstances of the case for  the  reasons
          he has provided.

      13. Although the Judge did not give a  clear  self  direction  on  the
          burden of proof regarding dishonesty, when  the  determination  is
          read as a whole I am satisfied that the Judge  was  clearly  aware
          of the burden of proof and has approached the case  in  accordance
          with the guidance set out in Shen.

      14. Ms Nizami also criticised the Judge  for  reaching  a  finding  on
          dishonesty when this was not clearly put  by  the  respondent.   I
          was not provided with a witness statement to indicate what was  or
          was not put by the Judge.  In any event I am  satisfied  that  the
          appellant was asked clear questions and the Judge was entitled  to
          make a finding  on  dishonesty  based  on  those  questions.   The
          appellant  and  his  representative  both  knew  that  the   Judge
          regarded dishonesty as a key issue and the  questions  asked  were
          plainly  relevant  to  dishonesty.   The  Judge   has   adequately
          reasoned why he found the appellant to be dishonest.

Decision

      15. I do not set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and  I
          dismiss the appellant's appeal.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
30 September 2014

