
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/51023/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 February 2016                    |On 6 April 2016                      |
|Prepared 17 February 2016              |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                          Mr Shoeb Hussain Mohammed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Ms S Sreeraman, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a national of India,  date  of  birth  14  August  1990,
    appealed against the Respondent's decision, dated 27 November 2014,  to
    refuse a combined application made on  22  August  2014  for  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student.  The basis of  refusal  was  that
    the Appellant had not submitted a CAS letter with the  application  nor
    had any CAS number been assigned to  him.   Thus  there  was  no  valid
    Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies in support  of  the  application
    and it followed that there was no assessment as to  whether  sufficient
    funds had been identified.

2.   The appeal against that  decision  stated:  "I  am  not  satisfied  the
    decision of the Home Office.   I  will  provide  the  time  information
    before  the  honourable  court  according  to  the  court's  Rules  and
    procedures".

3.   There was no such additional documentation  provided  when  the  matter
    came before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lingam,  who  determined  the
    matters on the papers on 19 August  2015.   The  judge  listed  in  the
    decision the documents contained within the Respondent's bundle and the
    Appellant's reliance upon the grounds stated in the notice  of  appeal.
    The Appellant wrote to the  Tribunal  and  asked  that  his  appeal  be
    determined on the papers and  the  Respondent  was  content  with  that
    course: Accordingly the judge did so.

4.   For the reasons given in the decision by the judge, the judge was  left
    in the position that quite simply the Appellant never had a CAS letter,
    never had a CAS reference number and never  provided  any  evidence  as
    such that he had done so.  Accordingly the  appeal  could  not  succeed
    under the Rules and similarly failed in the evidence  adduced  to  show
    that maintenance was not a legitimate basis for refusal.

5.   The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal clearly lay the blame,  for
    what happened on the London College of Advanced Management,  which  the
    Appellant had intended to attend, on the basis that they had  told  him
    to submit a Tier 4 application and that he could provide a  CAS  letter
    at a later stage.  The college took fees from  the  Appellant  for  the
    intended course.  The college did not provide a CAS as,  it  was  said,
    they had promised to do.  So far as I can tell the  Appellant  did  not
    notify the Home  Office  as  to  the  difficulties  he  was  facing  or
    explaining the absence of a CAS letter or  seeking  time  in  which  to
    provide another CAS.  The Appellant claimed in the grounds that he made
    numerous attempts to contact the college regarding his CAS  letter  and
    was upset to learn that at some stage the college's  licence  had  also
    been revoked.

6.   Whilst the grounds assert that the Home  Office  should  have  provided
    further time to provide a fresh CAS, however, the point was that a  CAS
    had not been provided, no extension of time  was  requested,  none  had
    been promised and there was no legitimate expectation that he would  be
    granted any extension of time.  There was no unfairness on the part  of
    the Home Office because quite simply no CAS letter  had  been  provided
    and no explanation had been given for its absence and no  request  made
    for further time to submit one.  This was not a case as contemplated in
    Patel [2011] UKUT 275 where revocation was a surprise to  an  applicant
    and therefore consideration should be given to  further  time  to  find
    another college (Patel [2011] UKUT 287).  The grounds to the First-tier
    Tribunal had not included a claim under Article 8 ECHR  but  the  judge
    noted in the decision that there was simply no evidence to support such
    claim or to substantiate any human rights grounds presumably  based  on
    family or private life being established.   Accordingly  there  was  no
    error of law in the judge failing to deal with Article 8 ECHR nor  even
    if it had been was there any appearance that  it  would  have  had  any
    prospects of success whatsoever outside of the Immigration Rules or  at
    all.  In  these  circumstances  it  was  unsurprising  that  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal.

7.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Frankish
    on 20 December 2015 but in the reasons given it is  extremely  hard  to
    see what might have been relevant to the  grant  or  what  the  reasons
    were.  Nevertheless I  decided,  having  referred  this  matter  to  Ms
    Sreeraman, that it  was  appropriate  to  proceed  on  the  basis  that
    permission had been granted and she relied upon  a  Rule  24  response,
    dated 7 January 206, that there was no basis for an appeal.

8.   Prior to the hearing a fax or email was sent  to  the  Tribunal  on  or
    about 16 February 2016 concerning the hearing on 17 February 2016.  The
    Appellant's  signature  and  address  appear  on  the  document   which
    coincided with  the  case  file  information  on  those  matters.   The
    Appellant said:

         "I write further to my pending appeal.  Please note that I tried to
         engage a Counsel for my hearing but I could not  arrange  one.   In
         these circumstances I request the honourable court to deal with  my
         appeal on papers in my  absence  taking  into  account  my  witness
         statement provided with the Appellant bundle and  the  grounds  for
         permission to appeal."

9.   In the circumstances I decided it was appropriate to proceed by way  of
    a hearing and Ms Sreeraman's submissions were short and directed at the
    Rule 24 response and nothing  else.   I  could  not  see  prejudice  or
    unfairness to the Appellant in proceeding by that route.   The  grounds
    of appeal did not overcome the fact that there never was a  CAS  letter
    issued to the Appellant.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The original Tribunal  made  no  error  of  law.   The  original  Tribunal's
decision stands.  The appeal of the Appellant is dismissed.

ANONYMITY

No anonymity order was sought nor is one necessary  or  appropriate  as  the
appeal has failed.

Signed                                  Date 14 March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed                                  Date 14 March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

