



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)Appeal Number: IA/51355/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 24 June 2014                            |On 4 August 2014           |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before
                           DEPUTY JUDGE DRABU CBE

                                   Between

                             MR FREDRICK ASIEDU
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

   Representation:
   For the appellant:      In person
   For the Respondent: Mr I Jarvis, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a national of Ghana. He was born on 10 May 1987.  Upon
    refusal of the respondent to grant his application for a residence card
    on the basis of his proxy marriage to an EEA national exercising treaty
    rights, the appellant appealed. The  appeal  was  determined  by  Judge
    Grimmett at the First Tier Tribunal on 18 February 2014. At the request
    of the appellant the  appeal  was  determined  on  papers  and  in  the
    determination promulgated on 20  February  2014,  Judge  Grimmett  gave
    reasons for decision to dismiss the appeal.


 2. The appellant sought and was granted permission to appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal on 12 March 2014.by Judge JM Holmes, a Judge of the First Tier
    Tribunal. The Judge saw no merit in the ground challenging the  finding
    of Judge Grimmett on validity of marriage  as  a  proxy  marriage,  the
    Judge gave permission to appeal because he took  the  view  that  Judge
    Grimmett had not addressed the  argument  advanced  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant that the relationship of the appellant with the  sponsor  was
    that of a cohabiting couple and that it  should  have  been  considered
    under the EEA Regulations and pursuant to Article 8 appeal.
 3. Before me the appellant was represented by Ms N C Udeagbaja of C W  Law
    Solicitors. She did not appear to understand the remit  of  the  appeal
    before the Upper Tribunal or that it was not open to her to  argue  the
    merits of the case before establishing that the decision of  the  First
    Tier Tribunal  was  in  material  error  of  law.  However  after  some
    discussion she argued that the  decision  of  the  First  Tier  was  in
    material error of law for failing to accept that the marriage was valid
    as its validity was  certified  by  the  marriage  certificate  by  the
    competent authority in Ghana. Her attention was drawn to  the  decision
    granting permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal and  the  decisions
    of the Upper Tribunal in Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law) [2014]  UKUT
    24 (IAC). She was invited to persuade me that the  said  decision  upon
    which the First Tier Judges Grimmett and Holmes ha placed reliance  was
    wrong on principles of law, but she was unable to offer  any  arguments
    except that the marriage certificate in itself proved the  validity  of
    the marriage.

 4. Mr Jarvis representing the respondent  invited  me  to  find  that  the
    determination of Judge Grimmett was sound in law and on facts and  that
    the grounds advanced did not establish a material error of law  in  the
    determination.

 5. I have looked at the determination of Judge Grimmett with  care  and  I
    find that her decision to follow the legal principles set  out  by  the
    decision of the Upper Tribunal in Kareem was sound  and  my  conclusion
    accords with the view of Judge Holmes who granted permission to  appeal
    in this case. Before me, no evidence was drawn to my attention  and  no
    argument was advanced that in failing to address the durability of  the
    relationship between the appellant and his sponsor Judge  Grimmett  had
    erred in law. There was no evidence adduced before  Judge  Grimmett  on
    this score and she  was  therefore  correct  in  her  decision  not  to
    "address" it as there was nothing to  address..  Similarly  as  far  as
    Article 8 engagement is concerned, Judge Grimmett did no err in law  as
    again besides bland assertion that Article  8  was  engaged  no  cogent
    evidence to support that assertion was adduced. Neither  the  appellant
    nor the sponsor gave evidence before  Judge  Grimmett.  No  documentary
    evidence of relevance to this issue was produced. Even if the Judge had
    looked at the Article claim  in  greater  depth  that  the  Judge  did,
    dismissal of the claim was inevitable as the appellant did not meet the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules and Section 117 of  he  2002  Act
    would come into play.

 6. The decision of Judge Grimmett to dismiss the appellant's  appeal  must
    therefore stand.

ANONYMITY DIRECTION

None has been sought and circumstances of the case do not warrant such
direction.

Judge Drabu

Judge of the First Tier Tribunal sitting as Deputy Judge of the Upper
Tribunal
26 July 2014
