
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/52199/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 4th June 2014                                |On 27th June 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAIRD

                                   Between

                                 MR ALI RAZA
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Jafar - Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood - Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against  the  determination
    of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Clarke  issued  on  27th  February  2014
    allowing the appeal of  the  Appellant  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State made on 22nd October 2013 to refuse further leave to
    remain as a Tier 4 Student.  The Appellant is  a  citizen  of  Pakistan
    born 22nd December 1989.

 2. The Secretary of State refused the application  because  the  Appellant
    had not provided a CAS which is a mandatory requirement.

 3. On 10th April 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge Brunnen granted permission
    to appeal.  He said:

         "2.  The grounds on which permission to appeal  is  sought  submits
             that the Judge erred in failing to apply the  principles  laid
             down in MF, Gulshan and Nagre.  There appears to little  merit
             in these  submissions  since  the  judge  expressly  found  at
             paragraph 16 of the Determination that  the  circumstances  of
             the case were such that they were compelling and that it would
             be unjustifiably harsh for the Appellant not  to  be  able  to
             complete his studies.

           3. The grounds submit, further, that the  Judge  failed  to  give
             adequate  reasons  for  this  finding.   This   is   arguable.
             Although the Judge expressly referred to the principles stated
             in Patel and Nasim, it is arguable that the  judge  failed  to
             apply them."

 4. To expand slightly on the grounds as stated in the grant of  permission
    it was submitted by the Respondent that the Tribunal had found that the
    criteria in the points-based system Rules impose a higher test than the
    proportionality test of Article 8.  It is submitted that the  Appellant
    has no right to remain in the UK purely to complete his studies and  he
    is entirely at fault for having failed to complete  his  final  module.
    There  is  therefore  nothing  compelling  or  exceptional  about   his
    circumstances, particularly since he has made  no  attempt  to  enquire
    whether he could complete his last module in Pakistan or  via  distance
    learning and cannot continue his studies as he does not  have  a  valid
    CAS.

 5. Judge Clarke relied on the decision CDS  (PBS  "available"  Article  8)
    Brazil [2010] UKUT 305 and accepted the submission of Mr Jafar that the
    principles set out in CDS that if a student is faced with  hypothetical
    removal which would have prevented him from completing  the  course  of
    study for which he had been given leave,  then  it  is  justifiable  to
    grant leave so that the course can be  completed.   This  is  therefore
    what she did.  She allowed the appeal to the extent that  he  would  be
    granted the  necessary  leave  to  complete  his  module  and  sit  his
    examinations.  She also said at paragraph 15:

         "15. There is a gap in why it is his college never  offered  him  a
             CAS earlier, other than at the time  of  his  application  his
             results were not produced and his leave to remain  expired  on
             31st August 2013 just before the results.  It is  likely  that
             this resulted in the college not being able to issue a CAS."

 6. At the hearing before me Ms Isherwood pointed out that the Appellant is
    still missing the  required  module  but  I  heard  evidence  from  the
    Appellant who told me  that  he  has  paid  a  fee  and  is  doing  his
    coursework to enable him to sit the exam to complete the module that is
    missing.  He said that he had actually started his  degree  later  than
    planned because he did a  preliminary  course  prior  to  starting  the
    degree.  The original plan was that his leave would finish at the  same
    time as his course.  The CAS he was expecting was to do a Masters.   If
    his coursework is accepted he will have his degree and  then  he  would
    hope to remain to do his Masters.  The position of Ms Isherwood is that
    he can go back and do this in Pakistan.

 7. Having considered the determination of Judge  Clarke  I  conclude  that
    there is no material error of law in it.  She had placed  weight  on  a
    letter from LCA Business School dated  12th  December  2013  confirming
    that the Appellant was registered on  a  BA  -  International  Business
    Management course with an expected completion date of  30th  May  2014.
    The letter said he had one element of that degree course to finish.  It
    also confirms that he could commence classes on 21st January  2014  and
    finish on 25th March 2015 and then sit the exam in  April.   In  these
    circumstances and bearing in mind that she granted leave only until the
    end of the course he is currently doing,  it seems to me that  she  was
    entitled to reach the conclusion she did and that there is no  material
    error of law in her decision.

DECISION

I find that there is no material error of law in the  determination  of  the
First-tier Tribunal and that that decision shall stand.




Signed                              Date: 26th June 2014

N A Baird
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Baird
