
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/52731/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Sheldon Court, Birmingham            |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4 November 2014                            |On 12 November 2014          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ROBERTSON


                                   Between

                          MISS IRVY CABBAB LADERAS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Presenting Officer.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Immigration History

 1. The Appellant is a female citizen of the  Philippines,  whose  date  of
    birth is 7 June 1988. She had leave to remain in the UK  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Migrant until 5 November 2013. On 19 October 2013 she applied
    for leave to remain in the UK as the spouse of  a  person  present  and
    settled in the UK. Her application was refused and within the  body  of
    the letter dated 28 November 2013 (the RL) it was stated that  she  did
    not have a right of appeal because she had no  extant  leave  when  she
    made her application because her Tier 4 leave was curtailed with effect
    from 26 April 2013. The Appellant maintained that she had extant  leave
    until  5  November  2013  because  she  had  not  been  served  with  a
    curtailment decision.

 2. Designated Judge Manuell decided the appeal on the papers, finding that
    the issue of validity was a preliminary issue and as the Respondent had
    curtailed leave with effect from 26 April 2013, the  Appellant  had  no
    extant leave when she made her application to vary leave on 19  October
    2013 and an immigration  decision  had  not  been  issued.  There  was,
    therefore, no right of appeal.

 3. Permission to appeal was requested on the basis that: (i)  irrespective
    of whether or not a decision had been issued, the Respondent had  acted
    contrary to law and the Judge should have so held; (ii) the  Respondent
    had failed to serve the curtailment decision and a curtailment decision
    must be communicated for it  to  be  effective,  as  provided  by  Syed
    (curtailment of leave - notice) [2013] UKUT 144  (IAC).  Therefore  the
    Appellant had extant leave until 5 November 2013 and a right of appeal.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated Judge McCarthy,  on  the
    basis that (i) it was not clear from Judge Manuell's  determination  if
    he had regard to the history of  the  appeal  and  he  had  decided  to
    determine the issue of jurisdiction  without  giving  either  party  an
    opportunity to make submissions when the  Appellant  had  requested  an
    oral hearing; (ii) Judge Manuell overruled a decision on validity  made
    by a duty Judge and, whilst he stated that the duty Judge had not given
    reasons for the decision, it was not clear what jurisdiction he had  to
    overrule another First-tier Tribunal Judge once  a  decision  had  been
    made; and (iii) case law consistently holds that the Tribunal should be
    slow to deny an Appellant a right of appeal and that the  Tribunal  has
    jurisdiction to find that a decision is  one  to  which  s  82  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 applies even if a decision
    has not been issued. On the face of it  administrative  errors  on  the
    part of the Respondent may have resulted  in  the  wrong  notice  being
    issued and the Appellant had waived her right  to  be  properly  served
    with the decision (cf FO and others (service  of  notice  of  decision)
    Nigeria [2007] UKAIT 00093 and AH (Notices required) Bangladesh  [2006]
    UKAIT 00029).

 5. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 response, submitting that the Judge  had
    not erred in finding that the Tribunal lacked jurisdiction; he  clearly
    had regard to the curtailment decision at [2] and, although  the  Judge
    did not expressly state what supporting evidence  he  had  before  him,
    this did not go far enough to establish an arguable error off  law.  It
    was open to the Judge to find that the Appellant's assertion  that  she
    had extant leave was 'obviously wrong' based  on  the  evidence  before
    him.

 6. The Appellant did not attend the appeal and a letter was received  from
    her representative saying that he was without instructions. As  to  the
    grounds on which permission was granted, I  indicated  at  the  hearing
    that: (i) it was clear from the Tribunal file that the duty  Judge  had
    endorsed on the file that "it was likely that the Appellant had a valid
    appeal but the IJ may like to  consider  the  point  as  a  preliminary
    issue". Judge Manuell did not,  therefore,  overrule  the  decision  of
    another First-tier Tribunal Judge; and (ii) although the Appellant  had
    initially requested  an  oral  hearing,  she  had  later,  through  her
    representatives, requested a hearing on the papers. The Judge  was  not
    obliged to request submissions on  jurisdiction  prior  to  determining
    this issue. This left only the third point to be dealt with;  that  is,
    was the curtailment decision served on the Appellant.

 7. Mr Avery conceded that the curtailment decision had not been served  on
    the Appellant and therefore the Appellant had a valid right of  appeal.
    In  the  circumstances,  he  submitted  that  as  the  decision  as  to
    jurisdiction had deprived the  Appellant  of  a  fair  hearing  and  no
    findings of fact had been made, it was an appropriate case to remit  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for hearing.

 8. In view of Mr Avery's concession, it was appropriate to find  that  the
    Judge had erred in law in finding that he lacked jurisdiction  to  hear
    the appeal.


 9. Where a material error of law has been found in  the  determination  of
    the FtT, paragraph  7  of  the  Practice  Statements  relating  to  the
    Immigration and Asylum Chambers of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the
    Upper Tribunal provides:

         "7.2     The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to
      proceed to re-make
              the decision, instead of remitting the case to the First-tier
      Tribunal,
             unless the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:


   a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
      tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that party's
      case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


   b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is necessary
      in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that,
      having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate
      to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal."

10. I am satisfied that the Appellant was deprived of an opportunity to put
    her case before the FtT and that the  fact  finding  in  this  case  is
    likely to be extensive, bearing in mind that no findings of  fact  have
    been made. I therefore remit this matter for hearing before the FtT for
    a de novo hearing. It would be advantageous to the Appellant to  attend
    and the matter is to be listed for oral hearing. However, if  she  does
    not wish to attend and the Respondent is content for it to  proceed  by
    way of a decision on the papers, both parties should notify the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  at  least  7  working  days  before  the  date  of  the
    substantive hearing.


Decision

11. As conceded by Mr Avery, the decision of the FtT contained  a  material
    error of law as set out above and is set aside.

12. The Appellant's appeal is allowed.

13. The matter is to be remitted  for  hearing  before  the  FtT  with  the
    following directions:


          a. The Appellant shall file and serve:
               i. A comprehensive bundle of documents that were before  the
                  FtT Tribunal at the date of the last hearing.
              ii.  Any additional evidence,  including  statements,  to  be
                  relied on for the purposes of the substantive hearing.


          b. The matter is to be listed with a time estimate of 2 hours.


          c. It is my understanding that an interpreter is not required. If
             the Appellant needs an interpreter, she or her representatives
             must contact the Tribunal and confirm the language and dialect
             required.


          d. This matter is  not  to  be  listed  before  Designated  Judge
             Manuell.


Anonymity

 1. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I see
    no reason to direct anonymity pursuant  to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed                                  Date 12 November 2014


M Robertson
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have considered whether to make a fee award. I have had regard to the
Joint Presidential Guidance Note: Fee Awards in Immigration Appeals
(December 2011). As the Appellant's appeal has been allowed, the fee award
is to be determined when the substantive hearing is concluded.



Signed                     Dated 12 November 2014

M Robertson
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge



