
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/52192/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 26th September 2017                |On 2nd October 2017                   |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI


                                   Between

                               christine madu
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Richardson, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appeal of the Secretary of State against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge David  Taylor  promulgated  on  25th  January
    2017, allowing the appeal of the Appellant on the basis of her  private
    life in respect of Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights
    following a refusal by the Secretary of State  on  24th  January  2014.
    The appeal is of some considerable vintage and has been back and  forth
    between the First-tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal  on  three  separate
    occasions, this being the last of those circuits.  I do not propose  to
    set out the history of the appeal beyond that, it not being relevant to
    my decision.

 2. The Secretary of State was granted permission to appeal  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Pooler.  The grant of permission may  be  summarised  in
    the following terms:

         "There is, however, enough in the substance of the  application  to
         identify other alleged errors of law.   It  is  arguable  that  the
         judge erred in his assessment of the public interest factors  under
         s117B of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  and
         failed to take account of matters relevant  to  proportionality  on
         which the Respondent relies.  It is also arguable that he relied on
         a 'near miss' and that he erred in identifying  compelling  factors
         which could give rise to the need to consider Article 8 outside the
         Immigration Rules.  It is unfortunate that the headings used in the
         application for permission did not accurately identify the  alleged
         errors of law on which the grounds in fact rely.  Bearing  in  mind
         their substance, permission is granted on all grounds."

 3. I was provided with a Rule 24 reply  drafted  by  Mr  Richardson  which
    myself and the Secretary of State's representative had the  opportunity
    to consider prior to the commencement of the hearing.

Error of Law

 4. At the close of submissions I indicated that I did not find that  there
    was an error of law in the determination such that  it  should  be  set
    aside, but that my reasons for so finding would follow.  My reasons for
    that finding are as follows.

 5. Taking the  Grounds  of  Appeal  in  turn,  given  that  the  grant  of
    permission by the First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  limit  the  grant  of
    permission  to  specific  grounds,  albeit  criticising  the  remaining
    grounds drafted in the same breath, in relation to the first  issue  of
    the consideration of the Appellant's continued residence in the  United
    Kingdom for at least twenty years by the First-tier Tribunal  Judge,  I
    remind myself that paragraph 276ADE(1)(ii)  states  that  an  applicant
    should have made a valid application.  It is not in  dispute  that  the
    Appellant did not apply for leave to remain on the basis of her private
    life as she  had  not  completed  twenty  years  at  the  time  of  her
    application and indeed  had  only  completed  twenty  years'  residence
    shortly before the promulgation of the determination of the  First-tier
    Tribunal.   Albeit  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   considered   the
    Appellant's  twenty  years'  residence  and  the  Secretary  of   State
    complained that this was something beyond  his  consideration  and  was
    used as a near-miss to justify granting the appeal under Article  8,  I
    do not see any force in this argument as the First-tier Tribunal  would
    have been entitled in theory to consider the twenty  years'  continuous
    residence  that  the  Appellant  had  demonstrated  according  to   the
    Tribunal's findings by reference to paragraph 276AO of the  Immigration
    Rules which specifies that for the purposes of paragraph 276ADE(1), the
    requirement to make a valid application will not apply when an  Article
    8 claim is raised in an appeal subject to the consent of the  Secretary
    of  State   where   applicable,   according   to   paragraph   276AO(3)
    specifically.   It does not appear, and I have not been told, that  the
    Secretary of State took issue with the  judge's  consideration  of  the
    Appellant's twenty years' continuous residence as he indicated he would
    do at the close of the hearing which would have come  to  pass  by  the
    time the decision would have  been  promulgated.   As  such  any  later
    complaint that he did so, where any complaint could have been raised at
    the time this was mentioned to both parties by the First-tier  Tribunal
    is  belated  and  unarguable.   In  any  event,  the  judge   did   not
    substantively consider paragraph  276ADE(1)(iii)  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant having lived continuously in  the  UK  for  at  least  twenty
    years.

 6. It is further noteworthy that the Secretary of  State  complained  that
    such a matter would  have  been  not  likely  to  succeed  because  the
    Appellant had not demonstrated she met  the  suitability  requirements.
    This statement was plainly unfounded given that the Secretary of  State
    had not taken issue with her suitability in the  refusal  letter  which
    gave rise to the appeal.  This was noted by the First-tier Tribunal  at
    paragraph 7 of the determination in any event (which the  Secretary  of
    State has failed to note in drafting her Grounds of Appeal).  Thus,  in
    my view the judge did not misdirect himself in stating  that  the  only
    reason the Appellant did not succeed under the Rules  was  because  she
    had  not  acquired  twenty  years'  residence  at  the  time   of   her
    application.  Indeed this was a correct observation to make.  I further
    observe in light of my above analysis that if  the  Appellant  were  to
    make such an application today it would  also  be  likely  to  succeed.
    Such hypothetical observations were noted by the Supreme Court  in  the
    decision of R, (on the application of Agyarko and Ikuga) v Secretary of
    State for the Home Department [2017] UKSC 11 by Lord Reed at  paragraph
    51 of the judgment where it was stated that if an applicant is  in  the
    UK unlawfully or is entitled to remain in the UK only temporarily,  the
    significance of that consideration  depends  on  what  the  outcome  of
    immigration control  might  otherwise  be  and  if  an  applicant  were
    residing in the UK unlawfully but was otherwise certain to  be  granted
    leave to enter (or remain in this instance)  then  there  might  be  no
    public interest in her removal.

 7. As such in my view the ability of the Appellant to meet the Immigration
    Rules in theory, and perhaps in  practice  also,  is  relevant  to  the
    consideration of, and weight to be given to the  public  interest.   To
    that end the criticism of the First-tier Tribunal Judge's  decision  by
    reference to an allegation that  he  used  a  "near-miss"  scenario  to
    justify consideration of Article 8 is wholly without  merit.   This  is
    because the Immigration Rules normally give clarity to the  weight  and
    purpose to be given to the public interest in any assessment  that  had
    been established by the judgment of Lord Carnwath in the Supreme  Court
    decision of Patel at  paragraphs  55  to  57  (see  Patel  &  Others  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC  72).   Thus  in
    this instance the First-tier Tribunal Judge was quite right,  not  only
    for the reasons I have already given  but  also  for  this  reason,  in
    gauging the weight to be given to the public interest by looking at the
    relevant provisions of the Immigration Rules  against  the  Appellant's
    scenario as he saw it.

 8. In any event I also note that the First-tier  Tribunal  considered  the
    public interest in maintaining immigration control,  at  paragraphs  26
    and 30 amongst other passages, and also noted the  public  interest  in
    maintaining immigration control at paragraph 30  of  the  judgment.   I
    note in particular that the judge used the language of the 2002 Act  by
    describing the Appellant's presence in the UK as precarious rather than
    unlawful thus paying regard to the statute as he was bound to do.

 9. The further complaint that the judge failed to note the Appellant's use
    of the NHS is similarly, I find, misconceived in relation to  paragraph
    12 of the determination and  her  hospital  treatment  and  orthopaedic
    advice from a Harley Street consultant, as this scenario  suggests  she
    received private treatment.  But in any event,  any  recourse  to  such
    treatment would not be sufficient to rob her of the weight to be  given
    to her private life such that it would tip the balance against  her  in
    my view, particularly given that the Secretary of State did not seek to
    raise any suitability issues in her refusal letter.

10. In summary, I do not find that the First-tier Tribunal materially erred
    in its consideration of the appeal.

Notice of Decision

11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is hereby affirmed.

12. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

13. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini

