
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/52728/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16th January 2015                         |On 27th January 2015          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN


                                   Between

                                TUFAYEL AHMED
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Haque, Legal Representative, Imperial Law
Partners
For the Respondent:    Miss A Everest, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  with  permission  by  the
    Appellant who is a citizen of Bangladesh.   The  original  appeal  came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge R G Walters at Taylor  House  on  18th
    September 2014.  The  appeal  was  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    refusal to grant the Appellant leave to remain.

 2. The Appellant had applied for leave to remain as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student Migrant and the reason for the Secretary of  State's  decision,
    taken on 22nd November 2013, was that she claimed he had been in breach
    of his previous conditions of leave; he had been found to be working at
    a  restaurant.   The  circumstances  of  that  are  allegedly  that  an
    Immigration Officer carried out a raid  at  a  restaurant,  the  Balaka
    Restaurant at 104 High Street, Horsell in Woking, on 21st  August  2013
    and it is alleged that  the Appellant was found there working which was
    prohibited under the terms of  his visa.

 3. The Appellant says that, on the contrary he was  not  working,  he  had
    gone there to discuss work experience.  That may  or  may  not  be  the
    truth.  He may or may not be lying.   However,  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal there was absolutely no evidence provided by or on  behalf  of
    the Immigration Officer as to what  took  place  and  what  was  found.
    Knowing this to be the case, at the outset of the  hearing  before  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  the  Presenting  Officer   requested   an
    adjournment to obtain that evidence.  That application was  opposed  by
    the Appellant's representative, understandably because  they  were  now
    some twelve months on from the date of decision and ample time had been
    given to the Secretary of State to put her "ducks in  a  row"  for  the
    purpose of the appeal.

 4. However, having refused the adjournment request the judge then noted in
    the determination that both representatives said that the appeal should
    be allowed.  The Appellant's representative argued that it should be an
    allowed outright and the Respondent's representative that it should  be
    allowed to the extent that the original decision was not in  accordance
    with the law, based as it was on an absence of evidence and  should  be
    remitted back to the Secretary of State for a fresh decision.

 5. For some reason known only to him, the Judge ignored both of those  and
    proceeded to deal with the substantive appeal.  In other words he  went
    behind the concession by the Secretary of State that the appeal  should
    be allowed.

 6. He then heard oral evidence from the  Appellant  and  cross-examination
    and decided he did not believe what the Appellant was telling  him  and
    he dismissed the appeal.  However in so doing he had found  as  a  fact
    something about  which  there  was  absolutely  no  evidence  from  the
    Secretary of State and if the Secretary of State is alleging some  kind
    of wrong doing  in  the  same  way  as  with  an  allegation  of  false
    documents, there is a burden  upon  her  to  prove  that  fact  to  the
    appropriate standard and in this case  she  had  produced  no  evidence
    whatsoever.  There was thus nothing for the Appellant to rebut.

 7. I find therefore in this case that the Judge  made  several  errors  of
    law.  In refusing the  adjournment  he  may  well  have  erred  because
    clearly it was crucial evidence that was being asked for.  Secondly, in
    ignoring submissions from both sides that the appeal should be  allowed
    he erred, and thirdly, in  making  findings  based  on  an  absence  of
    evidence he also erred.

 8. Those go to the heart of the appeal and for that reason nothing in  the
    decision can stand and it is right that it is set aside in its entirety
    to be reheard in the First-tier Tribunal.  Accordingly, the  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal is allowed and it  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a fresh hearing.  The appropriate hearing centre is Taylor
    House.



Signed        Date 26th January 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

