

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/52818/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |         Decision and Reasons       |
|                                       |Promulgated                         |
|On 03 June 2015                        |         On 09 June 2015            |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM

                                   Between

                                EVADNE HARRIS
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Turnbull, counsel, instructed by Highland
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal Easterman who, in a decision heard on  24/07/2014  but  not
       promulgated until 25/11/2014, dismissed  the  appeal  of  Ms  Evadne
       Harris, a 76 year old national of Jamaica, against a decision of the
       respondent to refuse to grant her  further  leave  to  remain  as  a
       dependent relative of her adult children present and settled in  the
       United Kingdom (UK).

    2. The appellant entered the UK as a visitor in June 2012. She made  an
       in-time application to vary her leave to remain on  the  basis  that
       she was dependent on her two daughters  in  the  UK  for  financial,
       emotional and practical support. The appellant also claimed to  have
       a strong relationship with her grandson, for whom she cared since he
       was a month old. She had two children with whom she previously lived
       in Jamaica, a son and daughter, but, so the appellant  claimed,  the
       son was not in a financial position to assist her and  the  daughter
       was handicapped. The respondent considered the application under the
       immigration rules relating to adult dependent  relatives,  and  also
       considered  the  appellant's  application  under  paragraph  276ADE.
       Consideration was also given as to whether the  appellant's  removal
       would breach Article 3 ECHR with respect to her  medical  condition.
       The respondent refused the application on all bases.

    3. On appeal the Judge properly noted  that  the  appellant  could  not
       succeed under the immigration rules, namely paragraph ILRDR.1.1.  of
       Appendix FM, as she did not have valid leave to remain as  an  adult
       dependent  relative.  The  Judge   then   considered   whether   the
       appellant's removal would breach Article 8 ECHR, both in respect  of
       the appellant's private life and in respect of any family  life  she
       enjoyed with her family in the UK. The Judge concluded  there  would
       be no breach of Article 8 and dismissed the appeal.

Whether the First-tier Tribunal made a material error of law

    4. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  on
       the basis that the First-tier  Judge  failed  to  properly  consider
       material facts including the  appellant's  frailty,  age,  the  true
       relevance of her children in Jamaica, and that the Judge  failed  to
       consider the best interests of the appellant's  grandchild.  At  the
       permission stage the appellant sought to adduce fresh evidence  with
       her application including a medical report dated 04/12/2014, and, at
       the Upper Tribunal hearing,  produced  a  bundle  that  contained  a
       number of documents post-dating the  date  of  decision.  The  Upper
       Tribunal is not however entitled to consider post-decision  evidence
       when determining whether the First-tier Judge made an error  of  law
       unless that new evidence is being used to identify a material  error
       of law on the basis  of  a  mistake  of  fact  and  the  concomitant
       requirements have been met. It was not argued  by  Ms  Turbull  that
       this was the case. We have therefore  not  considered  the  evidence
       adduced by the appellant that post-dates the date of the  First-tier
       Tribunal hearing.

    5. Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman granted permission on the  basis
       that it was arguable the First-tier Judge failed to consider section
       55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009  (the  2009
       Act) with respect to the appellant's grandson, whom she  cared  for,
       alongside his parents, since he was a month  old.  It  was  on  this
       basis that the oral submissions before the Upper Tribunal were made.



    6. Ms Turbull submitted that the First-tier Judge failed to identify or
       consider section 55 in  respect  of  the  relationship  between  the
       appellant and her grandson, failed to make any findings  in  respect
       of the impact on the grandson of the appellant's removal, and  erred
       in  finding  that  the  appellant's  removal  would  not  amount  to
       'exceptional' or 'compelling' circumstances sufficient to render the
       decision disproportionate under Article 8 ECHR.

    7. Section 55 requires a Judge to have regard to the need to  safeguard
       and promote the welfare of children who are in the  United  Kingdom.
       In ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4 the Supreme Court  held  that,
       "In making the proportionality assessment under Article 8, the  best
       interests of the child must be a primary consideration.  This  means
       that  they  must  be  considered  first."  What   is   required   by
       consideration of the best  interests  of  a  child  is  an  "overall
       assessment" and it follows that  its  nature  and  outcome  must  be
       reflected in the wider Article 8(2) proportionality  assessment  (MK
       (best interests of child) India [2011] UKUT 00475). E-A (Article 8 -
       best interests of child) Nigeria [2011]  UKUT  315  (IAC)  indicated
       that the correct starting point in considering the welfare and  best
       interests of a young child would be that it is in the best interests
       of the child to live with and be brought up by his or her parents.

    8. In the instant appeal the grandchild lived with  both  his  parents,
       who were employed. The evidence before the Judge was to  the  effect
       that the appellant looked after the  child  when  his  parents  were
       working. It remains the case however that the  grandchild's  primary
       support relationship was that between him and his parents.  Although
       a  child  may  develop  a  strong   substitute   relationship   with
       grandparents in the absence of one or either parent, or  if  parents
       were unfit or incapable of properly caring for  a  child,  it  would
       otherwise require strong evidence to show that the child-grandparent
       relationship is as strong or significant as that between a child and
       their parents. Family life in  Article  8  (1)  is  certainly  broad
       enough to include the ties between  grandparents  and  grandchildren
       (see Marckx v. Belgium [1979] ECHR  2).  However,  the  relationship
       between grandparents and grandchildren by its very nature  generally
       calls for a lesser degree of protection than  that  between  natural
       parents and their children (G.H.B. v UK Application  no.  42455/98).
       We note that there was little in the  way  of  independent  evidence
       before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  relating   to   the   appellant's
       relationship with her grandson or relating  to  the  impact  of  the
       appellant's removal on the child's physical or emotional well-being.



    9. Although the First-tier Judge did not specifically refer to  section
       55 his decision does make clear that he had the relationship between
       the appellant and her grandchild well in mind  (paragraphs  14,  18,
       24, 31, and 35). Given that the  child  was  living  with  both  his
       parents, in what one must  reasonably  suppose  to  be  a  warm  and
       supportive family unit, there was no  evidential  basis  before  the
       Judge upon which he could have concluded that the grandchild's  best
       interest were not served by having him remain with his  parents.  In
       so concluding we  remind  ourselves  that  the  onus  rests  on  the
       appellant to show there has been a breach of the section 55 duty (MK
       (section 55 - Tribunal  options)  Sierra  Leone  [2015]  UKUT  00223
       (IAC)).

   10. Even if it were found that the grandchild's best interests  entailed
       the  appellant  remaining  in  the  United  Kingdom,  it  does   not
       necessarily follow that removal would be disproportionate  (Gayle  v
       Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015]  UKUT  B3  (IAC)).
       The best interests of a child is a primary consideration, but it  is
       not a paramount consideration.

   11. In the present case the Judge considered the evidence that he  heard
       in respect of that relationship (paras 51, 52) and  noted  that  the
       appellant was "... very useful for  the  purpose  of  looking  after
       their child" (para 54). On the evidence before  him  the  Judge  was
       entitled to find that the appellant was used  primarily  to  provide
       childcare. There was nothing in the evidence before the Judge as  to
       why childcare could not be provided by a child minder or in  a  pre-
       school. That was the choice of the child's parents. The Judge  found
       it would be possible for the  grandchild  and  his  family  to  make
       visits to Jamaica and enjoy family  life  through  periodic  visits.
       This was a conclusion  properly  open  to  the  Judge.  We  are  not
       satisfied that any failing by the Judge in  his  assessment  of  the
       best interests of the grandchild could have possibility resulted  in
       a  finding  that  the  decision  to   remove   the   appellant   was
       disproportionate under Article 8. We are consequently satisfied that
       Judge Easterman did not make a material error of law.

   12. We finally note that a complaint was lodged by the appellant against
       the respondent in respect of advice they received  relating  to  the
       appellant's application and relating  to  confusion  concerning  the
       fee. We are not however in a position to comment on  the  merits  of
       this complaint.


Decision:

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.


                                                         08 June 2015

Signed:                                            Date:
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum





