

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/52517/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 27 May 2015                                |on 3 June 2015               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                LIXIANG CHEN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Ms L Kerr, of Katani & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs S Saddiq, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against a determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Dennis, dismissing her appeal against refusal of a residence card
    under the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

 2. The first ground of appeal is directed  against  paragraph  15  of  the
    determination where the judge said that Article 8 issues raised by  the
    appellant were "not in issue" before  him  "as  there  are  no  removal
    directions in place".  Ms Kerr argued  that  this  ignores  submissions
    which were based on the Immigration Rules  Appendix  FM  paragraph  Gen
    1.9, on Ahmed [2013] UKUT 00089  (IAC)  at  paragraph  43,  and  on  JM
    (Liberia) [2006] EWCA Civ 1402.

 3. There is a second ground of appeal,  based  on  alleged  error  in  the
    judge's finding  that  he  was  not  satisfied   that  the  appellant's
    daughter  is  the  biological  daughter  of  an  EEA  national.   While
    permission to appeal was not restricted, the permission  judge  doubted
    whether that could sensibly be argued, and thought that the  point  was
    implicitly raised in  the  respondent's  decision  under  appeal.   The
    respondent's Rule 24 response maintains that the judge had good  reason
    to doubt the nationality and parentage of the appellant's daughter.  Ms
    Kerr did not press this ground, and I did not need  to  hear  from  Mrs
    Saddiq on it.  The judge's finding was open to him and was reached  for
    good reasons.  The appellant's case would have  failed  on  this  issue
    alone.

 4. In my opinion the judge did err by not dealing (even briefly) with  the
    particular submissions made about Article 8, and by  not  disposing  of
    that ground of appeal.  It is  not  correct  that  absence  of  removal
    directions by itself means there is no Article 8 appeal  available:  JM
    settled that point.

 5. However, the error is of no eventual significance,  for  the  following
    reasons:

      i) A decision under the Regulations is not one in consequence of which
         removal  can  be  directed,  or  which  changes   the   appellant's
         immigration status.  That distinguishes this case from JM.

     ii) In Ahmed the respondent agreed that the case should be looked at as
         if removal were a putative consequence (paragraphs 48 and 69).  The
         Presenting Officer in this case made  no  such  concession.   Ahmed
         succeeded under the Regulations. The findings on Article 8  are  in
         the alternative  (paragraph  79).   It  is  not  an  authority  for
         considering appeals under  the  Regulations  as  if  there  were  a
         substantive prospect of removal.

    iii) An appeal under the Regulations cannot be allowed  on  the  grounds
         that the decision is not in accordance with the  Immigration  Rules
         (see regulation 26 and schedule 1, paragraph 1).  The Rules are the
         starting point for any private and family life  consideration,  and
         aim at providing a complete code.  The appeal could not be  allowed
         under the Rules, even if their requirements were met.  It would  be
         absurd to allow on human rights grounds outside the Rules  where  a
         route inside the Rules is available.

     iv) The respondent's refusal letter invites the appellant to  apply  if
         she wishes on the basis of family and private life under Article  8
         ECHR and the Immigration Rules.  A requirement to apply  under  the
         Rules is not  a  disproportionate  interference  with  private  and
         family life.

      v) The respondent also says that as  the  appellant  has  no  apparent
         alternative basis of stay her departure may be enforced, but she is
         advised that in such event she would be contacted again  and  would
         have  a  separate  opportunity  to  make   representations.    Such
         procedure is not a disproportionate interference with  private  and
         family life.

     vi) Appendix FM paragraph GEN 1.9 provides that the requirement to make
         a valid application may not apply  when  the  Article  8  claim  is
         raised "in an appeal".  In context, that means an appeal under  the
         Immigration Rules.  It does not extend to an appeal taken under the
         Regulations.

    vii) Although there was available to the appellant  a  right  of  appeal
         invoking Article 8, and the judge was bound to dispose of  it,  the
         decision raises no meaningful interference with Article  8  rights.



 6. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside,  but  the
    decision substituted is as follows: the appeal is dismissed  under  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006, in  relation  to
    Article 8 of the ECHR, and on all other available grounds.

 7. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


            [pic]


            1 June 2015
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




