
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/53356/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 27 August 2014                             |On 29 August 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SOUTHERN

                                   Between

                              Mr Muhammad Bilal

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs H Gore, Counsel, instructed by Marks & Marks
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant  has  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  against  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Powell who,  by  a  determination
    promulgated on 19 May 2014, dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  against
    refusal to grant him leave to remain pursuant to paragraph 245ZX of  HC
    395 as a student.  The judge determined the appeal on the  papers  with
    the consent of the parties.

2.   It is common ground and agreed between the parties that the judge  made
    an error of law in failing to resolve a  factual  dispute  between  the
    parties which was whether or not there was a Certificate of  Acceptance
    for Studies ("CAS"), before the decision-maker.

3.   In the face of such consensus I need say no more than that  was  a  key
    issue to resolve in order to determine this appeal and in failing to do
    so the judge did not provide a proper basis for his  determination  and
    that is sufficient to identify that he made an error of law such as  to
    mean that his decision cannot stand.  If it is necessary for me  to  do
    so to facilitate that challenge, and without objection from Mr  Walker,
    I grant the appellant leave to amend his grounds of appeal to the Upper
    Tribunal.

4.   The parties are also agreed as to the  factual  basis  upon  which  the
    decision now falls to be remade.  It is accepted that there was in fact
    a CAS  before  the  decision-maker  who  was  therefore  wrong  to  say
    otherwise in the decision of 3 December 2013.  The only difficulty with
    that document was that it contained a typographical error in  that  the
    date of birth was incorrect.  That error was corrected by  a  sponsor's
    note and that was an error that could indeed be  corrected  within  the
    context of a points-based application because  of  the  application  of
    Section 85A.

5.   Therefore it is clear that this was an  application  that  should  have
    succeeded  as  the  appellant  met  all  of  the  requirements  of  the
    applicable Rule.  For those reasons I will substitute a fresh  decision
    to allow the appeal.



Signed                                  Date 27 August 2014

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


