
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/53035/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 January 2015                             |On 17 February 2015           |
|Oral judgment                                 |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                          Mr Muhammad Sakid Hossain
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No Appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the Appellant against a  determination  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Aujla promulgated on 3 September 2014  following  a
    hearing at Taylor House on 28 July 2014.

2.   The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on  1  February  2011  with
    valid clearance as a Tier 4 (General) Student which was extended  until
    31 May 2014.  On 30 May 2013 he applied to vary his leave to permit him
    a further period of leave as a Tier 4 (General) Student  Migrant  under
    the points-based system.  That was refused by the Secretary of State on
    28 November 2013 because it was said the Appellant  had  not  shown  he
    could meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  The decision was
    also accompanied by a  direction  for  his  removal  made  pursuant  to
    Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

3.   The reason for the application failing under the Rules, it is said,  is
    that the Appellant had claimed 10 points for maintenance under Appendix
    C but the documents provided by  the  sponsor  showing  funds  did  not
    demonstrate that he had been in possession of the  required  amount  of
    funds for the requisite 28 days.  The Secretary of State was  therefore
    not satisfied that he was entitled to 10 points under Appendix C of the
    Rules and that he could meet the Rules for leave to remain as a Tier  4
    (General) Student Migrant.

4.   The Judge dealt with this issue in some detail  in  the  determination.
    The findings of fact are set out from paragraph 17 in which  the  Judge
    notes that the issues are  very  simple,  namely  whether  or  not  the
    Appellant had held the required funds for the full consecutive  28  day
    period before he made his application.  The application  was  submitted
    on 30 May 2013.  A bank statement was submitted dated 5 June 2013.  The
    Judge makes comment that the statement must have been  submitted  after
    the application was submitted since it was issued  by  the  bank  "five
    years after the application  was  submitted".   That  latter  statement
    appears to bear no relationship to the reality of the facts of the case
    and one can only assume that it may have been  a  typographical  error,
    the chronology suggesting it should  have  been  five  days  after  the
    application was submitted.

5.   The Judge notes that as the application was submitted on  30  May  2013
    the latest date for the period of 28 days to end was 30  May  2013  and
    therefore commenced on 2 May.  There was, however, no evidence to  show
    that the Appellant had held funds for the  full  28  day  period  since
    there was no evidence of funds being held from 2 May until 5 May  2013.
    On that basis it was found that the Rules had  not  been  met  and  the
    Judge dismissed the appeal.

6.   The grounds of challenge to the decision under  the  Rules  state  that
    the alleged error is that:

         "11. The Secretary of State  refused  the  appellant's  application
             based on the fact  that  he  had  provided  a  bank  statement
             covering only 26 days and not 28.  The Secretary of State  has
             power to exercise her discretion where it was so desirable  to
             do so but the Secretary of State chose not  to  exercise  such
             discretion in the appellant's favour.


         12.  The appeal was therefore refused as the appellant has  had  no
             plausible argument in relation to the issue as  he  failed  to
             meet  the  criteria  according  to  the  letter  of  the  law.
             However, the appellant raised a  human  rights  claim  at  the
             Tribunal."

7.   There is nothing in the grounds that identifies any  arguable  material
    error in the Judge's approach and in fact it  appears  to  be  conceded
    that only 26 days' rather  than  28  days'  worth  of  bank  statements
    covering the requisite period were provided.  The  Rules  for  the  PBS
    system, as the Court of Appeal recognised in  Alam,  are  prescriptive.
    They set out the mandatory requirements and in relation to this  matter
    it appears to have been conceded as was found by the Judge  that  those
    mandatory requirements had not been satisfied.  I  find  no  basis  for
    interfering with that decision which shall therefore stand.

8.   The comment in paragraph 12 that the Appellant raised  a  human  rights
    claim before the Tribunal is factually correct.   It  is  also  correct
    that although the grounds assert that the Tribunal dealt with the human
    rights aspect by finding in paragraph 10 that "on the specific facts of
    this appeal differences between the burdens and standards of proof have
    not resulted in any material differences in my  findings"  the  way  in
    which the Tribunal dealt with  Article  8,  in  reality,  is  that  the
    Tribunal did not deal with Article 8 at all.  When  one  looks  at  the
    part of the determination setting out the consideration of findings  of
    fact there is no mention of the Article 8 aspects of the appeal.

9.   It is also debatable  whether  the  Judge  erred  in  paragraph  10  by
    suggesting there is a difference between the burdens and  standards  of
    proof.  In a case in which there is no protection element there are  no
    differences between the standard of proof to be applied under the Rules
    and  human  rights  elements  of  an  appeal.  It  is  the  balance  of
    probabilities in both cases.  Who has  to  prove  what  changes  in  an
    Article 8 appeal if proportionality becomes relevant as the  burden  of
    proving that the decision is proportionate falls upon the Secretary  of
    State.  Bar  this,  the  suggestion  that  there  is  some   evidential
    difference  to  the  burden  is  not  supported  in  any  way  in   the
    determination although, I find, that does  not  amount  to  a  material
    misdirection of law as the Judge  failed  to  undertake  an  Article  8
    assessment.

10.  The determination shall be set aside although the findings in  relation
    to the Immigration Rules shall be preserved findings.  The Tribunal  is
    minded to go ahead today to remake the decision on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence that was before the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

11.  I would state at this  point  that  there  is  only  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal a representative for the Secretary of State.   The  Appellant,
    Mr  Hossain,  has  not  attended  and  nor  have  his  solicitors   SEB
    Solicitors.  The Tribunal received a letter dated 31 December 2014 from
    them stating:  "Our client has instructed us to  request  the  Tribunal
    take a decision on the papers.  Therefore we won't attend  the  hearing
    on 5 January 2015."  The Tribunal responded by  return  fax,  dated  31
    December 2014, to SEB Solicitors in the following terms:

         "I write in regard to your request that the Upper Tribunal  hearing
         of 5 January 2015 be heard on the papers.  Please be  advised  that
         this hearing will remain in  the  list  so  that  the  Home  Office
         representative may make  oral  submissions.   The  presiding  Upper
         Tribunal  Judge  will  make  their  decision   based   upon   these
         submissions and the documents held on file in support of the above-
         named appellant's appeal.  It is at your discretion as  to  whether
         the appellant or their representative attends the hearing."


    There has been no request for an adjournment and no explanation why the
    Appellant has failed to attend even if he  cannot  afford  to  pay  his
    solicitors or there is some other reason why they cannot  attend.   The
    Tribunal considers there has been  valid  service  of  the  notices  in
    accordance with the necessary Rules as  acknowledged  in  fact  by  the
    letter from the solicitors referring  to  the  hearing  date.   I  have
    considered whether it is fair in all the circumstances for this  matter
    to proceed and for the Upper Tribunal to remake  the  decision  in  the
    absence of the Appellant and consider it is wholly appropriate to do so
    in the absence of any  satisfactory  explanation  for  the  failure  to
    attend.  The  Appellant  was  also  clearly  alerted  by  the  Tribunal
    administration to the fact that if he fails to attend that the Tribunal
    would be likely to proceed in absence in any event.

12.  As stated, Article 8 was before the First-tier Tribunal.  It is  raised
    in the original grounds of appeal which assert  that  the  decision  is
    unlawful because it is incompatible  with  rights  under  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.  The basis for this  appears  in  paragraph
    (vi) that "the Appellant has established a  private  life  through  his
    studies, employment and  through  his  residence  here  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  He has been integrated in society.  The Appellant has been in
    the UK for a number of years".  The grounds fail to specify the  period
    of years but it appears that the date of entry could have been sometime
    in February 2013 and so at the date the decision was made or  the  date
    of the hearing, today's date, he has only been in  the  United  Kingdom
    for a relatively short period of time.

13.  This is not an application for a variation  of  leave  relating  to  an
    individual such as the Appellant in the established case of CDS who was
    partway through a course in which it was felt not to  be  proportionate
    to expect such an individual to leave when they only had a short period
    of time left to finalise their studies in the United Kingdom.  The  CAS
    provided with the application relates to a course that had not  started
    at the date the application was made.  The start date  for  the  course
    was 10 June 2013, the expected end date was 22 May 2015.

14.  In relation to the Article 8 rights being relied upon I have also  been
    handed a copy of the judgment of the  Supreme  Court  in  Patel  &  Ors
    [2013] UKSC 72 in which the Supreme Court made it quite  clear  that  a
    near-miss argument, and I refer to that due to the 26 as opposed to  28
    day period  when  discussing  the  Immigration  Rules,  cannot  provide
    substance to a human rights case which is otherwise  lacking  in  merit
    but was a factor that would be taken into account.

15.  More importantly within Patel the Supreme Court laid to rest  the  idea
    that any individual who had a right to study in the United Kingdom or a
    person who came and entered the United  Kingdom  for  the  purposes  of
    studies had any legitimate expectation that they will  be  entitled  to
    remain based upon a private life that they  acquired  during  the  time
    they were undertaking their studies.

16.  It is also fair to say that the  way  in  which  Article  8  should  be
    assessed has moved on considerably since the decision was made  by  the
    decision maker.  The date of the decision is 28 November  2013  but  as
    this is an in country appeal the Tribunal is  expected  to  assess  the
    Article 8 matter at the date of the hearing, i.e. at today's date.

17.  The statements regarding the nature of private  life  relied  upon  are
    vague and generalistic.  They contain no specific details and as stated
    this is a private  life  that  was  accrued  during  a  time  that  the
    Appellant has had temporary status to remain in the United Kingdom as a
    student.  The statutory provisions brought in by  the  Immigration  Act
    2014 make it mandatory for decision makers, notwithstanding the earlier
    case law, to consider the statutory provisions set out in  part  5A  of
    the 2002 Act under Sections 117A, B and C  if  applicable.   C  is  not
    applicable to this case as it is not a deportation case.

18.  The statutory provisions make it clear that the view of  the  Secretary
    of State regarding the public interest question is to  be  assessed  in
    accordance with the guidance provided in  the  clauses  and  subclauses
    which includes a requirement for the Tribunal to undertake a  balancing
    exercise.   Therefore  it  is   still   necessary   to   consider   the
    proportionality of the decision.

19.  It is not disputed before me that private life has been formed  in  the
    United Kingdom although whether if one looks at  the  Razgar  questions
    there would be any interference with such private  life  sufficient  to
    engage Article 8 under the  Strasbourg  jurisprudence  is  a  question,
    based on the evidence,  that  perhaps  will  not  be  answered  in  the
    Appellant's favour. If it was, in the alternative, and  the  issue  was
    that of proportionality, and on the basis of the  evidence  before  the
    Tribunal it would be  my  finding  that  the  Secretary  of  State  has
    discharged the burden of proof upon her to  the  required  standard  to
    show that the decision is proportionate.

20.  Section 117B reads:

         "Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all cases


         (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
             public interest.


         (2)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic wellbeing  of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English -


             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and


             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.


         (3)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic wellbeing  of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons -


             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and


             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.


         (4)  Little weight should be given to


             (a)  a private life, or


             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner


             that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.


         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
             a person at a time when the  person's  immigration  status  is
             precarious.


         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where -


             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and


             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom."

21.  Those latter issues in (6) regarding a  parental  relationship  with  a
    qualifying  child  are  not  applicable  and  therefore  the  issue  of
    'reasonableness' does  not  have  to  be  considered  as  there  is  no
    suggestion of any family life  or  type  of  life  involving  an  adult
    relationship or relationship with a child relied upon by the Appellant.

22.  The Section 117B criteria require  evidence  of  an  ability  to  speak
    English which is not in dispute.  Subsection (3) regarding the economic
    wellbeing and the requirement for an individual to be able to show that
    they are financially independent  is  not  met  on  the  basis  of  the
    information before the Tribunal.   The  Appellant  entered  the  United
    Kingdom as a student and is  seeking  leave  to  study.   There  is  no
    evidence that he has financial resources available such as to make  him
    financially independent and to show that he will not become a burden on
    the taxpayer or will be properly able to integrate into the society.

23.  Subsection (4) regarding private life or relationship  with  a  partner
    is not applicable.  Subsection (5)  specifically  gives  guidance  that
    little weight should be given to a private life established by a person
    at a time when the person's immigration status was precarious.  In this
    respect if one considers the meaning of the  word  'precarious'  it  is
    settled Strasbourg jurisprudence that little weight should be given  to
    the private and family life of an individual developed at a  time  that
    they had no lawful leave to remain in the United Kingdom.   Y  (Russia)
    and other related cases are authority for that proposition.

24.  The wording of Section 117, however, does not speak in such terms.   It
    uses the word 'precarious'.  Precarious by definition means status with
    a lack of stability.  It  does  not  necessarily  mean  a  person  with
    unlawful or lawful status.  The fact the Appellant was  in  the  United
    Kingdom on a temporary basis as a Tier 4 Student  and  has  no  settled
    status or legitimate expectation he will be granted the same, makes his
    status precarious.  It is the immigration status and the nature of that
    which is the specific element of the test.   If  one  is  to  interpret
    'precarious' as being a person who does not have settled status or  any
    legitimate expectation that they will  have  settled  status  then  the
    Appellant in this case falls foul of that particular.  If in  fact  the
    interpretation of 'precarious' has to be  read  as  a  person  with  no
    unlawful leave, then it may be that the statutory  provision  does  not
    assist the Secretary of State as the leave to date of the Applicant has
    been lawful but, then one returns to the finding of the  Supreme  Court
    in Patel & Ors, that private life acquired at a time when an individual
    is a student does not create a legitimate expectation that they will be
    given status and allowed to remain in the United  Kingdom,  the  former
    interpretation is likely to be the correct.

25.  Having considered  all  the  provisions  relating  to  the  Immigration
    Rules, statutory provisions and the relevant case law it is my  finding
    that the Secretary of State has discharged the burden of proof upon her
    to the required standard to show that the decision is proportionate and
    therefore the appeal must fail.

Notice of Decision

The dismissal of the appeal under  the  Immigration  Rules  is  a  preserved
finding. The human right ground of appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
