
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/53519/2013
                                                               IA/53529/2013
                                                               IA/53533/2013
                                                               IA/53532/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 31st July 2014                               |On 29th August 2014        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                           A S K (First appellant)
                          T A K (Second appellant)
                           M A K (Third appellant)
                          A A K (Fourth appellant)
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr D Balroup, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants are citizens of India.  The first Appellant was born  on
    3rd May 1975.  The second Appellant was born on 13th  May  1982.   They
    are husband and wife.   The  third  and  fourth  Appellants  are  their
    children born on 23rd  May  2006  and  10th  September  2011.   On  7th
    September 2013 the Appellants' solicitors applied on their  behalf  for
    leave to remain on the basis of their family  and  private  life.   The
    Home Office gave due consideration to the application under  Article  8
    noting that from 9th July 2012 the application fell under  Appendix  FM
    of the Immigration Rules.  The second Appellant was in the UK as a Tier
    4 (General) Student.  The Appellants' application was refused by Notice
    of Refusal dated 2nd December 2013.

 2. The Appellants appealed and the appeals came before Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Walters sitting at Hatton Cross on 13th May 2014.   In  a
    decision promulgated on 16th May  2014  the  Appellants'  appeals  were
    allowed on human rights grounds.  The judge made an anonymity direction
    because of the ages of the third and fourth Appellants.  No application
    is made to vary that order and that order is maintained for the purpose
    of these proceedings and this determination.

 3. On 16th May 2014 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds of Appeal to the
    Upper Tribunal.  The grounds note the Immigration Judge at paragraph 23
    of his determination referred to the guidance in Gulshan (Article  8  -
    new Rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT  640  (IAC)  namely  that  if
    there are arguably good grounds for granting leave  to  remain  outside
    the Immigration Rules it is necessary for Article 8 purposes to  go  on
    to consider whether there are compelling circumstances not sufficiently
    recognised under the  Rules.   However  the  grounds  submit  that  the
    Immigration Judge misapplied the approach outlined in Gulshan and  that
    an Immigration Judge is required to make findings by reference to  case
    specific  arguably  good  grounds  and  compelling  circumstances   not
    sufficiently recognised  under  the  Immigration  Rules.   The  grounds
    contend that the Immigration Judge's findings on this issue amounted to
    perceived  omissions  within  the  refusal  letter  and  the   possible
    applicability  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   They  submit   that   the
    Immigration Judge made inadequate findings as to arguably good  grounds
    and compelling circumstances  not  sufficiently  recognised  under  the
    Rules and that the Judge has erred in law by considering Article 8.

 4. On 9th June 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer granted permission to
    appeal stating

         "I am satisfied that the grounds are arguable for the  reasons  set
         out in the application, namely a possible  failure  to  assess  the
         evidence in the light of Gulshan.  All ground may be argued."

 5. It is on that basis that the appeal comes before me.  I appreciate that
    the appeal is brought by the  Secretary  of  State.   However  for  the
    purpose of continuity within these proceedings the Secretary  of  State
    is referred to as the Respondent and Mr A S K and  his  family  as  the
    Appellants.  All reference herein to the Appellants are to Mr  A  S  K.
    The appeals of the second to fourth Appellants rise and fall as  family
    members on that of the first Appellant.  The parents are represented by
    Mr Balroup their instructed Counsel.  Mr Balroup is familiar with  this
    matter having appeared before the First-tier Tribunal.   The  Secretary
    of State appears by her Home Office  Presenting  Officer  Mr  Saunders.
    The issue before me is to determine whether or not there is a  material
    error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Facts

 6. The factual issues in  this  matter  are  not  challenged.   The  first
    Appellant entered the UK on 10th February 2006 in possession  of  entry
    clearance as a student dependant valid from 25th January 2006  to  31st
    October 2007.  That leave was extended until his most recent  leave  to
    remain expired on 6th October 2013.  The second Appellant who is T A  K
    entered the UK on 15th September 2005 in possession of entry  clearance
    as a student valid from 24th August 2005 to  31st  October  2007.   She
    obtained further leave to remain as a student and as a Tier 4 (General)
    Student under the points-based system until her most  recent  leave  to
    remain expired on 6th October 2013.  The third Appellant  was  born  in
    the United Kingdom and has resided there since her birth in 2006.   The
    fourth Appellant was born in Mumbai in  September  2011.   I  therefore
    assume that the second Appellant returned to India for the  purpose  of
    giving birth and entered the United Kingdom on 20th  November  2011  in
    possession of a valid entry clearance.  The  fourth  Appellant's  leave
    also expired on 6th October 2013.

 7. The first Appellant had therefore at the time of his hearing before the
    First-tier Tribunal lived in the United Kingdom for almost eight  years
    and he noted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  he  and  his  family
    considered the United Kingdom their home and that he was unaware of his
    Indian roots.  He stated that his friends, places of enjoyment and  his
    general life was based in the United Kingdom.  Having said all  that  I
    note that at  paragraph  17  of  his  determination  Immigration  Judge
    Walters found that the first Appellant had exaggerated his  account  as
    he has lived by far the majority of his life in India and could  easily
    be expected to readjust to that life upon return albeit with  different
    employment and friends.  I further note  the  factual  detail  provided
    with regard to  the  family's  employment,  education,  home  life  and
    academic history set out at paragraphs  17  to  22  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's determination.  No challenge is made to those  factual
    findings by the  Secretary  of  State.   I  note  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge found at paragraph 22 that the accounts  of  the  second
    Appellant and the first Appellant's mother to be credible.  The  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge does not appear to have made any  specific  finding
    as to the credibility  of  the  first  Appellant  save  for  the  issue
    mentioned above and referred to at paragraph 17  of  his  determination
    with regard to an exaggeration of his account.  There is nothing within
    the determination to suggest that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not
    find generally speaking that the first  Appellant's  evidence  was  not
    credible.



Submissions and Discussions

 8. Mr Saunders on behalf of the Secretary of State takes me  back  to  the
    Grounds of Appeal pointing out that  the  Immigration  Judge  may  have
    recited that the correct jurisprudence  includes  Gulshan  [2013]  UKUT
    00640 but that the judge has failed to properly apply it.   He  submits
    that paragraph 24 of the judge's determination is hopeless and that  it
    does not sit with paragraph 36 of his determination.   Mr  Saunders  is
    prepared to acknowledge paragraph 24 of the First-tier Tribunal Judge's
    determination may stand as his analysis of compelling circumstances but
    that the  judge  is  fundamentally  wrong  to  conclude  they  are  not
    sufficiently recognised by the Respondent  in  the  Notice  of  Refusal
    stating that in the Secretary of State's view they most certainly are.

 9. He submits that it is the reality of the circumstances that  the  judge
    has to address and that the circumstances fall far short of  compelling
    circumstances.  He asks me to find that there is a  material  error  of
    law, to set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and to remake
    on the facts before me particularly bearing in  mind  that  changes  to
    Section 117 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  came
    into force on Monday 28th July 2014 i.e. predating the hearing of  this
    appeal.

10. Mr Balroup submits that the law has moved on since Gulshan  relying  on
    MM (Lebanon) and Others v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2014] EWCA Civ 985.  He contends that  paragraph  23  shows  that  the
    judge had given due consideration  to  the  test  in  Gulshan.   It  is
    conceded and accepted that there is an error in paragraph  36  in  that
    the third Appellant is not a British citizen.  He takes me to paragraph
    37 pointing out that that is a detailed analysis of the position of the
    third Appellant, that she has been in the UK for eight years  and  that
    she speaks English.  He indicates that the  judge  has  given  due  and
    proper consideration to the case law thereafter and has  made  findings
    at paragraph 44 that he was entitled to.  He  asked  me  to  find  that
    there is no material error of law.

The Law

11.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account   immaterial   consideration,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

12. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

13. The law on Article  8  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  is  constantly
    changing.  The  approach  to  be  adopted  by  the  judiciary  is  also
    changing.  Gulshan was the starting point.  It  has  to  be  remembered
    that when this matter came before the First-tier Tribunal Judge the law
    had to a certain extent moved on beyond Gulshan in that there had  been
    additional  authorities  but  that  there  have  been  authorities  and
    statutory legislation which postdate the appeal.  The  question  before
    me is whether or not there is a material error of law in  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  I am satisfied that  there  is  not.
    It is not the purpose of the Upper Tribunal to decide  whether  or  not
    the Upper Tribunal Judge would have come to the  same  finding  on  the
    factual evidence to that of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge.   Providing
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge has carried out a proper analysis then he
    is entitled to make the findings that he does.

14. It is appropriate to look at the law.  The  Tribunal  in  Gulshan  made
    clear and has repeated subsequently in Shahzad (Article  8:  legitimate
    aim) [2014] UKUT 00085 (IAC) at paragraph (31):

         "Where an  area  of  the  rules  does  not  have  such  an  express
         mechanism, the approach in R (Nagre) v Secretary of State  for  the
         Home Department [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) ([29]-[31]  in  particular)
         and Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013]  UKUT
         640 (IAC) should be followed: i.e. after applying the  requirements
         of the rules, only if  there  may  be  arguably  good  grounds  for
         granting leave to remain outside them is it necessary for Article 8
         purposes  to  go  on  to  consider  whether  there  are  compelling
         circumstances not sufficiently recognised under them."

15. The Court of Appeal in MM (Lebanon) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2014] EWCA Civ 985 at paragraph 128 went on to state:

         "Nagre does not add anything to the debate save for  the  statement
         that if a particular person is outside the  Rule  then  he  has  to
         demonstrate, as a preliminary to a consideration outside  the  Rule
         that he has an arguable case that there may  be  good  grounds  for
         granting leave to remain outside the  Rules.   I  cannot  see  much
         utility  in  imposing  this  further  intermediary  test.   If  the
         applicant cannot satisfy the Rule, then there either is or there is
         not a further Article 8 claim.  That will have to be determined  by
         the relevant decision maker."

16. Ironically (because MM (Lebanon) had not been determined at that  time)
    that approach appears to be exactly what the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    has done in this instant case.  At paragraph  23  he  has  referred  to
    Gulshan.  He has thereafter looked at the factual scenario and analysed
    a considerable amount of case  law  and  Section  55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act.   He  has  analysed  the   position
    carefully of the third and fourth Appellants and made findings of  fact
    which are not challenged by the Secretary of State.  Having weighed the
    jurisprudence in the evidence before him he then found that  there  was
    nothing in the evidence to persuade him that the third Appellant should
    be removed from the United Kingdom and has gone on to give reasons.  He
    has then analysed the  test  set  out  in  Razgar  and  the  principles
    enunciated in Huang v the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2007] UKHL 11 and the need to balance the interests  of  society  with
    those of individuals and groups.   Judge  Walters  has  considered  the
    issue of proportionality in  some  detail  at  paragraph  43  and  made
    overall conclusions at paragraph 44 that Article  8  is  engaged  under
    paragraph 46 and the decisions appealed against would cause the  United
    Kingdom to be in breach of the law or its obligations under  the  Human
    Rights Act.

17. The analysis that the judge has carried out is a full and thorough  one
    and whilst I acknowledge that he has put considerable reliance  on  the
    fact that the youngest child is now aged 8, speaks English,  has  never
    been to India and has spent all of  her  life  in  the  UK,  these  are
    factual findings that he was entitled to make and an assessment that he
    was also entitled to make.

18. In such circumstances the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    does not disclose a material  error  of  law  and  the  appeal  of  the
    Secretary of  State  is  dismissed.   This  decision  applies  for  all
    Appellants.

Decision

19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  discloses  no  material
    error of law and the appeals of the Secretary of  State  are  dismissed
    and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

20. The First-tier Tribunal Judge made an order pursuant to  Rule  45(4)(1)
    of the Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005.   No
    application is made to vary  that  order  and  none  is  made  and  the
    anonymity direction is therefore maintained.


Signed                              Date 14th August 2014




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

