
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/53823/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Plymouth Magistrates' Court         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 March 2015                              |On 26 March 2015              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                              DAVID EDDIE MANGA
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Knapper of Knapper Fursdon Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REMITTAL

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Kenya who was born on 28 April 1953.   It
    is not clear when the appellant entered the UK.  However, he was issued
    with a visit visa valid from 23 July 2002 until 23 January 2003  during
    which time he entered the UK.  Thereafter, he has remained  in  the  UK
    without leave.

 2. On 25 May 2009, the appellant suffered a cerebral vascular event (dense
    haemorrhagic stroke) which  has  left  him  with  left-sided  weakness,
    reduced mobility and psychological consequences.  As a result  of  this
    event, the appellant has been in the care of Social  Services.   He  is
    currently resident in a  care  home  in  the  Plymouth  area  where  he
    receives 24 hour care.

 3. In October 2010, the Plymouth Social Services informed  UKBA  that  the
    appellant wished to  return  to  Kenya  and  on  27  October  2010  the
    appellant was served with a decision to remove him  as  an  overstayer.
    However, the appellant changed his mind about returning  to  Kenya  and
    did not leave the UK.  On 30 March 2012,  he  made  an  application  to
    remain in the UK relying on Arts 3 and 8 of the ECHR.  The basis of his
    claim was his medical condition.  On 11 October 2013, the Secretary  of
    State refused the appellant's claim for leave relying upon Arts 3 and 8
    of the ECHR.  Further, on that date, the  Secretary  of  State  made  a
    further decision to remove the appellant as an overstayer under s.10 of
    the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

 4. The appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  appeal  was
    heard by Judge Britton on 7 July 2014.  The appellant  did  not  attend
    and was not  represented.   Judge  Britton  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal on  the  basis  that  it  had  not  been  established  that  the
    appellant's removal would breach Arts 2, 3  or  8  of  the  ECHR.   The
    appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal on the basis  that  the  judge
    had failed to consider an application for an adjournment  made  on  the
    day  of  the   hearing   in   writing   by   the   appellant's   (then)
    representatives,  Duncan  Lewis  Solicitors  on  the  basis  that   the
    appellant was unwell to travel to court.

 5. On 14 August 2014, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge P J  M  Hollingworth)
    granted the appellant permission to appeal.

 6. Thus, the appeal came before me.

 7. The hearing of this appeal was arranged at Plymouth Magistrates'  Court
    because the  appellant's  carers  had  indicated  by  letter  dated  12
    September 2014 that the appellant was unable to travel to  the  hearing
    centre in South Wales.  The  care  home  would,  however,  be  able  to
    support his attendance at a hearing in the Plymouth area.  That  matter
    was considered at a 'for mention' hearing before me on 27 January  2015
    together with a letter dated  1  August  2014  in  which  Duncan  Lewis
    informed the Tribunal that  they  were  no  longer  instructed  by  the
    appellant.

 8. At the hearing  at  Plymouth  Magistrates'  Court,  Ms  Amanda  Knapper
    informed me that she was now instructed by the appellant but  that  she
    had been unable to take full instructions from  the  appellant  in  the
    time available.  She nevertheless indicated that she was in a  position
    to make submissions in relation to the error of law issue  even  though
    she had no instructions on the substantive merits  of  the  appellant's
    appeal.

 9. Mr Richards, who represented the respondent, agreed that the  error  of
    law issue  should  be  determined  initially  and,  if  established,  a
    subsequent hearing would be necessary.

10. Ms Knapper submitted that the appellant had  made  an  application  for
    adjournment based upon the fact that he was unwell to travel  to  court
    on the day of the hearing.  The judge had made  no  reference  to  that
    application in his adjournment and as a result the appellant  had  been
    denied a fair hearing on the basis of a procedural irregularity.

11. Mr Richards accepted that the adjournment application had been made but
    submitted that any error was immaterial as no unfairness arose from the
    judge's failure to consider the adjournment application.   Mr  Richards
    accepted  that  the  appellant  clearly  does   have   serious   health
    difficulties but there was no indication that the  failure  to  adjourn
    had produced any prejudice.  He  submitted  that  there  were  no  real
    credibility issues in the  appeal.   The  key  issue  was  whether  the
    appellant's health condition met the threshold for Arts 2 or 8  of  the
    ECHR.  Mr Richards submitted that the judge had ample basis to conclude
    that it did not.

12. It is accepted that  the  appellant's  (then)  representatives,  Duncan
    Lewis, made a written application to the Tribunal on  the  day  of  the
    hearing to adjourn that hearing on the basis  that  the  appellant  was
    "too unwell to travel to the court".  The letter continues:

         "This conversation was in the last hour, and as such we do not  yet
         have any medical evidence  to  support  this.   The  appellant  did
         inform us that the GP had been called to see him this morning after
         a particularly difficult night".

13. Of course, the background, which would have been obvious to the  judge,
    is that the appellant has serious health difficulties as  a  result  of
    his stroke and is resident in a care home where he receives  round-the-
    clock care.

14. It is a fundamental tenet of justice that a litigant should have a fair
    opportunity to attend any judicial proceedings in which he is involved.
     There is, of course, no absolute right to attend  a  hearing  and  the
    (then) Procedure Rules for the First-tier Tribunal recognise  a  number
    of situations where a Tribunal may hear an appeal in the absence  of  a
    party (see rule 19 of the Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)
    Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230 as amended)).  Similar provisions can be  found
    in the current Tribunal Procedure Rules 2014 (SI 2014/2604) in rule 25.

15. It does not seem that the adjournment application was  brought  to  the
    attention of the judge.  It had, nevertheless, been made  and  that  is
    accepted by Mr Richards on behalf of the respondent.  Through no  fault
    of his own, the  judge  erred  in  law  by  failing  to  consider  that
    adjournment application.  The application had been  made  but  was  not
    made known to the Judge.  Given  the  circumstances  of  the  appellant
    identified in the Tribunal's papers, the judge (had he  considered  the
    application)  would  have  been  faced  with  an  appellant   who   had
    demonstrable  health  problems  and  lived  in  a  residential  home  a
    considerable distance from the hearing  centre  in  Newport.   On  that
    evidence, I am unable to conclude that the judge would have necessarily
    refused the application.  Indeed, the application had, in  my  view,  a
    strong prospect of success.   The  appellant  was,  as  a  consequence,
    denied an opportunity to attend the hearing of his appeal.   I  do  not
    accept Mr Richards' submission that the loss of  that  opportunity  was
    not unfair because no issues of credibility arose and the key issue was
    whether the appellant's health condition  was  such  as  to  cross  the
    threshold to establish a breach of Art 3 or 8 of the ECHR.  The  denial
    of an opportunity to attend his hearing, in the circumstances  of  this
    appeal, was in itself unfair - it removed his opportunity to attend his
    own proceedings.  In any  event,  one  of  the  issues  in  the  appeal
    concerned the family circumstances of the appellant in Kenya.   He  was
    denied an opportunity to give any oral evidence relevant to that issue.



16. For all these reasons, there was a procedural irregularity amounting to
    an error of law in the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal.

17. At the conclusion of the representatives' submissions, I indicated that
    was my decision.  I invited submissions on whether the appeal should be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal or retained in the Upper  Tribunal.
    Ms Knapper invited me to remit the appeal and Mr Richards invited me to
    retain it in the Upper Tribunal.

18. In my judgment, the proper course for this appeal is that it should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.  The nature of the error of law is
    such that the appellant has effectively  been  denied  a  first  appeal
    hearing and that error can only properly  be  cured  by  remitting  the
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing at which the  appellant
    can attend.

Decision and Disposal

19. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal involved the making of an error of law.  That  decision  is  set
    aside.

20. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  heard  by  a
    judge  other  than  Judge  Britton.    Because   of   the   appellant's
    circumstances, which prevent  him  from  attending  a  hearing  at  the
    Newport Hearing Centre, I invite the First-tier  Tribunal  to  seek  to
    list the appeal (as was the appeal before me) in Plymouth.



                                                                      Signed





                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal





