

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/53753/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 8th September 2014                         |On 9th September 2014        |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                          ADEBAYO OLUWAGBENGA AINA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr M Mathews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant appeals a decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which
      dismissed his appeal against a decision to refuse him a residence card
      in accordance with the Immigration (European Economic Are) Regulations
      2006 dated 17th December 2013 on the grounds that  he  had  failed  to
      produce adequate evidence that his spouse (a British Citizen) had been
      working or self employed in another member state prior  to  coming  to
      the UK.


   2. Permission to appeal had  been  granted  on  the  basis  that  it  was
      arguable that the First-tier  Tribunal  judge  had  erred  in  law  in
      concluding that the time spent by  the  appellant's  wife  working  in
      Germany did not engage regulation 9 of the Regulations and  had  erred
      in law as regards his conclusions on Article 8.

   3. The appellant had a deportation  order  signed  against  him  on  11th
      January 2011 and was deported pursuant to that order. He  subsequently
      lived with his wife in Germany, having earlier failed to gain entry to
      Ireland. He returned to the UK and applied for a residence  card,  the
      refusal of which is the subject of this appeal.

   4. The First-tier Tribunal judge considered the appeal in accordance with
      regulation 9. he failed to have regard to  regulation  19  (1A)  which
      states that

             A person is not entitled to be admitted to the United  Kingdom
             by virtue of regulation 11 if that  person  is  subject  to  a
             deportation or exclusion order.


   5. Mr Aina drew attention to the respondent's policy statements which, he
      stated, set out the issues the Secretary of State is to have regard to
      in  determining  whether  to  revoke  a  deportation  order  made   in
      circumstances such as those applicable  to  this  appellant.  Although
      these appear relevant it was however clear that the Secretary of State
      had herself failed to treat the application for a residence permit not
      only as such an application but also, as seems to be  usual  practice,
      to treat the application as an application to revoke  the  deportation
      order.


   6. In  these  circumstances  it  was  agreed  by  the  parties  that  the
      determination of the First-tier Tribunal judge be set aside because of
      an error of law in failing to consider the appeal in  accordance  with
      the Regulations and in particular regulation  19  and  that  I  should
      remake the decision.

   7. In remaking the decision I am satisfied that the  Secretary  of  State
      failed to reach a decision on whether the deportation order should  be
      revoked and thereafter on whether the  appellant  was  entitled  to  a
      residence card. The Secretary of State has failed to reach a  decision
      on the application before her and I therefore find the decision to  be
      not in accordance with the law.

   8. The matter is remitted to the Secretary of State for a lawful decision
      to be made.

          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

     I set aside the decision

     I re-make the decision and find the decision of the Secretary of  State
to be not in accordance with the law.

     Consequential Directions


   The matter to be remitted to the Secretary of State for a lawful decision
   to be made.



                                    Date 8th September 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
