
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/53630/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 16th July 2014                               |On 21st July 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER

                                   Between

                               MRS JOYANNE ADU
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Darko
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 3rd September 1979 is a citizen  of  Ghana.   The
    Appellant  was  represented  by  Miss  Darko.    The   Respondent   was
    represented by Mr Harrison, a Home Office Presenting Officer.

Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant had made application for a residence card as confirmation
    of a right to reside in the United Kingdom.  The Respondent had refused
    that application and the refusal letter was dated  6th  December  2013.
    The Appellant had appealed that decision and her appeal  was  heard  by
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Chambers sitting at Manchester on 14th
    April 2014.  He allowed the  appeal.   Application  for  permission  to
    appeal was made by the Respondent and granted by Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Page on 23rd May 2014.  The grant of  permission  was  on
    the basis that the judge had not considered the decision in the case of
    Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT 00024 promulgated on 16th
    January 2014.  The matter came before me in  order  to  firstly  decide
    whether an error of law had been made in this case.

The Respondent's Submissions

 3. Mr Harrison adopted  the  application  for  permission  to  appeal  and
    further noted that the case of Kareem had been endorsed in the decision
    of TA Ghana [2014] UKUT 00316.

The Appellant's Submissions

 4. Miss Darko properly conceded that the judge had made an error of law in
    not considering the case of Kareem involving as  this  case  did  proxy
    marriages and whether such marriage in the form that it took would have
    been valid under the law of the EEA  national  country  namely  France.
    She further stated that submissions at the hearing had been made as  an
    alternative  to  the  question  of  marriage  on  the  grounds  of  the
    durability of the  relationship  under  Regulation  8(5)  of  the  2006
    Regulations although it does not appear that this had been  dealt  with
    by the judge.

 5. I said that I would provide a decision with reasons on the question  of
    the error of law in this case.  I now provide that decision.

Decision and Reasons

 6. Firstly, as conceded by both representatives there was an error of  law
    made by the judge in the First-tier Tribunal in terms of on the face of
    it failing to apply the decision in Kareem concerning the  validity  of
    proxy marriages.  The decision in Kareem has been recently endorsed  in
    the decision of TA where it said  that  the  determination  of  whether
    there is a marital relationship for the  purposes  of  the  Immigration
    (EEA) Regulations 2006 must always be examined in accordance  with  the
    laws  of  the  Member  State  from  which  the  union  citizen  obtains
    nationality.  In this case that would be France.

 7. Further it was perhaps incumbent upon the judge  in  terms  of  Section
    84(1)(d) of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  to
    consider whether the decision in respect of entry to  or  residence  in
    the United Kingdom breached the Appellant's rights under the  community
    treaties.  That would have  included  an  examination  of  whether  the
    Appellant was in a durable relationship with her EEA  national  partner
    as understood and within the terms  of  Regulation  8(5)  of  the  2006
    Regulations.  That would have been an alternative  matter  to  consider
    irrespective of the validity of the proxy marriage.

 8. For the above reasons therefore I find that an error of law material in
    its consequence was made by the First-tier Tribunal in  this  case  and
    set aside that decision and issue directions for that  decision  to  be
    made afresh.






Signed                          Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever
