
                                    [pic]

           In the Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                                                                 JR/493/2016
Heard at Field House
On 13 October 2017



             IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?

                                   Between

                       The Queen on the Application of

                                  SOFIA [M]
                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


            Application for judicial review: substantive decision

Having considered  all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  the  parties'
respective representatives,  Mr  M  Symes  of  Counsel,  instructed  by  Sky
Solicitors,  on  behalf  of  the  Applicant  and  Mr  W  Irwin  of  Counsel,
instructed by the Government Legal Department, on behalf of the  Respondent,
at a hearing at Field House, London on 13 October 2017.

Decision: the application for judicial review is refused


                                  JUDGMENT

      1. This is an application for judicial review,  filed  on  21  January
         2016, with permission granted on 13 December 2016 by Parker LJ  and
         remitted by consent to the Upper Tribunal on 3  April  2017.    The
         application for permission  had  been  previously  refused  on  the
         papers by Judge Jacobs on 1 April 2016.

      2. The challenge is in respect of the  respondent's  decision,  on  27
         October 2015, to refuse the applicant's application for  indefinite
         leave to remain under  the  Tier  1  route  and  to  maintain  that
         decision upon administrative review on 18 December 2015.




    Background

      3. The applicant, a Pakistani national born on 24 April 1978,  entered
         the UK as a Tier 1 (general) Migrant on  9  July  2009  with  leave
         until 13 May 2012. She was accompanied  by  three  dependants:  her
         husband, [M S] (DOB: 10 January 1978) and their two daughters, [Z1]
         and [Z2] (born respectively on 12  January  2005  and  20  February
         2009). A third child, [W], was born in the UK on 26 May 2010.

      4. On 8 October 2010, the applicant left the UK to travel to  Pakistan
         to visit her sick grandmother. Her young son accompanied her on  an
         emergency travel document  issued  by  the  Pakistani  authorities.
         Although it is maintained for  the  applicant  that  the  remaining
         children stayed in the UK with  their  father  during  her  absence
         (AB:11 and grounds to the Court  of  Appeal  at  17  and  26),  the
         evidence demonstrates that, in fact, both travelled with her to and
         from Pakistan (AB: 53-58). Her  husband  also  accompanied  her  to
         Pakistan but appears only to have stayed  until  23  November  2010
         (AB:47-48).

      5. On 6 May 2011, the applicant applied on her son's behalf for  entry
         clearance. This was refused on 23 May 2011. On 6 July 2011, another
         application/request for reconsideration was made (see paragraph  31
         below for details). This time it was successful and entry clearance
         was granted on 13 July 2011.  On  23  August  2011,  the  applicant
         returned to the UK with her three children.

      6. On 10 May 2012, the applicant sought further Tier 1 leave with  her
         dependants. This was  refused  on  2  August  2012.  The  applicant
         appealed. On 14 November 2012 her appeal was allowed and on 1  July
         2013 she was granted leave until 1 July 2015. I have not  seen  any
         papers relating to that refusal or to the appeal.

      7. On 25 June 2015, the applicant sought indefinite leave  to  remain.
         The refusal of her application has led to  these  proceedings.  Her
         dependants have not been included in this claim.

      8. The respondent refused the application under paragraph 245CD(c)  of
         HC395 (as amended). She found that the applicant had  not  shown  a
         continuous five-year period of lawful residence  as  she  had  been
         absent from the UK  for  318  days  which  was  in  excess  of  the
         permissible  period  of  absence  of  180  days  (under   paragraph
         245AAA(a)(i).

      9. The applicant requested that discretion be exercised in her favour.
         She explained that her absence was due to the illness and death  of
         her grandmother, the illness of her father  and  the  processes  of
         obtaining a passport and  entry  clearance  for  her  son.  In  her
         administrative review application, another reason was added. It was
         maintained that she had to wait to  build  up  funds  to  meet  the
         maintenance requirements for entry clearance.




    The Hearing

     10. The hearing proceeded on 13 October 2017 when I  heard  submissions
         from the parties on their respective cases.

     11. Reliance was placed by the applicant on the judgment of  EK  (Ivory
         Coast) [2014] EWCA Civ 1517.

     12. Mr Symes relied on his skeleton argument.  He  submitted  that  the
         applicant had returned to Pakistan on 8 October 2010 with her young
         son and her delayed return  was  caused  by  several  factors.  Her
         grandmother had been ill and passed away in November 2010. She then
         had to apply for a passport for her son who  had  travelled  on  an
         Emergency Travel Document.  Following  on  from  my  enquiries,  Mr
         Symes took instructions from the  applicant  and  stated  that  the
         application process for the passport had commenced "at the  end  of
         November 2010". The applicant then applied for entry clearance  for
         her son in May 2011 which was eventually granted.  Her  father  was
         also seriously ill but, nevertheless, she travelled back to the  UK
         on 23 August 2011. In  her  administrative  review  application,  a
         further reason was raised; that she had to show adequate funds  for
         a period of 90 days prior to  the  making  of  an  entry  clearance
         application. The applicant tried to make an application  for  entry
         clearance for her son in March  2011  but  the  earliest  available
         appointment had been in May 2011.

     13.  Mr  Symes  submitted  that  the  respondent's  guidance  was   not
         specifically referred to in the  decision  letter.  An  exceptional
         circumstance that could be taken into account by the respondent was
         the serious illness of a close relative. Mr  Symes  submitted  that
         the applicant's father must have  been  very  ill,  given  that  he
         passed away some weeks after her return to the UK. All the  factors
         which delayed her return were out  of  her  control.  Reliance  was
         placed on EK (Ivory Coast).

     14. Whilst Mr Symes accepted that the arguments on the  best  interests
         of  the  applicant's   children   were   only   made   during   the
         administrative review process, he  submitted  that  they  had  been
         mentioned earlier and letters from their school had been submitted.
         He submitted that as Tier 1 was  a  route  to  settlement,  it  was
         obvious  that  the  applicant  would  encourage  her  children   to
         integrate  into  British  society.  Mr  Symes  submitted  that  the
         respondent's treatment of the welfare of the children was  generic.
         It had been in her son's best interests to travel to Pakistan  with
         her because he was so young but the bureaucracy necessitated by his
         travel back had caused much of the delay. There was enough  in  the
         evidence to show that  the  respondent  acted  unlawfully  and  had
         failed to engage with all the evidence.

     15. Mr Irwin responded. He submitted that according  to  the  law,  the
         applicant was required to spend a requisite amount of time  in  the
         UK and that no more than an absence of 180 days  was  permitted  in
         any 12-month period of the five years leading up to the date of the
         application. In accordance with the guidance, there were exceptions
         to the rule but the test was a high one and the examples given were
         of  serious  illnesses  or  natural  disasters  such  as   volcanic
         eruptions. He questioned whether the refusal of the  respondent  to
         exercise her discretion was irrational in the Wednesbury  sense  on
         the basis of what had been initially put in  the  application.  The
         three  matters  raised  at  that  time   were   the   grandmother's
         illness/death, the child's passport and  entry  clearance  and  the
         applicant's father's illness. All these issues were comprehensively
         dealt with in the decision letter which identified  the  discretion
         to be exercised, summarised the facts put forward and  provided  an
         explanation as to why the application was rejected.

     16. Mr Irwin submitted that it had never previously been mentioned that
         the passport had only been sought  at  the  end  of  November.  The
         applicant had, however, been aware that this needed to be done  and
         she should not have delayed  in  making  the  application  for  the
         document. With regard to the delay in obtaining entry clearance, Mr
         Irwin pointed out that by the date of the application the applicant
         was already outside the permitted period of absence. With regard to
         the father's illness, Mr Irwin submitted that the death certificate
         stated that there had been a three-day illness  and  there  was  no
         medical evidence to confirm a lengthy period of serious illness  or
         the need for the applicant to be there to care for  him.  Moreover,
         her return undermined the claim that her presence was required.  He
         submitted that the respondent rationally  decided  the  application
         and refused to exercise her discretion.

     17. With  respect  to  the  administrative  review  process,  Mr  Irwin
         submitted that this was designed to correct any case working errors
         and was not an opportunity to provide new information or  evidence.
         He relied on Appendix AR of the  Immigration  Rules.  He  submitted
         that the respondent had taken account of  the  new  arguments  made
         although she  had  not  been  obliged  to.  She  also  undertook  a
         consideration of the best interests  of  the  children  under  s.55
         although no human rights claim had  been  made.  Her  decision  was
         wholly  rational  and   her   conclusion   that   the   applicant's
         circumstances  were  not  compelling  within  the  meaning  of  the
         guidance was unarguably one that was open to her on  the  available
         evidence.

     18. Mr Irwin submitted that the applicant was already  aware  when  she
         left the UK that her son would need a passport and entry  clearance
         and that she would need to show evidence of funds. She  had  failed
         to provide any evidence that her funds had  been  depleted  by  her
         journey and  absence.  Further,  her  grandmother  passed  away  in
         November 2010, long before an application for entry  clearance  had
         been made. Whilst it was accepted that an appointment was  required
         in order to make an application, there was no documentary  evidence
         to show that earlier attempts had been made. The failure  to  carry
         out bureaucratic tasks was, therefore, the applicant's fault.

     19. In reply, Mr Symes submitted that the passport application was made
         within a short time of the grandmother's death. He submitted it was
         inevitable that the applicant would have funding issues as she left
         her business for an extended period. He referred me to  a  doctor's
         letter which confirmed that the applicant's father had  been  under
         severe stress after his mother passed away and  he  submitted  that
         showed  the  father  had  been  sufficiently  ill  to  require  the
         applicant's presence. If it had not been for the six-week delay  in
         getting an entry clearance appointment, the period of absence would
         have been less than  180  days.  The  guidance  should  be  applied
         responsibly and the delay in getting  an  appointment  should  have
         been taken into account. EK (at paragraph 38) was applicable as the
         delay was due to the respondent's procedures.   When  granting  the
         application, the permission judge expressed a view that there was a
         good reason for the delay.

     20. Both parties made submissions on  costs  and  I  then  reserved  my
         decision.




    Analysis and conclusions

     21. Having taken full account of the evidence and the submissions made,
         I reach the following conclusions.

     22. The basis for the respondent's refusal was that the  applicant  had
         not met the requirement set out  in  paragraphs  245CD  and  245AAA
         (a)(i) of the Immigration Rules that she must spend five continuous
         years resident in the UK prior to her  application  for  indefinite
         leave to remain and that she should not spend more  than  180  days
         outside the UK in any one year period. Paragraph 245CD(j)  provides
         that specified documents in 245CD-SD must be provided  to  evidence
         the reason(s) for absence. These documents must include a  personal
         letter from the applicant explaining the reasons  for  the  absence
         and original  documents  in  support.  The  respondent's  guidance:
         Guidance - ILR - calculating continuous period  in  the  UK  V.12.0
         includes the provision that ILR may be granted in cases  where  the
         applicant has been absent in excess of the permitted  period  where
         there is evidence of  "serious  and  compelling  reasons"  for  the
         excessive absence.

     23. As the application for indefinite leave to remain was  made  on  25
         June 2015, the five-year period commenced  on  25  June  2010.  The
         applicant was outside the UK for 318 days between  8  October  2010
         and 23 August 2011 but that period fell  across  two  separate  12-
         month periods. The period with the excessive absence was June  2010
         - June 2011 and the applicant spent  259  days  away  from  the  UK
         during that time. The 180-day period of permissible  absence  ended
         on 6 April 2011 (the trigger date). Fifty-  nine  days  were  spent
         away over the following 12-month period.

     24. It is accepted by the respondent that a relative's serious  illness
         is capable of amounting to an exceptional reason for absence but it
         is a matter for the  exercise  of  discretion.  Other  examples  of
         serious or compelling reasons for an absence are also set  out  but
         none of these apply to the applicant's circumstances.

     25. I find no merit in the complaint  that  the  respondent  failed  to
         refer  to  her  guidance  in  her  decision  letter.  There  is  no
         obligation  on  the  respondent  to  specify  the  guidance   being
         considered and applied. It is sufficient, in my view, that she  was
         cognisant of the fact that  she  had  a  discretion  and  that  she
         considered all the facts and evidence when deciding whether or  not
         to exercise it.

     26. I now turn to the facts and evidence before the respondent when she
         made  her  decision,  bearing  in  mind  the  trigger   date.   The
         applicant's grandmother was said to have  been  seriously  ill  and
         that illness prompted the applicant's visit. There is  no  evidence
         of the illness in the papers. She is said to have passed away on 25
         November 2010 and a death certificate is contained in  the  bundle.
         Although the death was not registered until 23 January 2012,  which
         is when the certificate was issued, the respondent has not disputed
         its contents. The certificate, however, refers  to  the  period  of
         illness as 15 days. That would mean it commenced on  or  around  10
         November 2010 which does not accord with the applicant's  claim  of
         having had to travel back on 8 October 2010 because her grandmother
         was seriously ill.  However,  the  respondent  has  not  sought  to
         dispute the period of illness and both the illness  and  the  death
         were considered in the decision  letter  (AB:18-19).  The  skeleton
         argument is wrong to maintain  (at  paragraph  15)  that  this  was
         discounted.

     27. The applicant also maintained that she was delayed by her  father's
         illness and subsequent death. The respondent has taken  issue  with
         this. Firstly, the death occurred after the applicant's  return  to
         the UK so it could not have delayed  her  in  any  way  and  it  is
         misleading to argue otherwise (AB:10 and skeleton argument at  16).
         Secondly, although she claimed that her  father's  condition  meant
         she had to stay on  in  Pakistan  to  look  after  him,  his  death
         certificate suggests that he had  been  ill  for  just  three  days
         preceding his death on 3 September 2011. I have been  taken  by  Mr
         Symes to a letter from a doctor in support of  his  submissions  on
         this point however that is dated 6 April 2015 and only supports the
         contents of the death certificate as it states that he was admitted
         to hospital "in September". I accept that the  letter  also  states
         that Mr Majeed had heart conditions for which he received treatment
         in 1990 and 2005 (other medical evidence also supports the claim of
         treatment in 2005), but there is no  suggestion  that  he  had  any
         ongoing issues. I also accept that the  letter  maintains  that  Mr
         Majeed was under severe stress after his mother's death;  but  this
         again, is not a  serious  illness.  I  accept  that  the  applicant
         accompanied her father to the doctor during his  period  of  stress
         but given that there were many other family members there  to  care
         after him, including her mother and other  siblings,  the  evidence
         does not demonstrate that the applicant's presence was vital. I  do
         not accept Mr Symes' submission that Mr Majeed's death in September
         2011 is evidence that he must have been seriously  ill  during  the
         applicant's  stay.  Deaths  can  occur  suddenly  or  after   short
         illnesses just as often as after  prolonged  periods  of  sickness.
         Having taken the applicant's father's circumstances  into  account,
         the respondent's conclusion that this was not a  compelling  reason
         for the exercise of discretion was not irrational.

     28. The other factors put forward by the applicant were also considered
         by the respondent. I take first, the issue of the  son's  passport.
         This was issued  on  21  January  2011.  There  is  no  independent
         evidence at all in support of the claims made in  this  respect  by
         the applicant and that is a significant failing on her part.  There
         is no evidence to show when  the  application  was  first  made  or
         whether it was followed up if there was a delay. Given that  [Z2]'s
         passport was issued on 9 March 2009  just  days  after  her  birth,
         there is no apparent reason why the issue of [W]'s passport  should
         have  taken  so  much  longer.  It  would  have  been  helpful  had
         documentary evidence relating to the date of  the  application  and
         any  other  correspondence  with  the  Pakistani  authorities  been
         provided.  Even if the application was made at the end of  November
         2010, as is claimed, that is some  seven  weeks  after  arrival  in
         Pakistan and there are no reasons offered for  why  an  application
         was not made earlier. Mr Symes argues that the applicant  was  busy
         with sick relatives but even if that was the case, her husband  was
         with her until the end of November and  he  could  have  lodged  an
         application  for  their  son  knowing  that  a  passport  would  be
         required.

     29. There is also no documentary evidence to  support  the  applicant's
         claim that attempts were made to obtain an earlier entry  clearance
         appointment, nothing to show when the first approach was  made  and
         nothing to confirm the claim that no  appointments  were  available
         until 11 May 2011. It is not known whether the applicant  explained
         her predicament to the British authorities.

     30. The evidence shows that entry clearance was initially refused on 23
         May 2011. A copy of the reasons for refusal are not included in the
         papers but,  as  pointed  out  by  the  applicant,  the  respondent
         acknowledges the visa  was  erroneously  refused  in  her  decision
         letter. By that point, however, the applicant  had  already  passed
         the trigger date and had spent 226 days outside the UK.

     31. The grounds and various letters from representatives in the  bundle
         are confusing as to  what  happened  next.  I  am  unclear  whether
         another application for entry clearance was made (AB:65 and grounds
         for  permission  to  the  Court  of  Appeal  at  17)   or   whether
         reconsideration was sought (A's skeleton argument). The letter of 1
         July 2011 from the  applicant's  solicitors  is  also  unclear.  It
         refers to the errors made by the ECO but then appears to include an
         application form for entry clearance (AB:68-69). Whichever  it  is,
         however, there is no explanation for why the applicant waited  from
         the date of the refusal on 23 May 2011 until 1 July  2011  to  make
         the next application/request for reconsideration.

     32. The funding issue was not raised anywhere in the papers  until  the
         administrative review.  Again,  this  argument  is  plagued  by  an
         absence of documentary evidence. There is no evidence to show  that
         the applicant's funds were depleted by  her  visit,  nor  is  there
         evidence to show that they were built up again and  no  explanation
         as to how funds were obtained if the applicant was in Pakistan  and
         not working in her business. No details are provided as to what the
         journey to Pakistan cost or whether  further  funds  were  required
         during the applicant's  stay  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  she
         stated she was staying with her family. Had this been a reason  for
         the  delay  in  making  an  entry  clearance  application,  it   is
         reasonable to expect that it  would  have  been  mentioned  to  the
         respondent when the reasons for the excessive  absence  were  first
         put forward.

     33. It is incorrect as maintained in the skeleton argument (at 16) that
         the applicant returned to the UK "with  such  dispatch"  after  the
         issue of her son's visa, that she was not present when  her  father
         passed away. The evidence is that there was  a  further  period  of
         delay between the issue of entry clearance on 13 July 2011 and  the
         family's return on 23 August 2011.  The  reason  for  this  is  not
         addressed anywhere in the evidence.

     34. The applicant also argues that s.55 was not properly considered.  I
         have seen the application for indefinite leave  to  remain  and  it
         makes no reference at all to the best interests  of  the  children.
         Nor is there anything to even remotely suggest that leave on  human
         rights grounds was sought.  The respondent  nevertheless  undertook
         an assessment  of  the  best  interests  of  the  children  on  the
         extremely limited information she had (AB: 20-21).  She  cannot  be
         criticised for that. A further assessment was undertaken during the
         course of the administrative review process (AB:26). Contrary to Mr
         Symes' submissions, the documents in the bundle from the children's
         school were not initially placed before the respondent.  Certainly,
         the arguments now made with regard to the schooling of the children
         are undermined by the fact that both girls missed several months of
         school whilst they were in  Pakistan.  No  other  reasons  are  put
         forward for why their welfare would  be  adversely  affected  by  a
         return to Pakistan with their parents and where they have  a  large
         extended family.

     35.  I  conclude,  therefore,  that   there   have   been   significant
         shortcomings in the documentary evidence supplied by the  applicant
         to  support  her  case.  The  respondent  properly  considered  the
         evidence and the reasons put forward by the  applicant  to  explain
         her lengthy absence from the UK, that she had her  policy  in  mind
         when  doing  so  and  that  she  applied  it   flexibly   and   not
         restrictively  as  is  claimed.  This  is   demonstrated   by   her
         willingness  to  consider  photocopied  documentary  evidence   and
         information submitted for the  first  time  in  the  administrative
         review process. There was no  irrationality  or  other  public  law
         error in the respondent's conclusion that there were no serious  or
         compelling reasons to waive the requirement in the rules  for  five
         continuous years' residence with less than 180 days of absence over
         a 12-month period. I take note of Mr  Symes'  submission  that  the
         judge who granted permission expressed a view on the  case  however
         that was limited to it being arguable and was not a finding on  the
         substantive issues.




    Order

     36. I order that the judicial review application be refused.




    Permission to appeal

     37. Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal is refused.  There  was
         no unfairness to the applicant and the Tribunal's consideration  of
         the claim was not based on irrelevancies as can be  seen  from  the
         above. The applicant accepts  that  she  overstayed  the  permitted
         period during a 12-month period and  the  precise  number  of  days
         stayed is immaterial given that  she  was  well  over  the  maximum
         allowed. There were no  striking  features  as  is  argued  in  the
         grounds. This was not a human rights application but the respondent
         nevertheless undertook a s.55 assessment on  the  limited  evidence
         submitted to her. The grounds (at  paragraph  4)  misrepresent  the
         Tribunal's conclusions.




    Costs

     38. The applicant shall pay the respondent's reasonable  costs,  to  be
         assessed if not agreed.




   Signed:
   [pic]
   Dr R Keki?
   Upper Tribunal Judge
   Date of preparation: 26 October 2017
   Handed down on: 6 November 2017






Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------
 Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

 A party may appeal against such a decision to the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3.













