

                                                                      UTIJR6

                                                                JR/1572/2020

                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber

                       Judicial Review Decision Notice


                     The Queen on the application of WA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent



                      Before Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt


Representation:
For the Applicant:     Mr H Southey QC, Mr D Chirico and Miss  A  Nizami  of
                    Counsel, instructed by J D Spicer Zeb solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Broadfoot QC and Ms J Smyth  instructed  by  the
                    Government Legal Department



                                  JUDGMENT


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  applicant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the applicant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Having considered  all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  the  parties'
respective representatives, Mr H Southey QC, of Counsel, instructed by  J  D
Spicer Zeb, on behalf of the applicant and Ms S Broadfoot  QC,  of  Counsel,
instructed by the Government Legal Department, on behalf of the  respondent,
at a remote hearing at Field House, London on 15 September 2020.

 1) The applicant (WA) challenges the refusal of the  respondent  to  amend
    his Biometric Residence Permit (BRP) to reflect WA's  claimed  date  of
    birth (29 December 1994) rather than the assigned  date  of  birth  (19
    April 1989).  The respondent's most recent  decision  setting  out  her
    refusal to amend the BRP was issued on 14 July 2020.

 2) The applicant maintains that the refusal to amend the date of birth  in
    the BRP to reflect his claimed date of birth amounts  to  a  breach  of
    Articles 2 and 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR)  and
    is irrational.

Background

 3) WA is a young man born in Gaza in the Occupied Palestinian territories.



 4) At a young age he was severely mistreated by Hamas for refusing to  act
    as a suicide bomber.  His family arranged for him to  flee  Gaza.   The
    applicant maintains that at that time his grandmother told him that his
    date  of  birth  was  29  December  1994  and  gave  him  documentation
    confirming this which was lost during his journey to Italy.

 5) The respondent maintains that WA  was  fingerprinted  in  Italy  on  22
    December 2003 but this is disputed by the applicant.  It is  undisputed
    that he was fingerprinted by the Italian  authorities  on  23  February
    2005 and 23 August 2005.

 6) The applicant then arrived in the UK on 31 May 2007 and claimed asylum.



    First Age Assessment - 4 June 2007

 7) On 4 June 2007 an age  assessment  was  conducted  by  Reading  Borough
    Council.  That age assessment is at E14 of the bundle of materials.  An
    age assessment was required as the applicant did not  have  a  reliable
    identity document showing his date of birth or supporting  his  claimed
    age. The duty to establish whether he was a minor  fell  to  the  local
    authority under the Children Act 1989.

 8) During the age assessment conducted  in  2007,  the  applicant  gave  a
    different date of birth to his current claimed age, maintaining that he
    was born on 19 April 1993; see E22. According to that date of birth  he
    would have been 14 years old at the date of the  assessment.  According
    to the applicant's current claimed age he would have been 12 years  old
    at the time of the 2007 age assessment. Reading Borough  Council  found
    him to be an adult aged between 18 and 20 years.  The  assessment  from
    2007 also shows at E22 that the applicant's evidence at that  time  was
    that he knew his date of birth because "his  mother  had  informed  him
    throughout his childhood."

 9) The respondent  acted  upon  the  age  identified  by  Reading  Borough
    Council, treated him as an adult and returned him to Italy on 24 August
    2007.

10) The applicant returned to the UK on  12  May  2009  and  again  claimed
    asylum.

    Second Age Assessment - 4 March 2009

11) On his return, the applicant continued to maintain that he was a  child
    and another age assessment was conducted. This assessment was  made  by
    Gloucestershire County Council.  A  copy  of  this  assessment  is  not
    available. There is a summary of it in a later (fourth) age  assessment
    conducted in 2012; see E50-E51. The summary indicates that at the  time
    of the assessment on 4 March 2009 the applicant gave his date of  birth
    as 29 January 1994 and so was claiming to be 15 years old and  more  or
    less  a  year  older  than  his  current   claimed   date   of   birth.
    Notwithstanding production of a birth certificate with the date  of  29
    January 1994 and an identity document made  in  Libya,  Gloucestershire
    County Council did not accept the date of birth of 29 January  1994  or
    that the applicant was 15 years old. The local authority found  him  to
    be 16 years of age, that is two years older than he would have been  at
    that time according to his current claimed age; see  E51.   It  remains
    unclear what other information Gloucestershire County Council had  when
    the assessment was made or whether it was aware of the Reading  Borough
    Council 2007 assessment.

    Third Age Assessment - 20 March 2009

12) On 20 March 2009 the applicant underwent another age assessment.   This
    is at E28.  The document is handwritten and the entries  are  extremely
    brief or non-existent.   The  assessment  indicates  at  E28  that  the
    applicant was "very distressed" during the interview and  that  he  was
    having difficulty with  remembering  details  because  of  stress.   He
    appeared nervous.  On page E31 the writer of the report indicates  that
    the applicant presented as "a young person who could be any age between
    14 and 18" and that the "overwhelming impression is of someone  who  is
    afraid".

13) On page E32  the  applicant  is  reported  as  having  stated  that  he
    completed five years of primary education.  The sections on independent
    and self-care skills are left blank as is the  section  on  health  and
    medical assessment.  The assessment indicates on page E34 that at  that
    time the applicant was claiming to have been born on 29 December  1994,
    the date he currently maintains is  his  correct  date  of  birth.   He
    relied on another birth certificate showing his date of birth to be  29
    December 1994;  see  E34.   This  age  assessment  concluded  that  the
    applicant was 14 years of age and that his date of birth was  estimated
    to be 29 December 1994; see E35. That is consistent  with  his  current
    claimed date of birth.

    Fourth Age Assessment - 21 February 2012

14) A fourth age assessment was issued on 21 February 2012.  This  document
    is at E36. The assessment  was  conducted  by  an  organisation  called
    Independent Age Assessment on behalf of Gloucestershire County Council.
    It sets out on E36-E38 how  the  interviews  with  the  applicant  were
    conducted and the range of documents  that  were  taken  into  account.
    Those documents included the  earlier  age  assessments,  other  Social
    Services documents and documents from the  applicant's  asylum  claims.
    Over E39 to E54 the assessment sets out the  information  contained  in
    the documents that were considered. The analysis  of  that  information
    begins on page E55.  The writers of the report indicate:

         "It has not been possible to obtain a reliable account from [WA] of
         his history.  He has said he is unable to recall some events and it
         is noted that Dr [VDL] has stated  that  memory  lapses  can  be  a
         consequence of his anxiety and PTSD.

         There are remarkable inconsistencies in the  accounts  provided  by
         [WA] at different times ..."

15) The report also confirms that WA had, at different times, given a range
    of different dates for his date of birth. It indicates that there  were
    also documents with very  different  dates,  for  example,  an  Italian
    document showing his date of birth to be 10 May  1987.  A  letter  from
    Gloucestershire County Council dated 31 May 2011 (at E52)  stated  that
    there was a record of the applicant's date of birth being 19 April 1989
    as well as there being records of other dates of birth.

16) Having taken into account the applicant's birth  certificate,  his  own
    accounts, his physical presentation and his  behaviour  and  the  other
    documents considered, the 2012 age assessment concludes on E58:

         "It is very difficult to pinpoint [WA's] age.  The inconsistency of
         his own accounts render them unreliable and while his demeanour has
         been observed over a sustained period to be that of an  adolescent,
         his physical maturity is believed to be more persuasive evidence to
         inform an assessment of his age.  In 2007 Reading  Borough  Council
         concluded that he was then an adult: it does not appear  that  this
         was challenged at  the  time  and  its  outcome  would  be  broadly
         consistent with this assessment.  Hence it is concluded  that  [WA]
         was at least 18 years of age in mid-2007, and  so  was  nearing  20
         when he presented to Gloucestershire County Council in  the  spring
         of 2009.

         It is possible that one of the dates of birth provided by  [WA]  at
         different times is correct and on the basis  of  the  above  it  is
         believed the one which is most likely to be accurate  is  19  April
         1989.  However, in the light of  the  range  of  information  which
         needs to be taken into account it is accepted that there  could  be
         (sic) fairly wide a margin of error in this: it  is  believed  very
         unlikely that he is as much as two years younger than this date but
         could be as much as three years older."

17) The 19 April 1989 date of birth was taken from a Gloucestershire County
    Council record; setting out some of the dates of birth recorded for the
    applicant; see E52. The 2012 age assessment concluded that this was the
    most likely date when all of the evidence was considered in the  round.
    The 2012 assessment also allows for the applicant's date of birth to be
    as early as 19 April 1986 but unlikely to be as late as 19 April  1991.
    The  respondent  appears  to  have  assigned  19  April  1989  as   the
    applicant's date of birth since the 2012 age assessment was completed.




    Events from 2014 to the present

18) Meanwhile the applicant's asylum claim proceeded and was refused by the
    respondent on 4 February 2014.  The applicant appealed and  the  appeal
    was heard on 28 March 2014 by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Woolley.  The
    applicant was successful. The determination is at D15 to D33.  It is of
    note that WA's account and claim to fear a risk on return was, overall,
    found to be credible; see paragraph 39 on D28.

19) Subsequent to that successful appeal the applicant was granted  refugee
    status and on 23 July 2019  was  granted  indefinite  leave  to  remain
    (ILR).

20) A consequence of being recognised as a refugee was that  the  applicant
    had to apply for a Biometric Residence Permit (BRP). That document acts
    as an identity document, containing  an  individual's  name,  date  and
    place of birth, fingerprints and a photograph. It enables the holder to
    demonstrate, amongst other matters, an entitlement to  public  services
    and the right to work and study. It is  uncontentious  that  a  BRP  is
    issued in conformity with Council Regulation (EC) No  1030/2002  of  13
    June 2002 (the EC Regulation) which provides for a uniform  format  for
    such  documents  within  the  European  Economic  Area  (EEA).  The  EC
    Regulation is reflected in  domestic  legislation  by  the  Immigration
    (Biometric  Registration)  Regulations  2008  (Biometric   Registration
    Regulations).

21) Also uncontentious, is the provision within the Biometric  Registration
    Regulations for the respondent to require the surrender  of  a  BRP  or
    cancel a BRP if she concludes  that  the  information  it  contains  is
    false, misleading or incomplete.  These  provisions  are  contained  in
    Regulations 16 and 17. In practical terms, those provisions  allow  the
    respondent to issue an amended BRP if sufficient evidence  is  provided
    to show that she should do so.

22) The BRP issued to WA contained the assigned date of birth of  19  April
    1989. As above, this was the date found in the  21  February  2012  age
    assessment as being the "most likely to be accurate".

23) Very sadly, as a result of serious mistreatment he experienced in  Gaza
    and in Italy, the applicant continued to experience significant  mental
    health issues.  This was despite his having formed strong bonds in  the
    UK with the family who fostered him,  Mr  and  Mrs  DT,  with  whom  he
    continues to live and who have supported him in this and other matters.
    WA has been diagnosed with post-traumatic stress  disorder  (PTSD)  and
    depression. That diagnosis is accepted entirely by the respondent.  One
    aspect of WA's presentation has been increasingly profound distress  at
    the use of  the  assigned  date  of  birth  recorded  in  his  official
    documentation, including the BRP. He believes that his date of birth is
    29 December 1994 and that this should be shown on his BRP.

24) WA's views on this matter is perhaps best set out in a  decision  dated
    16 July 2020 issued by Mr  Justice  Hayden  sitting  in  the  Court  of
    Protection; see C6.  In paragraph 6 of that document Mr Justice  Hayden
    states:

         "From one perspective it might be thought that the impact  of  this
         bureaucratic decision might have diminished in WA's  thoughts  over
         the last decade and perhaps become little more than  a  frustrating
         and upsetting irritation.  That  has  not  happened.   For  WA  the
         removal of  his  date  of  birth  is  perceived  as  a  fundamental
         violation of his own rights and an assault on his identity".

25) A decision on appropriate treatment from the Court  of  Protection  was
    necessary as WA's health deteriorated very seriously  during  2020.  In
    the early stages of the COVID-19 pandemic WA  made  an  application  to
    volunteer at a Nightingale Hospital.  This was rejected because in  his
    application he gave the date of birth he believed  to  be  correct  (29
    December 1994) rather than the date on his BRP (19  April  1989).   The
    rejection and the reason for  it  triggered  a  serious  relapse  which
    included a complete refusal of food and fluids beginning in March 2020.
    WA became extremely unwell and he was eventually admitted  to  hospital
    on  20  April  2020.   He  accepted  intravenous  fluids  but   refused
    nasogastric feeding.  On 30 April 2020 he was detained under Section  3
    of the Mental Health Act 1983.  He was fed using an nasogastric tube on
    4 May 2020 but found this to be "intolerable" and removed it after  the
    feed had been given.  Further attempts at  feeding  were  unsuccessful.
    WA intermittently accepted fluids  and  very  limited  nutrition.   His
    health continued to be severely compromised.

26) On 5 June  2020  the  applicant's  representatives  sent  a  pre-action
    protocol letter to the respondent setting  out  his  circumstances  and
    requesting that the date of birth in his BRP be amended to 29  December
    1994.  On 8 June 2020 further submissions were made including a witness
    statement from the applicant and his foster mother and the  exceptional
    urgency of the situation highlighted where there was a very  real  risk
    to the applicant's  life  given  his  limited  liquid  and  nutritional
    intake.  On 10 June 2020 the applicant's representatives sent an urgent
    letter to the respondent informing her that the applicant's doctors had
    confirmed that his heart had shrunk and that "death will follow anytime
    from now".

27) On 10 June 2020 the respondent provided a pre-action protocol  response
    declining to amend the BRP where "your client has not provided evidence
    to support his claim that his date of birth is 29 December 1994".

28) The applicant issued this judicial review on 11 June 2020.  On the same
    day interim relief was granted,  and  the  applicant  was  directed  to
    provide the respondent with an expedited timetable was set down.

29) On 17 June 2020 the applicant agreed to the insertion of a  nasogastric
    tube to ensure that he remained alive until the  outcome  of  a  review
    that the respondent had undertaken to provide.

30) Meanwhile  the  NHS  Trust  responsible  for  treating  the  applicant,
    concerned about his capacity to make decisions about his nutrition  and
    hydration and the appropriate treatment plan,  took  his  case  to  the
    Court of Protection where it was heard by Mr Justice Hayden.

31) On 14 July 2020 the respondent made a decision which found  that  there
    was not satisfactory evidence capable of demonstrating that the claimed
    date of birth should be accepted and included on the  applicant's  BRP.
    The decision considered the new materials put forward by the applicant,
    together  with  the  previous  materials   including   the   four   age
    assessments. This document has become  the  focus  of  the  applicant's
    challenge in this matter.

32) On 16 July 2020 Mr Justice Hayden handed down his final judgment on the
    applicant's  capacity  to  make  decisions  about  his  nutrition   and
    hydration and the appropriate treatment plan where it was found that he
    did not have that capacity.

33) The respondent lodged summary grounds of defence on 20 July 2020 and  a
    reply from the applicant was lodged on 31 July 2020.

34) The Upper Tribunal refused permission on the papers on 3 August 2020.

35) A further set of amended grounds was filed on  6  August  2020.   Those
    grounds were admitted and, following an  oral  renewal  hearing  on  14
    August 2020, permission to apply for judicial review was granted by the
    Upper Tribunal on three grounds. There was agreement that  the  grounds
    of challenge on which permission was granted are that the  respondent's
    decision of 14 July 2020:

      i) breaches the applicant's rights under Article 2 ECHR

     ii) breaches the applicant's Article 8 ECHR rights,

    iii) is irrational/Wednesbury unreasonable.

    WA's Character

36) Before  proceeding  to  the  specific  legal  challenges  here,  it  is
    important to record that judicial authorities who have had  significant
    direct contact with the applicant have made highly positive  statements
    about him.  As above, the First-tier Tribunal found his asylum claim to
    be credible in the round in 2014.  In his final  judgment  of  16  July
    2020 Mr Justice Hayden, who spoke with the applicant using remote means
    on a number of occasions, refers to WA "as open, sensitive and honest";
    see paragraph 2. Mr Justice Hayden comments in  paragraph  56  that  he
    found WA to be "intelligent, articulate and honest".  In  paragraph  61
    he indicates he found WA to be "articulate, lively  and  humorous"  and
    "an interesting person who enjoyed conversation".   Mr  Justice  Hayden
    records that this was also the view  of  all  of  the  nurses  who  had
    provided information in  that  case.  He  comments  in  paragraph  101,
    "Despite all that he has  experienced  WA  is  the  gentlest  and  most
    courteous of men."

37) Mr Justice Hayden is also clear in paragraph 64 of his judgment that it
    is not the case that "WA's rejection of food and hydration is motivated
    to bring pressure on the Home Office." In paragraph 72 he states:

         "I very much agree ... that WA's refusal to eat  or  drink  is  not
         designed to  achieve  leverage  with  the  Home  Office  but  is  a
         behaviour which gives him 'some sense of control  in  a  situation'
         where he perceives 'control to have been taken away from him'."

    This view is repeated in paragraph 80:

         "I should state that nobody has suggested that these behaviours are
         intended to manipulate events they are  maladaptive  strategies  to
         achieve emotional respite."

    The decision at paragraph 82 also sets out how the team responsible for
    treating WA viewed his attachment to his claimed date of birth:

         "that he has been given an incorrect date of birth is  properly  to
         be described as 'an overvalued idea'.  From this it is extrapolated
         that WA is  so  fixated  with  this  perceived  injustice  that  it
         overwhelms his ability to weigh CANH as a global decision."

    Mr Justice Hayden also indicates at paragraph 66:

         "It is important that I record that if, hypothetically, the date of
         birth with which WA identifies was restored to him, all the doctors
         are clear that it would be a significant boost to his psychological
         wellbeing."

    In paragraph 98 Mr Justice Hayden comments that WA:

         "In the course of the last few months, reached a tipping  point  in
         which he is entirely clear that he can no longer live  without  the
         reinstatement of what he is certain is his true date of birth."

38) Justice Hayden begins his conclusion in paragraph 102 by remarking:

         "I make no apologies for repeating that I consider WA has  a  great
         deal to offer the world as well as much to  receive  from  it.   No
         effort should be spared in encouraging him to choose life."

    He then states in the following final paragraph:

         "In his childhood and adolescence WA encountered the suppression of
         his autonomy and the corrosion of his identity.  If he will forgive
         me further ad hominem remarks, I would wish to  point  out  to  him
         that he has his very proud Palestinian name, his rich and beautiful
         language, a faith which sustains and supports him and a family  who
         loves him and claim him as their own.  DT told me that  there  were
         times when she was not sure whether she was looking after WA or  he
         after her.  I also noticed that Mr DT unconsciously used an  Arabic
         expression that he later told me he had learnt from his son.   They
         are manifestly a close and loving family.  I am not in  a  position
         to reinforce WA's sense of identity in any way, only engagement  in
         the identified psychological therapy will  achieve  that.   I,  am,
         however, able to protect WA's autonomy.  In effect, to  restore  it
         to him.  For all involved in this  case  the  decisions  have  been
         difficult and painful.  From  this  point  on  the  decisions  will
         ultimately be taken by WA with the advice and encouragement of  his
         family and the clinicians, but no more than that."

39) It is also appropriate to set out here  that  the  respondent  has  not
    sought to gainsay  anything  in  the  judgment  of  Mr  Justice  Hayden
    concerning the applicant's excellent character or the acute seriousness
    of his current circumstances. The respondent, quite properly, has  also
    indicated at appropriate points in this matter her great  sympathy  for
    WA's personal circumstances.

Preliminary Issue - Admission of New Documents

40) On the morning of the hearing  on  15  September  2020,  the  applicant
    applied to admit further  evidence  which  had  been  provided  to  the
    respondent outwith the agreed timetable.

41) The first document was a report dated 2 September 2020 from Dr Jennifer
    Wild, a Consultant Clinical Psychologist and Senior Research Fellow  at
    the University of Oxford.  Paragraph 6 of the report explains  that  it
    was produced as a result of instructions  from  the  applicant's  legal
    representatives in order to "share my expert view on [WA's]  biological
    age and whether or not his belief of his biological age has arisen from
    his trauma."  Dr Wild gave evidence to the Court of Protection and  was
    found  to  have  provided  "thoughtful,  well-reasoned  and   carefully
    structured."; see paragraph 74 at C33.  In  paragraph  11  of  the  new
    report Dr Wild clarifies that the report was based on the interview she
    conducted with the applicant on 2  July  2020  which  was  part  of  an
    assessment for the Court of Protection proceedings  before  Mr  Justice
    Hayden where she was acting as an expert witness on capacity.  In  very
    brief summary, Dr Wild's opinion in the new report was that WA did  not
    appear to be older than he claimed because he had omitted to count  the
    time that passed when he was travelling but that this was likely to  be
    because the trauma he experienced  as  a  child  had  caused  premature
    aging. The report went  to  some  of  issues  in  dispute  between  the
    parties, therefore.

42) There was some dispute as to when this document could be said  to  have
    been properly served on the respondent  where  the  documents  that  it
    enclosed were not immediately accessible and the full material was  not
    with the Secretary of State until 7 September 2020. I accept that was a
    week outside the time limits for new evidence to be served. It  remains
    the case that the document has been with the Secretary of State in  its
    entirety for a week and had the initial report for nearly two weeks. It
    is relevant to the issues to be litigated. There is clearly a need  for
    expedition in this matter  given  that  WA's  health  is  so  seriously
    compromised. My conclusion was that in all  the  circumstances  it  was
    appropriate to allow this document to be admitted  and  to  decline  to
    allow an adjournment to afford the Secretary of State to have more time
    to consider it.  In the event, Ms Broadfoot QC's detailed  analysis  of
    Dr Wild's report showed that the respondent could not have gained  much
    benefit, if any, from considering Dr Wild's report of 2 September  2020
    any further.

43)  The  applicant  also  sought  to  admit  a   document   from   Amnesty
    International  dated  23  February  2006  entitled  "Italy:   Invisible
    children - The  human  rights  of  migrant  and  asylum-seeking  minors
    detained upon arrival at the maritime border in Italy".   The  document
    sets out the legal provisions and practice in Italy  for  dealing  with
    unaccompanied asylum-seeking children  in  2006  and  the  concerns  of
    Amnesty International at the lack of  transparency,  the  detention  of
    minors, treatment of minors during transfers, detention conditions  and
    risks relating to inaccurate age assessments.   There  was  no  dispute
    that this document was only served to the  Secretary  of  State  on  14
    September 2020, the day before the hearing. The substantive section  of
    the report comprises thirteen pages. It was simply  my  view  that  the
    document was submitted too late for the Secretary of State to  consider
    it and, as above, there remained an imperative for  the  matter  to  be
    considered expeditiously and without further delay. I refused to  admit
    the Amnesty International document for these reasons.

The Respondent's Decision of 14 July 2020

44) The latter part  of  this  decision  contains  extensive  extracts  and
    analysis of the respondent's assessment in the decision of 14 July 2020
    of the  individual  documents  and  information  that  was  before  the
    Secretary of State when she concluded  that  the  assigned  age  should
    remain on the applicant's BRP. It is not necessary also to include them
    here.  From paragraph 42 onwards  in  the  respondent's  decision,  she
    draws together the analysis of the individual documents  and  sets  out
    the principles used to make a  holistic  assessment  and  underpin  her
    conclusions. It is useful to include much  of  those  sections  of  the
    report here in order to set the context for the applicant's  Article  2
    and 8 ECHR challenges:

         "Amending [WA's] Age

42. As can be seen from the evidence submitted there is some evidence which
    supports that [WA] is the age he claims.  However, in light of all  the
    matters above, which I have considered in the round, I  have  concluded
    that there is no evidence which could lead me to conclude that the  age
    assessments were wrong, and that WA is the age which he claims to be.

43. Regulation 15 of the Immigration (Biometric  Registration)  Regulations
    2008 states that the BRP  can  contain  the  holder's  date  of  birth.
    Regulation 16 makes express provision for the  Secretary  of  State  to
    require the surrender  of  the  BRP  if  she  thinks  that  information
    provided in connection with the  document  was  or  has  become  false,
    misleading  or  incomplete.   Pursuant  to:  (a)  Regulation  16,   the
    Secretary of State has the power to cancel a document on such  grounds;
    and (b) Regulation 17, the holder of a BRP must notify the Secretary of
    State if he knows or suspects that the information provided was or  has
    become false, misleading or incomplete.  These provisions underline the
    importance of information in the  BRP  being  accurate.   Against  that
    background,  it  is  considered  that  for  the  Secretary   of   State
    proactively to amend  a  document  to  contain  information  which  she
    believes  to  be  false  would  be  acting  inconsistently   with   the
    Regulations.

44. The guidance available on  gov.uk  about  biometric  residence  permits
    (https://www.gov.uk/biometric-residence-permits) confirms that the  BRP
    contains the holder's name, date and  place  of  birth.   There  is  no
    capability or capacity to record an alternate possible date  of  birth,
    or a date of birth which the holder believes themselves to be, which is
    the same as any  other  secure  official  document  issued  by  the  UK
    government for example a driving licence or passport.

45. The Home Office position is that someone's  identity  (i.e.  biographic
    details such as name, date of  birth  and  nationality)  should  remain
    consistent during their presence in the UK, save where  proper  grounds
    exist to amend that information.   Regulation  16  of  the  Immigration
    (Biometric Registration) Regulations 2008 allows  the  Home  Office  to
    reissue a biometric residence permit (BRP).  Adopting the approach  set
    out in the Use and Change of Names Guidance it is considered  important
    that requests to  change  previously  recorded  biographic  information
    should be  supported  by  satisfactory  evidence  to  ensure  this  new
    information forms part of someone's "single identity for  all  official
    purposes.

         47. I have considered whether a change  of  biographic  information
             (specifically  a  date  of   birth)   can   be   accepted   on
             discretionary  or   compassionate   grounds,   that   is,   in
             circumstances where it is not accepted that the existing  date
             of birth is wrong -  and  in  fact,  where  it  is  positively
             believed that it is right.   There  is  no  premise  for  this
             within the existing Immigration  Rules,  policy,  guidance  or
             precedent case law.  I have examined the impact of  a  refusal
             to change [WA's] date of birth.  That he has PTSD,  depression
             and anxiety is not disputed.

             However, having  considered  the  matter,  the  Home  Office's
             position is that any finding on age should be  evidence-based,
             determined in accordance with an accepted  legal  process  for
             determining age, and a  decision  to  revise  a  person's  age
             should not be taken for the primary purpose of  addressing  or
             accommodating mental health concerns, however severe they  may
             be, in circumstances where there is no proper  basis  for  the
             age  to  be  revised.   In  your  representations   you   have
             emphasised that there would be a substantial advantage  to  WA
             in changing the date of birth, and no disadvantage to the Home
             Office in doing so.  While I recognise that there may well  be
             a significant advantage to WA, the matter cannot  be  properly
             assessed in terms of whether  there  is  any  disadvantage  or
             prejudice to the Home Office.  The question is  whether  there
             is evidence to support any change,  and  if  not  whether  the
             change is one that the Home Office, as a public authority with
             functions in respect of official  documents,  can  and  should
             make.  Subject to WA's reliance on Article 8, and having taken
             into  account  all  of  the  difficult  personally  compelling
             circumstances of this case, I  have  concluded  that  the  BRP
             should not be amended to state a date of birth which the  Home
             Office believes to be false."

45) The decision letter goes on to indicate in paragraphs 51 to 54:

         "51. The requirements of the  BRP  Regulations,  as  a  legislative
             scheme necessary for the avoidance of a false,  misleading  or
             incomplete information being included in a BRP, and  therefore
             ensuring that someone's identity remains  consistent,  do  not
             violate [WA]'s Article 8 private life rights, even if they are
             engaged.  Even if WA's Article 8 rights have  been  interfered
             with, our assessment is that any  interference  is  justified,
             due to the public interest in maintaining the integrity of the
             age  assessment  process,  and  the  recording   of   accurate
             information on the BRP to ensure consistency of identity.

52. In WA's case it is the medical opinion of those treating him that there
    would be an adverse impact on the state of his  mental  health  if  his
    request to amend his date of birth is refused.  This adverse impact  is
    recognised and  has  been  carefully  considered.   However,  there  is
    nothing in precedent or policy that supports an amendment being made to
    his BRP on the basis of undue interference with WA's Article 8  rights,
    without sufficient evidence of his current BRP  being  incorrect.   For
    the reasons already set out - while recognising the very serious nature
    of WA's mental health condition, and his strongly held belief  that  he
    is the age he claims to be - we do not consider that the BRP  ought  to
    be amended to set out a date of birth which we believe to be false.

53. WA has continued to access the necessary treatment of his mental health
    and has psychological and psychiatric support in place, as evidenced in
    the letter from Bristol Central and East Recovery Team dated  30  April
    2020.  In addition, he has people around him in his personal  life  who
    are supporting him and a home to live in, i.e.  a  "secure  base"  from
    which he can continue to get the relevant care he needs.  I  understand
    that there are also parallel Court of Protection proceedings where  the
    matter of WA's continued capacity is being considered and a substantive
    judgment is likely to be handed down imminently.

54. Having taken all the relevant information into consideration, it is not
    considered that refusing to amend WA's date of birth on his BRP (to his
    claimed DOB or to record both the stated and claimed DOBs) would breach
    his rights under Article 8."

46) The respondent concludes:

         "Conclusion

55. It is Home Office policy to give prominence to a  Merton-compliant  age
    assessment by a local authority; it is likely that in  most  cases  the
    authority's decision would be determinative as set out in the Assessing
    Age  guidance.   Nevertheless,  it  is  important  that  all  available
    relevant sources of information had  been  considered  and  an  overall
    decision made in the round.  In that respect, I have considered all  of
    the materials which you have provided,  as  set  out  above,  and  your
    accompanying representations and the interim judgment of the  Court  of
    Protection.  I have also taken into account  WA's  overall  credibility
    which has been accepted by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

56. The supporting evidence is being given due weight for the reasons given
    above.  The personal letters and statements from people who  know  [WA]
    are helpful in establishing the course of events and in explaining  the
    impact the date  of  birth  issue  is  having  on  him.   In  terms  of
    evidential value or whether they provide evidence  that  outweighs  the
    local authority age assessments, they have less value and are therefore
    afforded lesser weight.

57. As set out above, I have reviewed and considered each of the supporting
    letters  and  statements  received  on  an  individual   basis,   taken
    cumulatively  and  alongside  all  of  the  other  evidence  previously
    submitted.  I have also taken  account  of  the  assessing  age  policy
    guidance, in particular the section  entitled  'new  relevant  evidence
    received post age decision'.  In line with this guidance

             I have reviewed the totality of evidence of age.   Because  of
             the passage of time I have not made the local authority  aware
             of the new evidence nor have I invited them  to  review  their
             earlier decision.  It  remains  open  for  WA  and  his  legal
             representatives to ask the local  authority  to  undertake  an
             additional review.  I have also referred to other parts of the
             policy guidance, including the section entitled  'weighing  up
             conflicting evidence of age'.  It remains the case that I give
             prominence to  the  Merton-compliant  age  assessments,  which
             found that [WA]  was  born  on  19  April  1989.   I  am  also
             required, however, to consider all the  available  sources  of
             information and make an overall decision in the round.

58. Having considered all of the matters in the round, and for the  reasons
    set out above, my  conclusion  is  that  there  is  no  evidence  which
    undermines the conclusions in the 2007 and  2012  local  authority  age
    assessments.

59. Having addressed all of the evidence  submitted  in  pursuance  of  the
    Tribunal's Order dated 11 June 2020 it is my view that the new evidence
    does not show that WA is the age he claims to be.  I conclude  that  if
    the Home Office were to amend the date of birth as sought by  [WA],  it
    would be including a date of birth which is false  (and  certainly  one
    which the Home Office believes to be false).  For the reasons  set  out
    above,  notwithstanding  the  extremely  difficult  and   compassionate
    circumstances of this case, the Home Office does not consider  that  it
    can amend the BRP to include a date of birth which is  believed  to  be
    false.  The request to  amend  the  date  of  birth  recorded  on  WA's
    biometric residence permit, including to record  both  the  stated  and
    claimed date of birth, is therefore refused.  His date of birth  of  19
    April 1989 is maintained."

Article 2 ECHR

47) For the purposes of this case, the relevant  part  of  Article  2  ECHR
    states "Everyone's right to life shall be protected by law."

48) As agreed by  the  parties,  in  those  parts  of  the  challenge  here
    concerning human rights, it is  for  the  Tribunal  to  decide  if  the
    respondent's decision of 14 July 2020 amounted to  an  infringement  of
    the ECHR, unlike an ordinary judicial review of a public law  decision;
    Miss Behavin' Ltd v Belfast City Council [2007] UKHL  19  at  [31]  and
    [37] applied.

49) The applicant maintains that the respondent's refusal to amend his  BRP
    to reflect his claimed date of birth is a breach of his right  to  life
    under Article 2 ECHR.  He  submits  that  the  respondent  is  under  a
    positive operational duty to protect his Article 2 rights.

50) The respondent maintains that she is not under a positive obligation to
    protect the applicant's Article 2 EHCR rights. The  respondent  submits
    that her responsibility in this matter  towards  the  applicant  is  to
    provide a lawful process for deciding the date of birth of undocumented
    migrants, including provision for amending an  earlier  decision  where
    satisfactory evidence is provided. The respondent submits she  has  met
    that duty and did so in her decision of 14 July  2020.  The  respondent
    maintains that the proposition that Article 2 ECHR can be  extended  to
    impose a positive duty on the respondent  to  protect  the  applicant's
    life when operating a system for assigning an age and administering the
    BRP s system is misconceived.

51) Both parties sought support for their positions from the case of Rabone
    v Pennine Care NHS Foundation Trust [2012] 2 AC. That case concerned an
    involuntary patient  with  known  suicidal  ideation  who,  tragically,
    killed herself when on leave from the  hospital  where  she  was  being
    treated. The  Supreme  Court  had  to  decide  whether  the  NHS  Trust
    responsible for her care was  under  a  positive  operational  duty  to
    protect her Article 2 ECHR rights and found in the affirmative.

52) In paragraph 12 of Rabone, the Supreme Court identifies that the  ECtHR
    has found there to be "a positive  duty  to  protect  life  in  certain
    circumstances" as one of three overarching duties imposed on a state by
    Article 2 ECHR. The Supreme Court goes on in paragraph 12 to expand  on
    what that duty comprises:

         "This latter positive duty contains  two  distinct  elements.   The
         first is a general duty on the state 'to put in place a legislative
         and  administrative  framework  designed   to   provide   effective
         deterrence against threats to the right to life': see �neryildiz  v
         Turkey (2004) 41 EHRR 325, para 89 applying, mutatis mutandis, what
         the court said in Osman v United Kingdom (1998) 29 EHRR  245,  para
         115.  The second is what has been  called  the  'operational  duty'
         which was also articulated by the court in the  Osman  case.   This
         was a case about the alleged failure of the police to  protect  the
         Osman family who had been subjected to threats and harassment  from
         a third party, culminating in  the  murder  of  Mr  Osman  and  the
         wounding  of  his  son.   The  court  said  that  in  'well-defined
         circumstances'  the  state  should  take  'appropriate  steps'   to
         safeguard the lives of those within its  jurisdiction  including  a
         positive obligation to take 'preventative operational measures'  to
         protect an individual whose life is at risk from the criminal  acts
         of another: para 115.  At para 116, the court went on to  say  that
         the positive obligation must be interpreted 'in a  way  which  does
         not  impose  an  impossible  or  disproportionate  burden  on   the
         authorities'.  In a case such as Osman, therefore, there will be  a
         breach of the positive obligation where:

                  'the authorities knew or ought to have known at  the  time
                  of the existence of a real and immediate risk to the  life
                  of  an  identified  individual  or  individuals  from  the
                  criminal acts of a third party and  that  they  failed  to
                  take measures within the  scope  of  their  powers  which,
                  judged reasonably, might have been expected to avoid  that
                  risk.'  (See para 116.)"

53) This raises the first question  concerning  Article  2  ECHR  that  the
    Tribunal must answer here: does a positive operational  duty  arise  in
    the circumstances of this case such that the  respondent  must  act  to
    protect the applicant's right to life by amending his BRP to  show  his
    claimed date of birth?

54) Assistance in answering this question can be drawn from the examination
    by the Supreme Court in Rabone of when the  positive  operational  duty
    has been found to have arisen in ECtHR jurisprudence. As set out above,
    the Supreme Court notes in  paragraph  12  of  Rabone  that  the  ECtHR
    identified in Osman v United  Kingdom  (1998)  29  EHRR  245  that  the
    positive operational duty arises in  "well-defined  circumstances"  and
    that the ECtHR also indicated that the state's action  in  response  is
    required to be "appropriate" and the duty does not require there to  be
    an "impossible or disproportionate burden on the authorities".

55) In paragraphs 21 to 25 of Rabone Lord  Dyson  analyses  "the  essential
    features of the cases  where  Strasbourg  has  so  far  recognised  the
    existence of an operational duty." This was necessary  as  no  decision
    was cited in which the ECtHR "clearly articulates the criteria by which
    it decides  whether  an  article  2  operational  duty  exists  in  any
    particular circumstances"; see paragraph 22.

56) In paragraph 21 of Rabone Lord Dyson identifies  that  ECtHR  case  law
    indicates that the fact that there is a real and immediate risk to life
    is a "necessary but not sufficient condition for the existence  of  the
    duty." He continues:

         "This is because, as the Court of Appeal said, a patient undergoing
         major surgery may be facing a real and immediate risk of death  and
         yet the Powell case shows that there is no  article  2  operational
         duty to take  reasonable  steps  to  avoid  the  death  of  such  a
         patient."

57) In paragraph 22 Lord Dyson identifies that the operational duty:

         "... will be held to exist where there has been  an  assumption  of
         responsibility by the state for the individual's welfare and safety
         (including by the exercise of control).  The  paradigm  example  of
         assumption of responsibility is where the  state  has  detained  an
         individual, whether in prison, in a  psychiatric  hospital,  in  an
         immigration detention centre or otherwise."

58) In paragraph 23 Lord Dyson identifies that the ECtHR:

         "... has repeatedly emphasised the vulnerability of the victim as a
         relevant   consideration.   In    circumstances    of    sufficient
         vulnerability, the ECtHR has been prepared to find a breach of  the
         operational duty even there has been no assumption  of  control  by
         the state, such as where a local authority fails  to  exercise  its
         powers  to protect the child who to its knowledge  is  at  risk  of
         abuse as in Z v United Kingdom [2001] 34 EHRR 97".

59) In paragraph 24 Lord Dyson identifies  that  a  relevant  consideration
    shown in the Strasbourg jurisdiction is "the nature of  the  risk"  and
    whether this is an "ordinary risk" of the kind that individuals in  the
    relevant  category  should  reasonably  be  expected  to  take  or   an
    "exceptional risk" which could give rise to an  operational  duty.  The
    example given is the risk that  a  soldier  could  expect  as  part  of
    ordinary military duties as opposed to threats  to  life  which  "arise
    exceptionally".

60) In paragraph 25, Lord Dyson indicates that the factors identified above
    are "relevant" but not "a sure guide as to whether an operational duty"
    would be found by the ECtHR and that this is not surprising where  this
    area of the jurisdiction "is young" and "still being  explored  by  the
    ECtHR".

61) Also of relevance, in paragraph 100 of Rabone, Baroness Hale identifies
    that the Strasbourg court has not set down that  the  operational  duty
    amounts to "a duty to protect an individual from taking his own life":

         "That there is no general obligation on  the  state  to  prevent  a
         person committing suicide, even if the authorities know or ought to
         know of a real and immediate risk that she will do so".

62) Pulling together the guidance in Rabone and applying it to  this  case,
    it is my conclusion that the respondent does not have an Article 2 ECHR
    positive operational duty towards the applicant.  There  are  two  main
    reasons for this.

63) Firstly, it is difficult to see  how  the  circumstances  here  can  be
    properly found to amount to "well-defined circumstances"  required  for
    the duty to arise where they are only very partially in line  with  the
    criteria identified in Rabone as having the potential to show  that  an
    operational duty does arise. The applicant is clearly  very  vulnerable
    and that is a potentially relevant factor identified in paragraph 23 by
    Lord Dyson. There is also a real and immediate risk to life but this is
    specifically stated by Lord Dyson in paragraph 21 not to  amount  to  a
    sufficient condition for the duty to arise. The situation identified in
    paragraph 24 of Rabone of an "exceptional risk" beyond  a  predictable,
    "ordinary" risk to life having the potential to give rise to a positive
    operational duty, the  example  being  given  of  a  soldier,  is  very
    different and not analogous, to the circumstance of  the  applicant  in
    this case.

64) The circumstances here are that the applicant has a genuinely held  but
    overvalued preoccupation  with  his  claimed  date  of  birth.  As  the
    respondent has been unable to accept that his claimed date of birth  is
    sufficiently well-evidenced and unable to issue an  amended  BRP  after
    applying the systems she  has  in  place  for  those  assessments,  the
    applicant's preoccupation has led him to  refuse  sufficient  food  and
    fluids for many months and taken him close to death. This is  extremely
    serious but it is not a situation that can be said to  come  within  or
    close to the criteria shown in ECtHR case law as capable of giving rise
    to an Article 2 ECHR positive operational duty on the respondent.

65) Secondly, in Rabone the Supreme Court found that there was  a  positive
    operational duty on the NHS Trust responsible  for  the  treatment  and
    care of an involuntary patient to protect that patient's right to life.
    That situation is very close to WA's circumstances and, as  in  Rabone,
    the operational duty on the state to act to protect WA's right to  life
    is being met here by the NHS Trust which is treating him in  line  with
    the treatment plan identified as  most  appropriate  by  the  Court  of
    Protection. That is where the state's operational duty and its response
    to that duty  manifests  in  this  case.  That  action  is  the  proper
    implementation of the "appropriate steps"  required  by  the  ECtHR  in
    Osman. Where that it so, it is not appropriate or proportionate for the
    respondent to be required to act outwith her legal powers and policy by
    accepting the applicant's claimed date of birth which she has found  to
    be wrong under lawful procedures which are  not  subject  to  challenge
    here.

66) The applicant argues that it is not correct or is not  sufficient  that
    only the NHS Trust is expected to meet the operational duty to  protect
    the applicant's right to life.  He argues that the state as a whole  is
    required to act to protect Article 2 ECHR rights and that must  include
    the respondent. The respondent's action in refusing to amend the BRP is
    therefore a failure by the state properly to recognise and  respond  to
    the duty to protect the applicant's life. Mr Southey QC relies  on  the
    case of Wo? v  Poland  (Application  22860/02)  as  authority  for  the
    state's responsibility being indivisible and  the  state  as  a  whole,
    rather than a single individual public authority, being responsible for
    responding to the operational duty.

67) The case of  Wo?  does  not  support  this  contention.  The  case  was
    concerned with whether the state could absolve itself of responsibility
    for the actions of a private body which had been set up  to  administer
    war reparations and thereby avoid being  fixed  with  a  breach  of  an
    Article 6 ECHR right to a fair hearing. The ECtHR in Wo? did  not  find
    that there  was  an  indivisible  operational  duty  across  all  state
    organisations to respect the applicant's Article  6  ECHR  rights.  The
    Court found that the state could not avoid responsibility by seeking to
    limit it to the private body delegated to  administer  the  reparations
    scheme. Further, as above, the  state  here  does  not  seek  to  avoid
    responsibility for WA's right to life via a  private  organisation  but
    has accepted  the  Article  2  ECHR  operational  duty  arises  and  is
    responding to it through the actions of the NHS Trust.

68) The applicant also seeks support from the case of Mammadov v Azerbaijan
    (Application no.4762/05). In Mammadov, a family had been living  in  an
    unauthorised dwelling and the housing authorities and  police  attended
    to enforce their return to a hostel where they had permission to  live.
    The applicant's wife, already very unwell, was so  disturbed  by  these
    events that she threatened to set herself on fire  if  the  authorities
    did not leave. Mrs Mammadov proceeded to  carry  out  her  threat  and,
    after being taken to hospital, died from her injuries. The applicant in
    Mammadov argued that the state had breached  the  operational  duty  to
    protect his wife's right to life and also failed to carry out effective
    investigations into what had happened.

69) Mr Southey QC referred to paragraph 115 of Mammadov which states:

         "115.  The Court considers that, in a situation where an individual
         threatens to take his or her own life in plain view of State agents
         and, moreover, where this threat is an emotional reaction  directly
         induced by the State agents' actions or demands, the latter  should
         treat this threat with the utmost seriousness  as  constituting  an
         imminent  risk  to  that  individual's  life,  regardless  of   how
         unexpected that threat might have been. In the Court's opinion,  in
         such a situation as in the present case, if the State agents become
         aware of such a threat a sufficient time  in  advance,  a  positive
         obligation arises under Article 2 requiring them  to  prevent  this
         threat from materialising, by any means which  are  reasonable  and
         feasible in the circumstances.

70) The applicant argues  that  this  reasoning  indicates  that,  "however
    unexpected  the  threat",  the  respondent  can  be  under  a  positive
    operational duty if a threat to the applicant's right to  life  arises.
    As before, however, the reality is that here the responsibility for the
    immediate threat  to  the  applicant's  life  does  not  lie  with  the
    respondent but with the NHS Trust. The efforts to protect WA's right to
    life that are being made by the state via the NHS Trust are entirely in
    line with the kind of response  the  ECtHR  considered  appropriate  in
    paragraph [116] of Mammadov:

           116.  In the context of the present case, the Court notes  that,
           depending on practical possibilities and the moment at which the
           State  agents  became  aware  of  the  threat,   some   of   the
           hypothetical steps to be considered could have  entailed,  inter
           alia, calming down the situation by verbally persuading  Chichek
           Mammadova to refrain from any actions threatening her  life,  or
           physically preventing  her  from  taking  hold  of  and  pouring
           kerosene on herself, or physically preventing her from  igniting
           it, or putting out the fire as soon as she set fire to  herself.
           Such steps could also have included  providing  immediate  first
           aid, calling an ambulance  or  assisting  in  hospitalising  the
           victim... ."

71) For these reasons, the Tribunal concludes that  there  is  no  positive
    operational duty on the respondent to act in the way suggested  by  the
    applicant to protect the applicant's life and she is not in  breach  of
    Article 2 ECHR in declining to accept his claimed  age  and  amend  his
    BRP.

Article 8 ECHR

72) Article 8 ECHR provides:

         "1. Everyone has the right to respect for his  private  and  family
         life, his home and his correspondence.

         2.There shall be no interference by a  public  authority  with  the
         exercise of this right except such as is in accordance with the law
         and is necessary in  a  democratic  society  in  the  interests  of
         national security, public safety or the economic wellbeing  of  the
         country,  for  the  prevention  of  disorder  or  crime,  for   the
         protection of health or morals, or for the protection of the rights
         and freedoms of others."

73) The ECtHR in the  case  of  Ciubotaru  v  Moldova  (Application  Number
    27138/04) identifies in paragraph 49 that a right  to  a  private  life
    includes  "the  right  to  establish  details  of  their  identity   as
    individual human beings".  The respondent accepts that the  applicant's
    date of birth forms part of his personal identity and  that  Article  8
    ECHR is engaged.

74) The ECtHR in the case of Bensaid v  UK  (Application  Number  44599/98)
    identifies in paragraph 47 that:

          "Mental health must also be regarded as a crucial part of  private
         life associated with the  aspect  of  moral  integrity.  Article  8
         protects a right to identity  and  personal  development,  and  the
         right to establish  and  develop  relationships  with  other  human
         beings and the outside world  ...  .  The  preservation  of  mental
         stability is in  that  context  an  indispensable  precondition  to
         effective enjoyment of the right to respect for private life."

    Article 8 ECHR is therefore also engaged in relation to the applicant's
    mental health.

75) The ECtHR has also identified that Article 8 ECHR encompasses not  only
    the requirement for there to be no interference with  the  exercise  of
    Article 8 ECHR rights unless that interference is shown  to  be  lawful
    and proportionate but also a positive duty to respect  Article  8  ECHR
    rights.  This is set out in paragraph 50 of Ciubotaru which states:

         "Although the object of Article 8 is  essentially  to  protect  the
         individual against arbitrary interference by public authorities, it
         does not merely compel the State to abstain from such interference.
          There may, in addition to this primary  negative  undertaking,  be
         positive obligations inherent in an effective respect  for  private
         life.  These obligations  may  involve  the  adoption  of  measures
         designed to secure respect for private life (see X  and  Y  v.  the
         Netherlands, 26 March 1985, � 23, Series A no. 91).  The boundaries
         between the State's positive and negative  obligations  under  this
         provision do not always  lend  themselves  to  precise  definition;
         nonetheless,  the  applicable  principles  are  similar.   In  both
         contexts regard must be had to the fair  balance  that  has  to  be
         struck between the competing interests of the  individual  and  the
         community as a whole, and in both contexts the State is  recognised
         as enjoying  a  certain  margin  of  appreciation  (see  Paul�k  v.
         Slovakia, no. 10699/05, � 43, ECHR 2006XI (extracts))."

76) The question before the Tribunal is,  therefore,  whether  there  is  a
    positive duty on the respondent to respect the  applicant's  Article  8
    ECHR rights by amending his BRP to reflect his claimed date  of  birth.
    As set out in Ciubotaru, in assessing whether the respondent  is  under
    that positive duty, a fair balance must be struck between the interests
    of the applicant and "the community as a whole" and the state enjoys  a
    margin of appreciation.

77) As set out in the decision of 14 July 2020 in paragraph 6 at  D2,  when
    the applicant claimed asylum his age was disputed  and  the  respondent
    applied the "Disputed Age Cases" policy  then  in  force  in  order  to
    assign a date  of  birth.  The  lawfulness  of  that  guidance  is  not
    challenged here and nor is that of the later iterations of that  policy
    including the "Assessing Age" policy guidance followed in the  decision
    of 14 July 2020. Following that policy,  the  respondent  assigned  the
    date of birth of 19 April 1989. When the applicant was granted  refugee
    status, the respondent issued the applicant with a BRP  containing  the
    assigned date of birth. That was in line with the EC Regulation and the
    Biometric  Registration   Regulations   which   incorporated   the   EC
    Regulations into domestic law. The provisions of those Regulations  are
    not challenged. It is also not disputed that the Biometric Registration
    Regulations give the respondent a discretion to amend the assigned date
    of birth in a BRP if she "thinks" that  the  "information  provided  in
    connection with the document was or has  become  false,  misleading  or
    incomplete"; see Regulations 16 and 17.

78) It is therefore not in dispute that the respondent has  made  provision
    for a lawful system for determining the age  of  undocumented  migrants
    and a system for deciding when that assigned age  can  be  changed  and
    applied that system when assigning an age to the applicant and  issuing
    him with his BRP. It is not  suggested  here  that  those   systems  in
    themselves fail to strike a fair balance  between  the  state  and  the
    individual. It is clear that maintaining coherence in the BRP system is
    in the public interest. A BRP allows for proper identification  of  the
    individual and of the rights and benefits to which they  are  entitled.
    The respondent acts in line with ECtHR case law such  as  Ciubotaru  in
    which the ECtHR found that a state should have a proper system for  the
    records of someone's identity; see paragraph 57. The ECtHR continued in
    paragraph 57:

         "The Court does not dispute the right of a  Government  to  require
         the existence of objective evidence of a claimed  ethnicity.  In  a
         similar vein, the Court is ready to accept that it should  be  open
         to the authorities to refuse a claim to be officially  recorded  as
         belonging to a particular ethnicity where such a claim is based  on
         purely subjective and unsubstantiated grounds."

79) In applying these procedures when assessing what age should be assigned
    to the applicant and included in his  BRP,  the  respondent  meets  the
    positive duty on her under Article 8 ECHR to respect an important  part
    of the applicant's identity, his date of birth. That positive duty does
    not extend to having to assign the  applicant  the  date  of  birth  he
    maintains is correct, however genuine his  belief  may  be.  Where  the
    respondent has adopted a proper process for determining the age of  the
    applicant, Article 8 ECHR cannot require her to set that process  aside
    because of the particular impact of the outcome of that  process  on  a
    particular  individual.  Meanwhile,  the  NHS  Trust  responds  to  the
    positive duty on the state to protect the applicant's mental health.

80) For  these  reasons,  my  conclusion  is  that  there  is  no  positive
    obligation on the respondent to respect the applicant's private life by
    amending his BRP to reflect his claimed date of birth and that there is
    therefore no interference with the applicant's Article 8 ECHR rights.

Rationality

81) It is also the clear judgment of the  Tribunal  that  the  respondent's
    decision  of  14  July  2020  is  not  irrational.  In  reaching   that
    conclusion, the Tribunal has focussed  below  on  the  aspects  of  the
    decision  that  were  the  subject  to  particular  criticism  for  the
    applicant.

82) From the outset of the decision in paragraph 1 on  D1,  the  respondent
    shows that she asked herself the correct question:

           "whether the new evidence causes me to:

  . change the current stated DOB on  the  Claimant's  Biometric  Residence
    Permit (BRP) to the claimed DOB;

  . maintain the DOB; or

  . record both the stated and claimed DOBs on the BRP"

83) The respondent sets out accurately the new materials relied upon by the
    applicant; see D1. She indicates that during the assessment she kept in
    mind "the compelling personal circumstances of  [WA]"  and  appreciated
    that that they arose because of  "the  very  significant  distress  his
    recorded age causes him"; see paragraph 4 on D2.

84) The respondent then sets out the principles she applied when  assigning
    the applicant with a date of birth and when considering whether the new
    materials could show that the claimed  age  should  be  preferred;  see
    paragraphs 6 to 10 on pages D2 to D3. As before, the applicant does not
    challenge the legality or rationality of the  legislation  or  guidance
    documents relied on by the respondent in her assessment. This  guidance
    clearly allowed  for  prominent  weight  to  be  placed  on  a  "Merton
    compliant"  age  assessment  given  that  a  local  authority  has  the
    necessary expertise to make such an  assessment.  The  same  paragraphs
    point out the options that were open to the applicant to challenge  the
    local authority age assessments if he disagreed with them but  that  no
    challenge was ever made.

85) The decision then analyses the four age  assessments;  see  D3  to  D4.
    Submissions made for the applicant objected to the weight placed on the
    2012 age assessment and to lesser weight being placed on  the  4  March
    2009 assessment which found the applicant's age to be 12 December 1994.
    Those submissions do not have merit where the respondent  was  entitled
    to give prominence to a Merton-compliant age assessment  and  the  2012
    assessment is manifestly more  comprehensive  and  detailed  than  that
    conducted on 4 March 2009; see paragraphs 11 and 14 to 17 above.

86) The respondent goes  on  to  assess  individually  the  new  pieces  of
    evidence provided by the applicant; see D4 to D8. In paragraphs  13  to
    15 of the decision, on page D4, the respondent  takes  into  account  a
    letter dated 26 June 2020 from the Principal at the applicant's school.
    As with all of the new materials put forward  for  the  applicant,  the
    respondent summarises the document,  sets  out  the  positive  evidence
    going towards the applicant's claimed age contained in the document and
    then sets out other aspects of the document not favourable towards  the
    applicant's case. That is a wholly clear and rational approach.

87) Nothing in any of the assessments of the individual documents was shown
    to approach the threshold of irrationality.  The  respondent  indicated
    across those assessments her appreciation that many of those  providing
    the new evidence knew the applicant personally over a  period  of  time
    and had expertise working with young people. At paragraphs  19  to  21,
    for example, the respondent considers the  witness  statement  dated  8
    June 2020 of Mrs DT, the applicant's foster  mother,  and  acknowledges
    her involvement with young people over many years, the length  of  time
    she has known WA and how she has never doubted  his  claimed  age.  The
    analysis in these parts  of  the  decision  show  that  the  respondent
    carried out a balanced and rational assessment of the new materials.

88) It was argued for the applicant that in paragraph 26  of  the  decision
    the respondent was not entitled to rely on the comments of the  Central
    and East Recovery Team on the possibility that a child may  "hang  onto
    the age they were when they fled and not accept the age throughout  the
    journey". That submission relied on report of Dr Wild dated 2 September
    2020 which is at J1.  Dr Wild expressed the opinion in paragraphs 20 to
    23 of her report that trauma "has likely" caused the applicant  to  age
    prematurely. She found this to be a more  likely  explanation  for  the
    applicant appearing older than his chronological age  than  his  having
    failed  to  factor  in  the  years  that  he  was  travelling  to   his
    understanding of his age.  She  relied  on  two  studies  on  childhood
    trauma leading to premature physical aging to support her view.

89) Paragraph 26 of the decision does not suggest that the comment  of  the
    Central and East Recovery Team attracted significant weight such  that,
    even if it is shown to  be  unreliable  by  Dr  Wild's  report,  it  is
    difficult to see that this  could  undermine  the  rationality  of  the
    decision as a whole. In any event, Dr Wild's report does not  show  her
    to be an expert in age assessment. It is based in part on  her  meeting
    with the applicant which was conducted  for  a  different  purpose,  an
    assessment of the applicant's capacity  for  the  Court  of  Protection
    case. Dr Wild identifies academic research considering  whether  trauma
    can lead to premature ageing including the onset of  puberty  but  does
    not set out any detail as to  whether  that  research  can  be  applied
    generally or how it should be used  for  a  specific  analysis  of  the
    applicant's apparently mature appearance. Looked at fairly, neither the
    Recovery Team report or Dr Wild's report do more than speculate  as  to
    the reason  for  the  perceived  discrepancy  between  the  applicant's
    claimed age and the observations of his physical appearance at  various
    times. As above, that is not sufficient to show  irrationality  of  any
    materiality where, as above, the Recovery  Team  report  forms  a  very
    limited part of the respondent's decision.

90) In paragraph 32 the respondent  considers  the  applicant's  submission
    that his claimed  age  is  supported  by  his  having  attended  school
    consistently with that age. The final sentence of this paragraph refers
    to an age assessment conducted  in  2011  but  this  appears  to  be  a
    typographical error and the reference must intended to be  to  the  age
    assessment from 2012. The respondent  accepts  the  applicant's  school
    attendance was consistent with his claimed age. It was  not  irrational
    for the respondent to decline to place more weight on this factor where
    she provides a cogent reason for  not  doing  so,  as  the  appellant's
    attendance at school followed the less reliable age assessments and not
    the more reliable 2012 age assessment.

91) The decision of 14 July 2020 then turns in paragraphs 32 to 36  to  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal  from  2014  which  found  the
    applicant's asylum claim to be credible. The determination is  at  D15.
    The applicant submitted that  the  "global  positive  finding"  on  the
    applicant's credibility (in paragraphs 37 and 39 of the decision,  D28)
    in a judicial assessment should lead the respondent to  add  weight  to
    the applicant's claim about his  age.  Further,  at  the  time  of  the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, the respondent maintained  that
    the applicant's date of birth was the assigned date of 19  April  1989.
    The determination shows in paragraph 20(i) on D19 that  the  respondent
    submitted to the First-tier Tribunal that "if [the applicant  was  born
    in 1989 his reports cannot be true." The First-tier Tribunal went on to
    find the applicant's claim credible, however. The  applicant  maintains
    that the fact of his credibility being accepted where the respondent at
    the time considered that the account could not be consistent  with  his
    assigned age acts to  undermine  the  assigned  age  and  suggest  more
    strongly that the claimed age may be correct. The respondent  therefore
    erred in the decision of 14 July 2020 by not placing more weight in the
    applicant's favour on the basis of  these  aspects  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision.

92) The respondent addresses those submissions in the decision of  14  July
    2020 and does not accept them.  The Tribunal's view is that her reasons
    for not doing so, set out in paragraphs 33 to 36 of the  decision,  are
    cogent. The First-tier Tribunal was clearly aware of inconsistencies in
    the  evidence  concerning  the  applicant's  date  of  birth  and   the
    chronology of his account; see, for example, paragraph  20(i)  D19  and
    D20, paragraph 21 (i) of D21 and paragraph 34 on D26 and D27. The First-
    tier Tribunal went on to say in paragraph 34 of the  determination  (at
    D27):

         "There have been a variety  of  age  assessments  undertaken.   The
         appellant himself believes he was born in 1994 because that is what
         he was told by his grandmother, but the age assessment puts him  as
         being born in 1989.  It is known that he was in Italy in  2003  and
         2005 when he was fingerprinted.  As  Mr  Edwards  commented  it  is
         unlikely that his year of birth  will  ever  be  ascertained.   His
         'birth' certificate was obtained from Libya and can never have been
         verified against official records even if these ever existed.   The
         appellant has explained that  his  2007  statement  contained  many
         falsehoods as he was saying what he had been instructed to  say  by
         the agent and  he  sought  to  disclaim  it.   Against  this  whole
         background I find that errors in chronology are  not  determinative
         of the truth of the claim."

93) In this paragraph the First-tier Tribunal agrees with the  respondent's
    submission that the applicant's age may never  be  ascertained.  It  is
    also clear that the judge does not make a finding on either the claimed
    or the assigned age or attribute any particular age or date of birth to
    the applicant. My reading of the final  sentence  in  paragraph  34  is
    that, given the inconsistencies identified in the evidence,  trying  to
    reconcile dates or establish a consistent chronology was  not  possible
    but that this did not prevent the judge, after  conducting  a  holistic
    assessment of all of the evidence, from finding  the  applicant's  core
    claim of facing a risk on return was credible to the lower standard. As
    Ms Broadfoot QC submitted at the hearing, the judge  focussed  more  on
    assessing whether the evidence was capable of showing a risk on  return
    and  not  on  reconciling  the  applicant's  date  of  birth  and   the
    chronology. The applicant's submission  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision implies that the claimed age "may be true"  (paragraph  49  of
    applicant's skeleton argument) is not made out, therefore.

94) It is also perhaps worth pointing out that other aspects of the  First-
    tier Tribunal decision support the view that it cannot be  read  as  an
    endorsement of particular parts of the applicant's evidence even  where
    it finds his evidence in the round to be credible. It is  asserted  for
    the applicant that the respondent is wrong  to  maintain  that  he  was
    fingerprinted in Italy in 2003; see paragraph 6 above. The extract from
    paragraph 34  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  set  out  above,
    however, shows that the judge made a clear  finding  that  "he  was  in
    Italy in 2003".

95) The fact of the applicant being found credible  in  the  round  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal also cannot not bear the weight  asserted  for  the
    applicant. There is no suggestion  by  the  respondent  here  that  the
    applicant is not an honest person or that he is not entirely genuine in
    his belief as to his claimed age. The credibility finding of the First-
    tier Tribunal does not assist the applicant greatly, however, where, it
    is clear on the face of the First-tier Tribunal  determination  and  in
    other evidence, for example the age assessments, that the  evidence  on
    his date of birth remains very variable and not at all straightforward.
     It follows that the respondent did not err in paragraphs 32 to  36  of
    the decision of 14 July 2020 in finding that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision  did  provide  significant  assistance  to  the  applicant  in
    establishing his date of birth.

96) The applicant also challenged the comments made in paragraph 37 of  the
    decision on the prominence given to the 2012  age  assessment.  I  have
    already set out above why the respondent was entitled to find the  2012
    assessment  the  most  reliable  of  the  four  age  assessments.  This
    paragraph does not state that the approach taken by the respondent  was
    to require  documentary  proof  of  age  in  order  for  the  2012  age
    assessment to be displaced. It merely sets  out  the  correct  approach
    provided in the "Assessing Age" guidance that where there is an absence
    of documentary evidence,  prominence  should  be  given  to  a  "Merton
    compliant" age assessment.

97) The substantive remaining parts of the respondent's  decision  are  set
    out in paragraphs 44 to 46 above. As already indicated, the  respondent
    was entitled to work from the starting  position  of  the  age  already
    assigned to the applicant and  require  satisfactory  evidence  showing
    that this was not correct and should be amended. She  was  entitled  to
    give prominence to the 2012 age assessment. She explains the legitimacy
    of the  processes  she  applied  when  assessing  and  reassessing  the
    applicant's age.  The  decision  takes  into  account  the  applicant's
    medical issues. In so far as it finds, as  this  decision  does  above,
    that no breach of Articles 2 or 8 ECHR arises, it is rational.

98) For all of these reasons, the Tribunal concludes that the  respondent's
    decision of 14 July 2020 does not disclose  public  law  error  on  the
    ground of rationality.

Conclusion

99) The application for judicial review is refused as it has not been shown
    that the respondent's decision of 14 July 2020 breaches the applicant's
    rights under Article 2 and 8 ECHR or is irrational.

100) The Tribunal appreciates that this conclusion  may  have  very  serious
    implications for WA as he may experience it as a further repudiation of
    his deeply and genuinely held belief as to his correct date  of  birth.
    Any right-thinking person would wish to avoid causing him  any  further
    suffering and be deeply  concerned  at  the  prospect  of  any  further
    deterioration in his health. That being so, however,  does  not  permit
    the Tribunal do anything else here but fulfil its duty to apply the law
    as it is understood to the facts as found without fear or favour.

                                  ~~~~0~~~~



                                                                      UTIJR6

                                                                JR/1572/2020


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber

                               Judicial Review



                       The Queen on the application of

                                     WA
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent



                                   Before

                          Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt


                                    ORDER


Sitting remotely at Field House, 15-25 Breams Buildings,  London,  EC4A  1DZ
on 15 & 29 September 2020


UPON the application for judicial review having been  listed  for  a  remote
substantive hearing on 15 September 2020


AND  UPON  the  Tribunal  having  heard  oral  detailed  submissions  on  15
September 2020 from Mr Southey QC for the Applicant and Ms Broadfoot QC  for
the Respondent


AND UPON the Tribunal,  on  16  September  2020,  having  issued  directions
relating to the handing down of  the  judgment  and  having  promulgated  an
embargoed judgment on 25 September 2020


AND UPON the Applicant on 28  September  2020  having  submitted  a  written
application for permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal


AND UPON the Respondent informing the court on 28 September 2020 that  while
under usual principles, the Respondent would be entitled to her  costs,  she
does not seek an order for cost on the very specific facts of this  case  at
this stage but that the Respondent may seek her costs should the  matter  go
further


IT IS ORDERED:

         a. The Applicant's application for judicial review is dismissed.

         b. Permission to appeal is refused.

         c. No order as to costs, save that the publicly  funded  costs  of
            the Applicant shall be subject to detailed assessment.



REASONS FOR REFUSING PERMISSION TO APPEAL TO THE COURT OF APPEAL

 1. The Applicant applied for permission to appeal to the Court  of  Appeal
    in written submissions dated 28 September 2020.

 2. In paragraphs 6 and 8.4 of the grounds, the Applicant  maintained  that
    the Tribunal erred in law in failing to make a finding of fact  on  the
    Applicant's date of birth.

 3. At the hand down hearing on 29  September  2020,  after  receiving  the
    reserved judgment and in response  to  paragraphs  6  and  8.4  of  the
    Applicant's   grounds,   the   Respondent   invited    the    Tribunal,
    exceptionally, to amend the reserved judgment to include a  finding  of
    fact on the applicant's date of birth. The Applicant  objected  to  any
    substantive amendment to the reserved judgment.

 4. The Tribunal did not accede to  the  Respondent's  invitation  for  the
    following reasons. Firstly, it is clear from what is  in  the  judgment
    that the Tribunal does not accept on any basis that the case put before
    the Tribunal establishes that the  Applicant's  date  of  birth  is  as
    claimed.

 5. Further, the Tribunal does not accept the submission that in this  case
    the Tribunal had the task of reaching a view on the  Applicant's  exact
    date of  birth.  As  the  judgment  shows,  there  have  been  previous
    executive and judicial assessments  of  the  Applicant's  age  and  the
    Applicant's case here did not adduce primary evidence going to his age.
    The question for the Tribunal in this application was a different  one,
    whether the Applicant could establish that the  age  in  his  Biometric
    Residence Permit (BRP) was wrong and that the BRP should, instead, show
    his claimed date of birth.

 6. The evidence led before the Tribunal does not establish the Applicant's
    exact date of birth but only goes to various conflicting views  on  his
    date of birth. This is not a case  like  the  standard  age  assessment
    judicial review cases where, if the Applicant falls into  a  particular
    age range he is entitled to statutory benefits. As  before,  this  case
    can only succeed if the Applicant can show that the  Respondent  should
    not have entered the date that she has on the BRP and that  she  should
    have entered the particular claimed date of birth he puts forward.  For
    the avoidance of doubt, the Tribunal  indicates  again  here  that  the
    conclusions in the judgment are based on the lack of evidence  to  show
    that either of those propositions can be made out.

 7. The Tribunal therefore declined the Respondent's invitation to  make  a
    substantive  amendment  to  the  reserved  judgment  and  proceeded  to
    consider the Applicant's grounds for permission to appeal to the  Court
    of Appeal.

 8. The Applicant  submitted  in  paragraph  7  of  the  grounds  that  the
    Tribunal's decision on there being no breach  of  Article  2  ECHR  was
    wrong in law. The Tribunal did not find, as  alleged  in  the  grounds,
    that the respondent's view of the Applicant's age was determinative  of
    whether a breach of Article 2 ECHR arose.  The  determinative  question
    was whether a positive operational duty arose and lawful  reasons  were
    given for finding that it did not; see  paragraphs  47  to  64  of  the
    judgment. Paragraphs 65 to 71 of the judgment explain why the  case  of
    Wo? does not support the Applicant's submission that the Respondent  is
    under a positive operational duty.

 9. The Applicant submitted in paragraph 8 of the grounds that the Tribunal
    erred in finding that the Respondent's decision refusing to  amend  the
    BRP disclosed no breach of Article 8 ECHR. Paragraph 78 of the judgment
    sets out how the respondent has met any positive duty on her to respect
    the Applicant's Article  8  ECHR  rights,  was  entitled  to  look  for
    sufficient evidence justifying an amendment to a BRP and  was  not,  in
    law, required to do more than she did. There was no requirement  as  of
    the date of the decision  for  the  respondent  to  have  a  policy  on
    amending dates of birth in BRPs. Paragraph 8.4 of the grounds is  dealt
    with in paragraphs 4 to 6 above.

10. The Applicant  submitted  in  paragraph  9  of  the  grounds  that  the
    Tribunal's decision disclosed legal error  in  the  assessment  of  the
    rationality of the Respondent's decision. The  Tribunal  gave  detailed
    and cogent reasons in paragraphs 81 to 95 of the judgment  for  finding
    that the respondent took a rational approach to  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal. As noted by the Tribunal in paragraph  83  of  the
    judgment, the respondent's decision did recognise  the  impact  on  the
    applicant. The rationality of the respondent's decision  was  subjected
    to the requisite close scrutiny by the Tribunal; see paragraphs  81  to
    97 of the judgment.

11. The Tribunal  therefore  concludes  that  the  grounds  of  appeal  for
    permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal show no  real  prospect  of
    success.  The  case  turns  on  very  particular  facts   rather   than
    highlighting a novel point of  law  or  legal  point  of  more  general
    application. In all the circumstances, therefore, the Tribunal does not
    find that it is appropriate to grant  permission  to  appeal  for  some
    other compelling reason; [21] of J-S (Children) [2019] EWCA Civ 894 and
    [22]-[23] of JD (Congo) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 327 applied.


Signed: S Pitt
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt  Signed on: 29 September 2020

Dated:


[pic]

Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on: 29/09/2020

Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

A party may appeal against such a decision to  the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3).



