
|[pic]         |In the Upper Tribunal                        |JR/1588/2020  |
|              |(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             |              |
|              |Judicial Review                              |              |
|                                                                           |
|In the matter of an application for Judicial Review                        |
|                                                                           |
|              |The Queen on the application of              |              |
|              |                                             |              |
|              |FAD                                          |              |
|              |                                             |Applicant     |
|              |versus                                       |              |
|              |                                             |              |
|              |London Borough of Hackney                    |              |
|              |                                             |Respondent    |
|                                                                           |




                     Before Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede







            Application for judicial review: substantive decision



Having considered all documents lodged and having heard  from  the  parties'
respective representatives, Ms  M  Butler,  of  counsel,  instructed  by  TV
Edwards Solicitors, on behalf  of  the  Applicant  and  Ms  C  Rowlands,  of
Counsel,  instructed  by  London  Borough  of  Hackney  on  behalf  of   the
Respondent, at a hearing at Field House, London on 6 to 8 July 2021.



   Decision and Order of Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede



1) I make a declaration, for the reasons given in  the  attached  judgment,
   that FAD's date of birth is 13 April 2002.


   Costs

2) The Respondent shall pay 50% of the Applicant's reasonable costs of this
   claim to be assessed if not agreed. There shall be a detailed assessment
   of the Applicant's legal aid costs.



   Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal




3)  Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal is  refused  on  the  basis
   that there are no arguable errors of law in the  decision.  The  grounds
   submitted by the respondent amount to no more than  an  attempt  to  re-
   argue the issues already fully and properly determined by the Tribunal.




      Signed:     S Kebede


                 Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede


      Dated:           11 August 2021


The date on which this order was sent is given below


For completion by the Upper Tribunal Immigration and Asylum Chamber

Sent / Handed to the applicant, respondent and any interested  party  /  the
applicant's, respondent's and any interested party's solicitors  on  (date):
11 August 2021

Solicitors:
Ref No.
Home Office Ref:


Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

A party may appeal against such a decision to  the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
point of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal should apply to the  Upper
Tribunal for permission, at the hearing at which the decision is  given.  If
no application is made,  the  Tribunal  must  nonetheless  consider  at  the
hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule 44(4B)  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3).

                                    [pic]
                                                       Case No: JR/1588/2020
IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
(IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER)
                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                            London, EC4A 1WR

                                                              11 August 2021
                                   Before:

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE

                   - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                                  Between:

                                  THE QUEEN
                            on the application of

                                     FAD
                                                                   Applicant
                                   - and -

                          LONDON BOROUGH OF HACKNEY

                                                                  Respondent
                   - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -


    Ms M Butler of Counsel, instructed by TV Edwards Solicitors, for the
                                  applicant

 Ms C Rowlands of Counsel, instructed by the London Borough of Hackney, for
                               the respondent

                         Hearing date: 6-8 July 2021

                   - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                               J U D G M E N T

                   - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

Judge Kebede:

 1. The applicant, a national of Eritrea, claims that he  was  born  on  13
    April 2002 and was thus a child of 17 years of age when he entered  the
    UK on 2 October 2019.  The  respondent,  following  an  age  assessment
    completed on 10 January 2020, has assigned to him a date of birth of 13
    April 2000 on the basis of him being 19 years of age at the time of the
    assessment. This judicial review challenges the age assessment decision
    of 10 January 2020 on the ground that  the  applicant  is  the  age  he
    claims to be and, as part of that challenge, that  the  age  assessment
    was not Merton compliant, that the reliance of the age assessment  upon
    the applicant's appearance and demeanour  was  perverse  and  that  the
    respondent failed to give the applicant the benefit of the doubt.


    BACKGROUND


 2. The applicant arrived in the UK on 2 October 2019 as  an  unaccompanied
    asylum seeker claiming to be 17 years of age. He claims to  have  grown
    up in Tesseney, Eritrea, as a Pentecostal Christian, and to  have  fled
    to Ethiopia with his mother and siblings at the age of  three  or  four
    years after his father  was  arrested  and  detained  by  the  Eritrean
    authorities because of his activities related to his faith. He  had  no
    contact with his father after that time. The family stayed in  Ethiopia
    with the applicant's maternal uncle and moved around a lot, without any
    formal identification documents, with the result that his education was
    limited. His mother worked as a  street  vendor.  Between  October  and
    December 2010, the family moved to South Africa as his  maternal  uncle
    had moved there a  year  previously.  They  claimed  asylum  there  and
    received abuse from locals because of their  immigration  status.   The
    applicant went to school for a short time but was then not permitted to
    continue because of a lack of identity documents. In December 2016  the
    applicant's mother was attacked and killed when some young people broke
    into the house and tried to rape his sister. A  few  months  later,  in
    March 2017, his sister went missing and he had not heard from her since
    then. In September or October 2017,  he  and  his  brother  left  South
    Africa, using forged South African  passports  which  his  brother  had
    obtained. They flew from  Johannesburg  to  Casablanca  and  stayed  in
    Morocco for a few months before trying to  reach  Spain  by  sea.  They
    became separated during the journey and the applicant  heard  that  his
    brother had travelled to  France.  He  told  the  UN  workers  who  had
    arranged food and shelter for the people on the boats that he wanted to
    go to France to find his brother and he travelled by bus to  Paris  and
    then ended up in Calais. He did not find his brother. He spent about  a
    year and five months in Calais and then, after several failed  attempts
    and being sent back several times after he  was  caught  and  giving  a
    false name and date of birth, he managed to travel to the UK by lorry.


 3. The applicant managed to cut his way out of the lorry. He found his way
    to a police station and was handed over to social services  and  placed
    in the care of the respondent. He was placed initially in Dagenham  for
    about eight days, then Ilford for six to seven months and then Hackney,
    from June to September 2020, and he made friends and secured a place in
    college. He had hoped to find his brother here and had  been  searching
    for him and had sought assistance  from  the  Red  Cross  but  had  not
    managed to locate him.


 4. The applicant was interviewed by  the  respondent,  London  Borough  of
    Hackney ("Hackney"), on three occasions, on 5, 12 and 18 November 2019,
    to assess his age. On each occasion the same  Amharic  interpreter  was
    available to assist him, he was accompanied by the  same  advocate,  as
    the  'appropriate  adult',  from  the  Refugee  Council  and   he   was
    interviewed by the same two social workers, Rosemary Musoke and  Memory
    Meck, who then produced the age assessment report on 10  January  2020.
    The report concluded that he was aged  between  19  and  22  years  but
    recommended the lower age of 19, giving him a date of birth of 13 April
    2000.


 5. It is that assessment, as slightly amended on 12 February 2020 in order
    to correct typographical errors, which the applicant seeks to challenge
    in these proceedings.


 6. Following the completion  of  the  age  assessment,  the  provision  of
    support and accommodation from Hackney under section 20 of the Children
    Act 1989 was due to be terminated on 24 February 2020.


 7. On 21 February 2020 the  applicant  filed  an  application  for  urgent
    interim relief in a judicial review claim made  in  the  Administrative
    Court, seeking the continuance of support from the respondent under the
    Children Act 1989,  including  the  provision  of  accommodation  under
    section 20 and financial assistance under section 17.  On  21  February
    2020 Mrs Justice Eady ordered that the respondent continue  to  provide
    support  and  accommodation  under  the  Children  Act   1989   pending
    determination of his judicial review claim.


 8. On 6 March 2020 Mrs Justice Lang granted  permission  in  the  judicial
    review claim, ordered that  the  claim  be  transferred  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and again ordered that the  respondent  continue  to  provide
    support  and  accommodation  under  the  Children  Act   1989   pending
    determination of his judicial review claim or until further order.


 9. On 21 August 2020 the respondent applied  to  vary  the  order  of  Mrs
    Justice Lang so that the applicant could be moved from supported  local
    authority accommodation to section 95 asylum accommodation under  NASS,
    given that even by his own account he had  reached  18  years  of  age,
    although support would be continued on the basis of his claimed age, as
    a 'former looked after child'. The applicant resisted the application.


10. Lang J's order was varied by Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia in an  order
    dated 14 September 2020 reflecting the  respondent's  application.  The
    applicant sought confirmation from the respondent that a stay would  be
    granted on implementing that order pending the outcome  of  an  appeal,
    but that was refused by the respondent. Accordingly,  on  21  September
    2020 the applicant applied for a further urgent interim order requiring
    the respondent to continue  to  provide  support  to  him  as  well  as
    accommodation as a former relevant child. That application was  refused
    by Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia in a decision dated 22 September 2020,
    whereby permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal was  also  refused.
    That matter is, I understand, being pursued in the Court of Appeal. The
    applicant was, however, moved to NASS  accommodation  in  Earls  Court,
    West London, on 22 September 2020.


11. A case management hearing took place on 23 November 2020  before  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Smith and directions were issued for the disclosure  and
    filing of documents and for the listing of the matter which  then  came
    before me for a substantive hearing. The case was listed for  a  three-
    day hearing, but in the end was completed at the end of the second day,
    largely because one of the witnesses, Ms Babalola, did  not  attend  to
    give oral evidence as previously indicated.

    DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE


12. The parties produced an agreed bundle  of  documents  for  the  hearing
    comprising Tabs A to  G  and  including  witness  statements  from  the
    applicant, the applicant's solicitor  Lizan  Ghafoor,  the  applicant's
    allocated social worker Elizabeth Monakana,  the  applicant's  personal
    tutor and ESOL lecturer at New City College in Romford, Essex, Olubunmi
    Babalola, Victoria Nassozi a support worker for One Housing in  Hackney
    where the applicant  was  living  from  June  to  September  2020,  the
    applicant's allocated Personal Advisor from Hackney, Federica  Graziani
    and Fiona Curtis, Service Manager  and  social  worker  for  Supporting
    Independence  Services  (SIS)  Life  Limited;  the  notes  of  the  age
    assessment interviews prepared by  the  Refugee  Council  and  the  age
    assessment and amended age  assessment;  communications  from  relevant
    governmental departments in France, Spain and  Germany;  various  other
    documents disclosed by the respondent including  the  applicant's  Home
    Office file, the applicant's Social Services  file,  health  and  other
    assessments and progress reports from Hackney; and psychiatric  reports
    for the applicant from two consultant psychiatrists.


13. The following is a  summary  of  the  main  parts  of  the  documentary
    evidence, namely the age assessment report, the written  statements  of
    the witnesses who did not attend the hearing to give live evidence  and
    the psychiatric reports. Although I have not provided a summary of  the
    contents of the rest of the documentary evidence in the agreed  bundle,
    that is not an indication of the level of consideration given  to  that
    evidence nor the weight accorded to it. I have carefully read  all  the
    evidence, whether specifically  referred  to  and  summarised  in  this
    decision or not.


    Age Assessment 10 January 2020 (as amended on 12 February 2020).


14. I start  by  summarising  the  salient  parts  of  the  decision  under
    challenge, namely the age assessment report written by Rosemary Musoke,
    one of the two social workers who undertook the assessment, at  D46  to
    D61 of the agreed bundle.


15. Under the heading "Physical Appearance,  Demeanour",  it  was  observed
    that the applicant was of a small stature and slim build  and  that  he
    had a small beard. The assessor stated that she could not be certain of
    the applicant's age from his physical appearance  but  considered  that
    his demeanour and how  he  interacted  with  professionals  during  the
    assessments was contrary to how a young person aged 17 would behave. It
    was observed that the applicant faced the  interpreter  at  all  times,
    ignored the interviewers and played with his fingers or his  headphones
    and appeared slightly annoyed at times when he had to repeat himself or
    clarify his answers. The manner in which he  conducted  himself  during
    the interview gave the impression  that  he  was  mature.  He  did  not
    present any signs of trauma or loss during  the  interviews  and,  when
    speaking of his late mother, his demeanour did not change and he  could
    not, at first, recall the exact date of her death. He provided  limited
    information about his relatives and childhood experiences and  kept  on
    changing information. He did not demonstrate emotions of  sadness  when
    discussing difficult parts of his journey and stated that he could  not
    remember when responding to most of the  questions.  It  was  observed,
    further, that the applicant provided what seemed to be  an  implausible
    account of the background information before he travelled  as  well  as
    during his journey to the UK.  He sometimes appeared  rude  because  of
    the way he responded to  questions  and  his  emotional  responses  and
    frustrations at the information being asked of him at times during  the
    assessment was as would be expected from an adult.


16. Under the heading "Family composition and history", the assessor  noted
    that the applicant claimed to have left Eritrea when he was a child  of
    three to four years of age. He was the youngest of three  children  and
    had a brother born on 8 September 1993 and a sister  born  in  February
    1997. His mother was 46  years  old  when  she  died.  His  father  was
    detained because the family members  were  Pentecostal  Christians  and
    after that his mother was the main one looking after the  family,  with
    help from his maternal uncle. In Ethiopia his  family  moved  around  a
    lot, in several areas in Addis Ababa and in Awassa. They moved to South
    Africa in 2010 and lived in Orgis and Witbank, after his maternal uncle
    had moved there.  The applicant talked about the incident  in  December
    2016 when his mother was shot and killed by young people  who  came  to
    the family home and attempted to rape his sister and explained that his
    sister  had  gone  missing  after  that  and  he  had  had  no  further
    communication from her.


17. Under the heading "Interaction of  Person  During  Assessment"  it  was
    observed that the applicant's interaction  with  the  interviewers  was
    poor. He did not maintain eye contact with the interviewers  but  faced
    the interpreter and  became  frustrated  at  some  questions  and  when
    clarification was sought. Sometimes he did not seem to  be  taking  the
    assessment  seriously.  He  could  not  remember  a  number  of  things
    regarding his life and journey, and he would give estimates and  seemed
    to leave gaps in his account. He could  not  remember  if  he  went  to
    school in Eritrea and he could not remember what class or level he  was
    in, in Ethiopia, when the family left for South Africa. It was observed
    that the applicant seemed to be withholding important  information  and
    was not forthcoming in his answers and kept on  changing  answers.  The
    assessor considered that he might have been deliberately vague to avoid
    further questions, although acknowledged  that  he  could  be  avoiding
    upsetting questions due to trauma.


18. Under the heading "Education", it was observed that the  applicant  had
    very little memory about his education and could not remember going  to
    school in Eritrea nor the level attended or the name of his  school  in
    Ethiopia. He had started from year one in South Africa but had  had  to
    stop after a couple of months, in 2011, due to a lack of documentation.
    He could not remember his age at the time. His  next  formal  education
    was in the UK.


19. Under the headings "Journey  to  the  UK"  and  "Experience  along  the
    journey", the assessment records the applicant's explanation as to  why
    he and his brother left South Africa following his mother's  death  and
    his account of his brother having told him that they were going to  the
    UK, whereas they in fact went to Morocco, flying from  Johannesburg  to
    Casablanca in November 2017. They both had forged passports, his  being
    in a different name but containing his picture and  they  had  a  hotel
    booking made in Casablanca solely for the purposes  of  being  able  to
    leave the airport. After spending between five to seven months in Rabat
    they went to a place by the sea where  he  became  separated  from  his
    brother when getting on a boat to Spain and was collected from the  sea
    by the UN and given the choice to stay in Spain or leave  the  country.
    After learning that his brother was in France he was  given  directions
    by UN social workers to travel to France and he travelled there by  bus
    and then on to Calais where he stayed in the jungle for  about  a  year
    and five months before boarding a lorry to the UK. He cut his  way  out
    of the lorry and found a person who took him to a police  station.  The
    applicant explained that when he was  in  Calais  he  was  attacked  on
    several occasions and his mobile phone was taken away from him  because
    he was a child, and he was discriminated against by  the  older  people
    when he was trying to board a lorry for the UK.


20. Under the heading "Clients view on stated age" it is recorded that  the
    applicant said that he may have been 16 when he left  Morocco  in  2017
    and that his brother may have been  22  or  24  at  the  time.  It  was
    observed that the applicant had to have time to calculate when asked  a
    question about his age, which suggested that he might be older than  he
    claimed. It  was  also  observed  that  arguably  the  information  the
    applicant gave about his education did not give a true picture  of  his
    age.


21. Under the heading "Developmental Considerations/ Independent/ Self-Care
    Skills", it was observed that the applicant had shown  resilience  when
    it came to living alone, which showed that he had developed independent
    living  skills  since  leaving  Morocco.  There  is  reference  to  the
    applicant being courteous and  respectful  to  staff  and  having  good
    independent and self-care skills, but to  issues  about  his  behaviour
    when he permitted a guest to remain  in  his  flat  overnight  and  was
    smoking and drinking. As a result, he was on  a  visitor  ban  and  his
    weekly allowances were apportioned to limit his ability to buy alcohol.
    It was observed further that he was not seen  to  interact  with  other
    residents within the building and to  present  and  behave  as  someone
    older than 18 years  of  age.  He  travelled  independently  on  public
    transport and his level of confidence was mature.


22. Under the heading "Health and Medical Assessment", reference is made to
    regular medical check-ups, to the applicant  having  received  injuries
    which were treated in France and injuries from being attacked by a gang
    in South Africa and to his difficulty falling asleep and being at  risk
    of mental health problems due to the emotional trauma he had suffered.


23. Under the heading "Information from Documentation and Other Sources" it
    was confirmed that the applicant had no ID when he arrived  in  the  UK
    and that there was no information from other sources.


24. In her analysis of the information and her conclusions,  the  assessor,
    Ms  Musoke  observed  that  the  applicant  was  very  vague   in   his
    descriptions of his family life, that he  had  little  recollection  of
    significant childhood experiences, he had  difficulty  remembering  his
    age, he was unable to account for gaps  in  his  education  history  or
    provide relevant information about schools,  there  were  gaps  in  the
    information regarding communication with people in  Morocco  and  about
    his  loss  and  acquisition   of   mobile   phones   and   there   were
    inconsistencies in his account of the airport he flew from. In the  UK,
    he had demonstrated a good level  of  independence  and  had  not  been
    observed to require the support of adults for tasks,  he  presented  as
    mature and did not engage with other young people at the unit  and  his
    demeanour and manner  of  interacting  with  professionals  during  the
    assessments was contrary to how a young person aged 17 would behave. It
    was accepted by Ms Musoke that the trauma the applicant had experienced
    in South Africa, which included accidental and non-accidental  physical
    injuries inflicted by others, the death  of  his  mother,  moving  from
    various places at a young age,  the  journey  to  the  UK  as  well  as
    traumatic events in Calais that he did not wish to talk about, were all
    likely to have had a negative effect on his  memory.  However,  despite
    that being the case, she concluded that in her view the  applicant  was
    older than his claimed age of 17. Her assessment was that the applicant
    was aged between 19 and 22 years of age and recommended the lower  age,
    namely 19, with a date of birth of 13 April 2000.


    Statement from Olubunmi Babalola


25. In her statement of 2 November 2020 (page B31), Ms  Babalola,  an  ESOL
    lecturer at New City College in Romford, Essex, confirmed that she  had
    been in her role since January 2013, working with young people aged  16
    to 18 years. She stated that she had previously spent  seven  years  in
    other colleges teaching the same age group and had vast  experience  of
    working with young people within that age range. From 2010 to 2012  she
    worked as a community leader teaching community programmes and ESOL  to
    children and young people aged 11-18 years. She stated that she was the
    applicant's personal tutor and ESOL lecturer when he was a  student  at
    the college, from November 2019 to July 2019 (I assume she meant to say
    July 2020), and that he was 17 when he enrolled and turned 18 in  April
    2020. Ms Babalola referred to her previous letter of  22  January  2020
    (page E83) confirming her belief, at that time,  that  the  applicant's
    behaviour was that of a typical 17-year-old and  she  stated  that  she
    remained firm in her belief that he was currently 18 years of age. That
    belief was based upon weekly tutorial  sessions  where  they  discussed
    both personal and academic issues and her observations of the applicant
    in the classroom as well as in  their  weekly  tutorials.  Ms  Babalola
    confirmed that she believed that the applicant acted like a typical 18-
    year-old, and she did not get the impression that he was trying to  act
    younger than he was. She stated that she had had  students  who  looked
    and acted older than their age and  found  there  to  be  a  noticeable
    difference in behaviour between students who were 16 to  18  and  those
    over 18. She found that older  students  were  more  likely  to  follow
    classroom rules and she gave an example of that in relation to the  use
    of mobile phones during class. She found that 16 to  18-year-olds  were
    more likely to lie about small things and that older students  did  not
    like to engage in classroom activities. The applicant  fitted  in  with
    those observations and his behaviour was comparable to that of her  own
    sons when they were 18 years of age.


    Statement from Victoria Nassozi


26. In her statement of 2 November 2020 (page B35),  Ms  Nassozi  confirmed
    that she was a support officer working for One Housing in  Hackney  and
    had been in her current role since 2012,  prior  to  which  she  was  a
    supported housing officer. She had been working with  vulnerable  young
    people since 2000: from 2008 with young people aged 18-25 and prior  to
    that with mixed groups aged 18-60. The applicant was only there from  1
    June 2020 until 28 September 2020, when his tenancy ended.  Ms  Nassozi
    said that she spoke to the applicant  daily  and  had  weekly  key-work
    sessions on the telephone. After each key-work session she updated  his
    care-plan, which outlined their discussions,  goals  and  actions.  She
    would see him coming and going from the accommodation as she was  based
    two minutes' walk away.  Ms Nassozi said that she helped the  applicant
    to contact the bank a few times to make payments for his legal aid  and
    to set up ways of doing telephone banking and  she  assisted  him  with
    independent living skills to  make  sure  he  bought  and  cooked  food
    properly and went out. She  enrolled  him  on  the  Duke  of  Edinburgh
    programme, and she encouraged him to go to the park and play  football.
    Ms Nassozi said that the applicant seemed younger than 18 in some  ways
    as he did not understand some of the things that it would  be  expected
    he would understand, such as  the  ban  on  having  visitors  which  he
    breached twice, but in other ways he seemed more mature. He would  hang
    out a lot with other young people in the building and he  got  on  well
    with the others. She never saw him with anyone older than 18  and  most
    of his friends were 18. She did not see anything different and older in
    his behaviour to other 18-year-olds.


    Medical reports


    Report of Initial Health Assessment dated 28 October 2019 (page E1)


27. This report was prepared by  Dr  Elena  Roosinovich  of  the  Community
    Paediatrics Looked  After  Children's  Health  Team,  Hackney  Ark,  at
    Homerton University Hospital following an assessment on 24 October 2019
    in which the applicant was accompanied by his social worker,  Elizabeth
    Monakana, his student social worker Schantal Morisson  and  an  Amharic
    interpreter. In that report reference was made to the applicant  having
    left Eritrea at the age of eight or nine  years  due  to  his  family's
    persecution on account of their Protestant faith and to having fled  to
    South Africa where he remained until 2018. Reference was  made  to  the
    applicant encountering on numerous occasions physical violence  from  a
    gang in South Africa which persistently attacked him and his family and
    to him and his brother then fleeing South Africa, flying to Morocco and
    then crossing Europe to the UK where they became  separated.  Reference
    was made to his uncle remaining in South Africa  and  to  his  sister's
    whereabouts being unknown following her rape. The report also  referred
    to injuries received by the applicant to his hand and leg from  falling
    off a moving lorry and to the end of his fifth right finger  being  cut
    off by a gang and a head and ear injury received at the same  time,  as
    well as to events that happened in Calais which were too traumatic  for
    the applicant to talk about. The report concluded that  it  was  likely
    that the applicant had been chronically malnourished  in  view  of  his
    social circumstances and that he was at risk of mental health  problems
    due to the emotional trauma he had experienced.


    Psychiatric report  from  Dr  Jagmohan  Singh,  a  Consultant  Forensic
    Psychiatrist, dated 4 September 2020 (page F9)


28. This report followed an  assessment  by  way  of  a  video  call  on  3
    September  2020,  on  the  instructions  of   the   applicant's   legal
    representatives. The report refers to the applicant  stating  that  the
    only issues he had relating to mental health were the  separation  from
    his brother and difficulties sleeping. Dr Singh found there  to  be  no
    objective evidence at the time  of  the  assessment  of  the  applicant
    having any major mental health illnesses, any cognitive  deficits,  any
    major medical condition impacting on his mental health or  any  history
    of neurodevelopmental disorders. Neither were there any  post-traumatic
    stress symptoms. Dr Singh  could  not  elicit  any  significant  memory
    impairment or psychiatric features that could explain  the  applicant's
    inability at times to recall information. He found there to be  nothing
    significant from the applicant's history or  from  his  interaction  to
    suggest that he suffered with any  intellectual  impairment,  cognitive
    impairment or  psychological  issues  and  concluded  that  no  special
    adjustments were required for the court hearing.


    Letter dated 8 February 2021 from Psychiatry Liaison Service at Chelsea
    & Westminster Hospital


29. This letter is headed "Impression: Adjustment  Disorder"  and  followed
    the applicant's attendance at Chelsea & Westminster Hospital  reporting
    a low  mood,  feeling  depressed  and  having  suicidal  ideation,  and
    reported that whilst  the  applicant  was  otherwise  a  resilient  and
    determined young male, he was facing on-going stressors relating to his
    asylum application  and  issues  with  his  accommodation.  The  letter
    acknowledged receiving many asylum seekers from the same accommodation,
    the  Amsterdam  Hotel,  reporting  about  the  conditions  there  which
    negatively impacted upon their mental health. It  was  noted  that  the
    applicant  was  no  longer  able  to  access  education  as   his   new
    accommodation had no Wi-Fi to complete remote  studies  and  there  was
    otherwise a two-hour commute to his college. Further the  accommodation
    had no cooking facilities  and  did  not  provide  hot  meals.  It  was
    observed that he was a young, vulnerable 18-year-old who  was  isolated
    and separated from his brother  and  that  if  his  situation  did  not
    improve it would have a negative impact on his mental health. A request
    was made for his accommodation to be assessed so  that  he  could  have
    access to cooking facilities and Wi-Fi.


    Psychiatric  report  from  Dr  Susannah   Fairweather,   a   Consultant
    Psychiatrist, dated 17 May 2021 (page G1)


30. This report followed an assessment on  1  and  3  April  2021,  on  the
    instructions  of  the  applicant's  legal  representatives.  The  first
    appointment was in person  at  Dr  Fairweather's  consulting  room  and
    lasted for approximately three hours and the second was a continuation,
    by telephone, which lasted for  just  over  one  hour.  Dr  Fairweather
    considered that the applicant was fit to give  evidence  in  court  but
    that he should be treated as a vulnerable witness. She found  that  the
    applicant suffered from an adjustment disorder with depressed mood  and
    developmental disruption. She noted that he reported  significant  post
    traumatic symptoms but that he  would  not  meet  the  full  diagnostic
    criteria for PTSD. She was of the opinion that the acute  stressor  for
    his adjustment disorder was the accommodation move  which  resulted  in
    less social support, difficulty in accessing education and less contact
    with friends.


31. Dr Fairweather referred to  the  applicant's  transfer  to  the  asylum
    seeker support accommodation in  Earls  Court  in  West  London  on  22
    September 2020 which resulted in  him  being  unable  to  continue  his
    college education commenced in East London. She referred to  him  being
    told on 3 February  2021  that  he  was  being  moved  to  a  different
    accommodation the following day, but he did not travel there  when  the
    driver came as he was very  distressed  and  anxious,  and  his  mental
    health rapidly declined over the following days to the  extent  that  a
    referral was made to the local authority  clinical  team.  He  reported
    thoughts of harming himself and suicidal ideation, which culminated  in
    an urgent mental health assessment at Chelsea and Westminster  Hospital
    where he was assessed and given a provisional diagnosis  of  adjustment
    disorder. He was discharged from hospital the same day and went back to
    the care of his GP. He subsequently disclosed to his solicitors  on  19
    March 2021 that he was self-medicating with medications obtained from a
    friend to help him sleep. Dr Fairweather quoted from the documents with
    which she had been provided in relation to the applicant's history  and
    provided comments on parts of the age assessment report in  so  far  as
    they related to his psychiatric condition. She set out the  applicant's
    account of his family  and  background,  his  experiences  in  Eritrea,
    Ethiopia and South Africa and his journey to the UK.


32. Dr Fairweather concluded that  the  applicant's  presentation  and  the
    deterioration in his mental health were consistent  with  the  previous
    report from Dr Singh, the subsequent move  to  different  accommodation
    and the diagnosis given in February 2021  by  the  psychiatric  liaison
    practitioner at the time of his attendance at Chelsea  and  Westminster
    Hospital. She was of the view that  an  adjustment  disorder  diagnosis
    with  the  specifier  with  depressed  mood  captured  the  applicant's
    presentation most  accurately,  but  she  was  concerned  that  if  his
    inadequate social situation persisted and his  depressed  state  became
    more evident, then major depressive disorder would be a  more  accurate
    diagnosis. Dr Fairweather noted that she had identified  some  symptoms
    consistent with PTSD and  that  the  applicant  had  been  observed  to
    present with symptoms  of  PTSD  by  professionals,  but  she  did  not
    currently make such a diagnosis as he did  not  present  with  all  the
    required symptoms. She considered that the cumulative impact  upon  the
    applicant of multiple adverse experiences  in  childhood  significantly
    pre-disposed him  to  developing  a  psychiatric  disorder  across  his
    lifetime.  She  observed  that  his  adolescent  development  had  been
    disrupted and affected and that that affected his current presentation.
    Dr Fairweather also commented that the applicant's depressive  symptoms
    would have an impact on his memory and ability  to  recall  information
    and that his difficulties in providing a history should not necessarily
    be taken as evidence of a lack of credibility.


    Psychiatric addendum report from Dr Susannah Fairweather, dated 23 June
    2021 (page G57)


33. In an addendum to her report Dr Fairweather responded to questions from
    the respondent. In response to the request for  confirmation  that  the
    applicant's current presentation was  not  the  same  as  when  he  was
    interviewed in the course of his age assessment,  Dr  Fairweather  said
    that she could not entirely rule out him suffering psychiatric disorder
    when he was interviewed in November and December 2019, given that there
    was reference to him experiencing psychiatric symptoms over  time.  She
    clarified that her finding of the applicant's concrete thinking,  which
    was not as developed as expected for his age, provided support for  him
    having suffered  experiences  in  his  childhood  which  disrupted  his
    developmental trajectory and also  supported  his  account  of  limited
    formal education.

    THE HEARING: ORAL EVIDENCE


34. I heard oral evidence from the witnesses. For the applicant  there  was
    just himself  and  for  the  respondent  there  were  three  witnesses,
    Elizabeth Monakana,  Federica  Graziani  and  Fiona  Curtis.  All  gave
    evidence before me over a period of two  days:  the  applicant  and  Ms
    Monakana on the first day and Ms Graziani and Ms Curtis on  the  second
    day.


35. Before the applicant gave  his  evidence  it  was  made  clear  by  the
    Tribunal, and with Ms Rowlands' agreement, that he was to be treated as
    a  vulnerable  witness,  further  to  the  indication  of  such  by  Dr
    Fairweather in her psychiatric reports. Careful  regard  was  therefore
    taken of the Presidential Guidance Note 2 of 2010 in that respect,  and
    the applicant was provided with frequent breaks and was addressed  with
    concern to ensure that he  understood  and  was  comfortable  with  the
    proceedings. There was no indication that he had any difficulty at  any
    point in understanding what was being asked of him or that he  had  any
    problems throughout the proceedings. He had the benefit of  an  Amharic
    interpreter when giving his evidence and in  summarising  for  him  the
    evidence of the first witness, Ms Monakana, on the first day.  Although
    he confirmed that he understood and was able to communicate in English,
    he preferred to use the services of the interpreter to  give  his  oral
    evidence and confirmed, during the proceedings, that he had no problems
    with the interpretation and with his  understanding  of  the  questions
    asked of him. There was no Amharic interpreter available on the  second
    day, when the evidence of the last two witnesses was given and for  the
    submissions, since there was a cancellation early that morning, but  Ms
    Butler confirmed that she had no problem proceeding  that  day  without
    the interpreter as the applicant had completed his evidence and  had  a
    good understanding in English. Although she  requested  an  interpreter
    for the third day, there was no need as the proceedings were  completed
    by the end of the second day.


    Witnesses for the Applicant.


    The Applicant

36. The applicant confirmed his four statements,  dated  20  February  2020
    (B1), 21 September 2020 (B3), 2 November 2020  (B7)  and  3  June  2021
    (G67) and adopted them as his evidence in chief.


37. In his first statement he explained that  he  had  not  understood  the
    purpose of the age assessment interviews before  attending  at  Hackney
    Council and was surprised when he was called back after the first  one.
    There were four meetings and he found them stressful. He  was  asked  a
    lot of questions and often guessed when asked for dates of  events.  He
    felt like he was being interrogated. He was given a  copy  of  the  age
    assessment report at the last  meeting,  which  lasted  for  about  two
    hours.


38. At the time of his second statement  the  applicant  had  been  in  his
    accommodation in Hackney for around three months and he explained  that
    he received support from the placement staff as well  his  friends  who
    lived there. He was helped to secure a place at college  and  to  apply
    for and renew his oyster card and the support workers showed him around
    the area and the local amenities. He felt part of a small community  in
    his accommodation, but he also had friends outside his placement who he
    had met when he arrived in the UK.   He  attended  college  with  other
    Eritreans and played football in the park with his friends and he  felt
    settled. He was stressed at the thought of having to move.


39. In his third statement the applicant stated that he knew  his  date  of
    birth because his mother has told  him  many  times  and  he  also  saw
    letters when they lived in South Africa with his date of birth and that
    of his family. His brother's birthday was  8  September  1993  and  his
    sister's was in February 1997. The applicant gave details of  his  life
    in Eritrea, Ethiopia and South Africa. He said that his family moved to
    Ethiopia in 2005 and moved around a lot. He said that it was  difficult
    to give a proper timeline because his memory was confused.  They  moved
    to South Africa in 2010, between October and December 2010, and claimed
    asylum there. He was only able to attend school there for a few months.
    In 2015 they moved from Orgies to Witbank, where his uncle was  living,
    and his mother was shot on 23 December 2016 and died the following  day
    in hospital. His sister disappeared in March 2017 and there was  a  lot
    of speculation as to what may have happened to her. He and his  brother
    left  South  Africa  in  October  2017,  flying  from  Johannesburg  to
    Casablanca. The applicant gave details of his time in Morocco  and  his
    onward journey to Spain, France and the UK,  and  his  search  for  his
    brother from whom he had become separated when he  boarded  a  boat  in
    Morocco. He stated that he took several attempts to get to the UK  from
    Calais and on one occasion he ended up in Germany and was caught by the
    police and taken to a police station and fingerprinted. He  refused  to
    claim asylum there and travelled back to France instead. He was stopped
    many times by the police and gave a different name every  time,  as  he
    was advised to do by the older boys. The applicant gave details of  his
    accommodation in the UK and referred to the end  of  his  accommodation
    with Hackney Council and the move to NASS accommodation on 22 September
    2020. He explained how he was unhappy in the accommodation as he  could
    not cook there, there was no Wi-Fi and his  friends  and  college  were
    very far away so he mostly stayed in his room and felt alone.


40.  In  his  fourth  and  final  statement,  the  applicant  responded  to
    information from the respondent confirming his use of  different  names
    and dates of birth in France and Germany. He  explained  that  he  gave
    different details every time he was stopped by the  police  as  he  was
    advised to do that by other people he met when travelling, so that  the
    police would not know he had been  stopped  previously.  He  also  gave
    different nationalities, to match those of the others in the group with
    which he was travelling. He understood that there was information  from
    France showing his date of birth recorded in Spain as 19  January  1985
    and he explained that he was advised by other  travellers  to  give  an
    older date of birth so that he would not be prevented  from  travelling
    from place to place. He was told that the name recorded in Germany  was
    Semir Juher Sherif and he recalled having given this  name  because  he
    had had a friend in Morocco called Juher Sherif.


41. When cross-examined by Ms Rowlands, the applicant said that he had some
    friends in Shepherds Bush  and  Finsbury  Park.  He  learned  to  speak
    English in South Africa and was able to communicate in English when  he
    arrived in the UK, although a Tigrinya interpreter was provided on  the
    day he arrived, which was the wrong language. In  the  first  place  he
    stayed in Dagenham, he was not shown around, but in his first placement
    in Ilford, when he was with SIS Life and Fiona  Curtis,  he  was  shown
    around and he asked about a gym and a park to play football. He used to
    cook meals in his first  placement,  although  at  first  his  roommate
    cooked for him. He had learned to cook dishes in Morocco. He  confirmed
    that he kept his place clean and tidy because that was the house  rule.
    He was not happy when a third flatmate moved in as he did not speak the
    same language and so they could not understand each other, whereas  the
    second flatmate was Eritrean and they got on well. The other flat  mate
    would take charge of the TV and that was the main  reason  they  wanted
    him to move out. The Eritrean  flatmate  was  17  years  old.  He  (the
    Eritrean flatmate) was living in  the  accommodation  before  him  (the
    applicant). In response to Ms Rowlands' question about  meeting  people
    in Elephant & Castle, the applicant said that he  went  there  to  meet
    friends he knew from when he lived in Ilford.


42. The applicant confirmed that Elizabeth Monakana looked after  him  when
    he was living in Ilford, but he had not seen her since  then.  Federica
    looked after him afterwards. When asked by Ms Rowlands  about  the  age
    assessment he said that Elizabeth was not the person who  explained  it
    to him, but it was someone else. At first, he did not  know  about  the
    process, but when it happened a few times he started to understand.  He
    did not know about the Home Office not accepting his age.  Ms  Rowlands
    told the applicant that Elizabeth had explained to him  about  the  age
    assessment, at a meeting on 25 October about his pathway plan,  but  he
    replied that he did not remember. He only remembered it being discussed
    after it had happened and not before. He remembered asking her why they
    were pressurising him like that.


43. Ms Rowlands put to the applicant that later on, when the time came  for
    him to move to another accommodation, Federica came  to  his  home  and
    explained to him many times about the move and when  it  was  going  to
    happen, and she told him that he should pack his  bags.  The  applicant
    said that he was not so sure it  was  many  times,  but  he  remembered
    talking to her on the telephone. He did  not  agree  with  the  way  Ms
    Rowlands explained the situation and said that he was notified  in  the
    evening but replied that there was not enough time. He agreed he had  a
    meeting with Federica, but he said that she did not  mention  that.  Ms
    Rowlands put it to the applicant that Federica had  spent  three  hours
    with him explaining about the move, on a Friday, and had told him to be
    ready on the Monday, but the applicant disagreed and said that  it  did
    not happen like that. When reminded that this was the move in September
    to the Amsterdam Hotel and not  the  attempted  move  in  February,  he
    agreed that she had told him about it, but he said  that  he  was  late
    when they came for him as he  had  been  at  a  friend's  house  saying
    goodbye. He did not recall telling his solicitor that he was only given
    one hour's notice.


44. Ms Rowlands asked the applicant about his time in South Africa. He said
    that his brother had brought the false passport which he used to  leave
    the country. He did not recall the name on the passport, only  that  it
    was a Muslim name. He did not  recall  saying  that  the  name  in  the
    passport was Semir Anwar Juher. When asked why that name had come up in
    the age assessment, he said that that was a friend of his from  Morocco
    and he may have given that name  when  talking  about  his  travels  in
    Europe and the other refugees there. He only knew someone called  Juher
    Sherif but not someone of the other name. He agreed that  he  may  have
    given the name Semir Juher Sherif when he was in Germany as he gave  so
    many different names whenever when he was arrested, and  he  could  not
    remember. He also gave different dates of birth. The agent had  advised
    him to do that, and his brother had told him to listen to the agent. He
    had never been told to  give  a  younger  age  as  that  would  not  be
    beneficial. A younger person would not be allowed to move from place to
    place, so he had been told to give an older age. A  lot  of  times  the
    authorities of the different European countries thought that he  was  a
    child, but he told them that he was not, because he  did  not  want  to
    stay there. However, when he came to the UK,  he  thought  his  brother
    would be here and he would stay here so he gave the correct age. He had
    never been told that it would be beneficial to him to  give  a  younger
    age in the UK.


45. Ms Rowlands then asked the applicant about his knowledge of his date of
    birth. He said that the letters he referred to in his statement,  which
    he had seen in his home in South Africa, contained his  photograph  and
    date of birth. The letters were written in English. He could  not  read
    English well at the time but knew enough to read his date of birth. His
    mother told him his date of birth in  the  western  calendar,  not  the
    Ethiopian calendar. He did not know his date of birth in the  Ethiopian
    calendar. The applicant then said that his mother told him how  old  he
    was, but whenever he looked at the letters  with  his  photograph,  she
    would tell him that that was his date of  birth.  They  all  had  those
    letters as they were asylum seekers there  and  they  were  the  papers
    given to anyone who applied for asylum. They had to  be  renewed  every
    three or six months. The applicant agreed that that information may  be
    on the authorities' records in South Africa, but he said  that  he  did
    not know how to request a copy. When asked about efforts to contact his
    uncle in South Africa who could assist in providing such evidence,  the
    applicant said that he did not how to get in touch with him and that if
    he could find him, he could help him in so many ways. He agreed that it
    was possible he did not mention his uncle to the Red Cross and had only
    mentioned his brother and sister, but if they found his brother then he
    could help him find their uncle. When  questioned  about  the  passport
    used to leave South Africa,  the  applicant  agreed  that  it  had  his
    photograph in it, but he  did  not  recall  going  to  get  a  passport
    photograph and assumed that  his  brother  had  used  a  photograph  he
    already had on his phone. He recalled signing a piece of paper  at  the
    airport before leaving South Africa, but he did not understand what  it
    was. He thought it was to do with the hotel booking  in  Morocco.  When
    asked about his previous reference, at the age assessment interview, to
    having  flown  from  Frankfurt  Airport,  which  he  then  changed   to
    Johannesburg, the applicant denied having said that. He  said  that  he
    had never been to Frankfurt. He was in Germany, but only at the border.


46. When asked about his attitude to the rules of the  accommodation  where
    he was staying, the applicant said that he respected the rules, but  he
    did not like them if they were too strict. He did  not  like  the  rule
    that he was not allowed to stay out overnight and  that  he  could  not
    bring friends in. He agreed that he drank with his friend but said that
    was the first time. He did not recall the incident when 7 cans of  beer
    were found but said that that was possible. He may have lied about that
    because he had a doctor's appointment in the morning, but  he  did  not
    lie most of the time. The applicant said that it was possible  he  told
    Fiona he was not a child, and he could  handle  his  shopping  himself.
    They argued a lot as they lived in the same house,  but  he  had  never
    liked anyone telling him he was a child, even when he was little.  When
    asked whether the agent who took him to Morocco told him to say that he
    was younger than his real age when he came to  the  UK,  the  applicant
    said that was not the case. He was currently 19 years of age  and  that
    was the truth.


47. When re-examined by Ms Butler, the applicant said that his English  had
    improved a lot since coming here. When he first came to  the  UK  there
    were some members of staff in his accommodation whose accents when they
    were speaking English were difficult to understand, but  he  understood
    more nowadays. With regard to the age assessment interviews, he did not
    know what they were about at first and did not expect to come back  for
    further interviews after the first one. When asked about  the  passport
    he used to travel  to  Morocco  and  the  name  in  the  passport,  the
    applicant said that he did not know anyone called Semir Anwar. The name
    of the friend he had in Morocco was Joher Sharif. As for when  he  went
    to Germany, he said that they caught them, they were released, and they
    went immediately to France. He was in Germany for one day.


    Witnesses for the Respondent.


    Elizabeth Monakana


48. Ms Monakana confirmed her two statements, the first undated  (B24)  and
    the second dated 6 November 2020 (B26) and adopted them as her evidence
    in  chief.  The  first  statement  was  prepared  in  support  of   the
    respondent's application to vary the order of Mrs Justice Lang so  that
    the  applicant  could  be  moved   from   supported   local   authority
    accommodation to section 95 asylum accommodation under  NASS.  In  that
    statement, Ms Monakana confirmed that she had  qualified  as  a  social
    worker in August 2019 after obtaining a master's degree in Social  Work
    from Hertfordshire University, that she had been employed by the London
    Borough of Hackney as a social worker since September 2019 and that she
    had been the allocated social worker in the applicant's case  since  10
    October 2019.


49. In her second and lengthier statement, Ms Monakana stated that she  did
    not have access to the applicant's casefile owing to a cyber-attack  on
    Hackney's systems and that  she  was  therefore  limited  in  providing
    factual dates. She explained that her  role  was  to  ensure  that  the
    applicant had  suitable  accommodation,  access  to  education,  health
    services, extra-curricular activities and financial support to meet his
    needs. She visited  the  applicant  approximately  five  times  in  his
    placement and approximately three times  in  other  settings  and  also
    maintained contact with him over the phone.  She  was  responsible  for
    organising the age assessment and had  explained  the  process  to  the
    applicant prior to the assessment. She confirmed  that  the  assessment
    was  Merton  compliant.  Ms  Monakana  provided  information  from  the
    placement staff at the applicant's semi-independent accommodation  with
    SIS Life who reported that he presented as mature with good independent
    skills, that he was  able  to  travel  on  his  own  soon  after  being
    accommodated and was able to prepare his own meals and ensure  that  he
    had sufficient food in his flat. She referred to  him  challenging  the
    placement rules by allowing a friend to stay overnight and having seven
    beer cans and tobacco recovered from his room, by smelling  of  alcohol
    despite denying having had any although later admitting to it,  and  by
    being reported missing from the placement approximately three times. Ms
    Monakana referred to having seen a picture  of  a  young  girl  on  the
    applicant's WhatsApp display and to him not giving  a  truthful  answer
    about who she was.  Ms  Monakana  responded  to  the  applicant's  ESOL
    tutor's views about his age and commented on the  applicant's  response
    to offers of assistance in accessing groups in his  area,  noting  that
    his ability to consider options and make his  own  decisions  indicated
    that he was mature and possibly over the age he was claiming to be.  Ms
    Monakana commented on the applicant's failure to mention having been in
    Germany, which demonstrated an intentional withholding of  information,
    and his use of aliases and adult dates of birth throughout Europe.  She
    was confident that her social worker colleagues in  Europe  would  have
    ensured that the applicant was safeguarded as a  child,  if  he  was  a
    child. In conclusion her view was that the applicant  showed  behaviour
    which was synonymous with young people over the age of 17.


50. In her evidence when cross-examined, Ms Monakana confirmed that her job
    with Hackney was her first  job  as  a  qualified  social  worker.  The
    applicant was not the first young person she dealt with but one of  the
    early ones, although she had previously worked with many other  asylum-
    seeking young people in a different local authority. She confirmed that
    she had met the applicant about eight times, five in his  accommodation
    and three elsewhere including in  their  offices  and  at  his  medical
    appointment at the health centre in the Hackney building  which  lasted
    for about two hours. She last saw the applicant when he was handed over
    to Federica in March last year. When asked how many age assessments she
    had been involved in by November 2019, Ms Monakana said  that  she  had
    completed one and had arranged others for her colleagues. She  did  not
    attend the assessment for the applicant, but she organised it  and  she
    told the applicant about it. She was able to say  that  it  was  Merton
    compliant as she had done the age assessment training and the applicant
    had the relevant people there including an advocate on his  behalf  who
    did not raise any concerns. When Ms Butler put it to her that there was
    no occasion when adverse matters were put to the applicant so  that  he
    could respond, Ms  Monakana  said  that  that  happened  at  the  third
    interview and that if there had been any concerns,  the  advocate  from
    the Refugee Council would have raised them.


51. Ms Monakana confirmed that the matters referred to at [7] of her second
    statement, such as the  applicant's  consumption  of  alcohol  and  the
    discovery of seven beer cans, were based upon the reports given to  her
    by others. She confirmed that she was aware that a  significant  amount
    of 17-year-olds drank alcohol even though not legally permitted  to  do
    so, but her concern was that the applicant had previously reported that
    he did not drink alcohol. It was  not  the  incident  itself  that  was
    evidence of the applicant being an adult, but the way he went about it,
    denying that he had been drinking. She confirmed  that  there  were  no
    other reports of such incidents to her knowledge. Ms  Butler  read  out
    several parts of the psychiatric report of Dr Fairweather  in  relation
    to the impact of the disrupted development and adjustment  disorder  on
    maturity and ability to recall matters. When asked by Ms Butler if  she
    accepted that inconsistencies  in  the  applicant's  account  could  be
    because of his past trauma, Ms Monakana  accepted  that  to  an  extent
    trauma had some impact upon recollection but said  that  the  applicant
    had never mentioned to her that he had gone to  Germany.   Ms  Monakana
    confirmed that the applicant was given 10 hours of  one-to-one  support
    for the first six months of being in the UK and  that  weekly  progress
    reports were prepared from that support. She explained that there  were
    only three such  reports  available  because  of  the  cyber-attack  on
    Hackney's systems but she was sure there were  otherwise  more  reports
    which she could not access.


52. Ms Monakana confirmed that the applicant had  support  with  opening  a
    bank account, bursary payments and budgeting,  and  other  support  but
    said  that  that  was  all  part  of  semi-independence  training.  She
    confirmed that she had helped the applicant when he had concerns  about
    his new flatmate, and she had spoken to the placement manager about it.
    She confirmed that he  had  had  support  from  the  staff  for  making
    applications such as for an oyster card  and  a  lunch  card  and  that
    Federica was supporting him in dealing with finances and had helped him
    with matters since he had moved to Earls Court. However, in the initial
    placement in Ilford, the applicant  had  said  that  he  did  not  need
    support. Ms Butler asked Ms  Monakana  if  she  accepted  that  asylum-
    seeking children living in Europe would develop independent skills  and
    she said that she did. Ms Butler asked Ms  Monakana  if  she  had  ever
    asked the applicant if he  had  travelled  to  Germany,  to  which  she
    replied that she had not, but she had asked him which countries he  had
    travelled to and he had mentioned France, Spain  and  Morocco  but  not
    Germany and so the omission seemed to be intentional.  When  Ms  Butler
    pointed Ms Monakana to the Home Office Welfare form  completed  shortly
    after he came to the UK, she accepted that  he  had  mentioned  Germany
    then, but maintained that he had not disclosed that to her, and she did
    not accept that he had  not  deliberately  lied  about  it.  Ms  Butler
    pointed out the ADCS Guidance at page 63 which referred to a margin  of
    error of 5 years  in  assessing  age  and  asked  Ms  Monakana  if  her
    assessment of a 2-year age difference was within that margin, to  which
    she replied that it could be.


53. When re-examined by Ms Rowlands, Ms  Monakana  said  that  the  correct
    finding was within the margins of 19 and  22,  as  stated  in  the  age
    assessment. She was unable to explain why  the  lower  age  of  19  was
    recorded. Ms Monakana did not accept that, if the applicant looked like
    a child, the German authorities would simply let him go when  he  asked
    to leave, but she considered that they would make an effort to keep him
    and support him. Ms Rowlands referred Ms Monakana to her case-notes  at
    E195 and asked if she could remember what she meant when she said  that
    "the meaning of an age assessment was explained", to which she  replied
    that she explained to the applicant that the Home Office had  an  issue
    with his age because he had no paperwork and  that  he  would  have  an
    interview with social workers to try to assess his age. Her manager was
    with her at the time. Ms Butler remined Ms Monakana of the  case  notes
    about the applicant having been found with beer cans and asked  her  if
    she recalled him admitting to drinking half a can of beer, to which she
    replied that she did not recall all the discussion.


    Federica Graziani


54. Ms Graziani confirmed her two statements, the first  dated  5  November
    2020 (B40) and the second dated 17 June 2021 (G77) and adopted them  as
    her evidence in chief. In her first statement she  confirmed  that  she
    was based in the UASC Unit Social  Care,  Community  Services,  Hackney
    Service Centre and had been employed by Hackney as a  personal  advisor
    since 2 March 2020. She  was  allocated  as  the  applicant's  personal
    advisor on 6 April 2020 and, as such, had undertaken three face-to-face
    visits since then as well as maintaining regular telephone contact  via
    video calling or text messaging. She had assisted  him  with  enrolling
    into college, moving placement and making contact with his  immigration
    solicitor, as well as reading out letters  to  him  and  liaising  with
    other professionals such as key workers and Migrant Help to  make  sure
    that he received his weekly  allowance  and  money  for  transport.  Ms
    Graziani said that  she  had  a  good  working  relationship  with  the
    applicant until the last court hearing when she was unable  to  prevent
    his move to different accommodation. She had  supported  him  with  his
    enrolment into BSix College in  Hackney  to  study  ESOL,  but  he  had
    stopped engaging with his studies because of the accommodation move and
    the distance from the college.


55. Ms Graziani said that she had contacted the applicant on  15  September
    2020, following the court hearing on 14 September 2020, to explain that
    he would have to move to adult accommodation in one week as he was over
    18 and he did not take that well. She spoke to him again on 16  and  17
    September 2020 about the accommodation move and on Friday 18  September
    2020 she went to visit him at home. They spent more  than  three  hours
    together as she was trying to help him sort out his bank card  and  she
    kept explaining why he had  to  move.  She  advised  him  to  pack  his
    belongings over the weekend and be ready for Monday 21 September  2020.
    She received an email on 21 September 2020 about transport  booked  for
    the move and she called the applicant to let him know, but he was at  a
    friend's house an hour away and was not  back  home  when  she  arrived
    there. The move was re-arranged for the following day.  She  understood
    that the applicant had contacted his solicitor on 21 September 2020  to
    inform them that he had been given one hour's notice of  the  move  and
    the solicitors were complaining that Hackney  had  acted  unreasonably,
    whereas the applicant had in fact been warned of the move  in  advance.
    Since then, the applicant's  mental  health  had  deteriorated  and  he
    reported that he hated the new accommodation, that he was not sleeping,
    that he did not have an  appetite,  that  he  had  not  been  attending
    college because  of  the  distance  and  that  he  was  worrying  about
    everything and wanted to find his brother.


56. Ms Graziani said that the applicant's physical features,  such  as  his
    beard, hair on his arms and his body shape, suggested that  he  was  an
    adult in his  early  20s.  His  independent  living  skills  were  also
    consistent with him being in his early 20s. His friends were those from
    the first two placements and were aged around 17  to  21.  Ms  Graziani
    said that she had concerns about the  credibility  of  the  applicant's
    story of how he arrived in the UK as  the  information  from  the  Home
    Office did not match the information he had shared with  them.  He  had
    given different names and places  of  birth  and  had  never  disclosed
    travelling to Germany or France. It was  her  view  that  it  was  more
    likely that he was in his early 20s than the age he claimed to be.


57. In her second statement, Ms Graziani added that she made a referral for
    psychological support for the applicant on 5 February  2021  given  his
    high level of emotional distress and she referred to  the  letter  from
    the Psychiatry Liaison Service at Chelsea & Westminster  Hospital.  She
    stated that she had been trying to help the applicant find his brother,
    but without success. She last visited him on 16 June 2021 and  observed
    that he seemed settled in Earls Court and had  made  new  friends,  all
    around the age of 20. He was spending about four days  a  week  at  his
    friends' house in Shepherds  Bush  and  his  closest  friend  was  from
    Eritrea. Ms Graziani stated that she believed that the catalyst for the
    applicant's mental health concerns was his anxiety about the outcome of
    the age assessment process and the court hearing and  he  feared  being
    moved out of London. She still believed that he was in  his  early  20s
    due to his physical appearance and stature  and  his  good  independent
    living skills.

58. Ms Graziani gave oral evidence before me. She had requested an  Italian
    interpreter to be available in case she needed any assistance  and  one
    was booked for her, but  in  the  event  there  was  no  need  for  the
    interpreter. Ms Graziani confirmed that her first language was Italian,
    but she spoke English in her day-to-day work and  with  the  applicant.
    She was never worried that he did not understand her and had never  had
    any problems communicating with other asylum-seeking children.


59. When cross-examined by Ms Butler, Ms Graziani stated that the applicant
    was one of the first young people she had worked with since  commencing
    her job with Hackney. She had previously  worked  for  Southwark  local
    authority as a senior support worker with young people and  had  worked
    with five or six asylum-seeking children. Prior to that  she  had  done
    voluntary work with asylum seeking children. She had attended  one  in-
    house training session on age assessments at Hackney, last summer.  She
    first met the applicant on 6 April 2020 and met him three  times  after
    being allocated his case. They would video-call  or  text  or,  mostly,
    speak by telephone. Ms Graziani accepted that  she  had  only  spent  a
    limited amount of time with the applicant to form a view of his age and
    accepted that he had been an adult for all the time she had known  him,
    aside from the first few days, even on his own account of his age.


60. Ms Graziani agreed that the applicant had needed support  and  help  in
    adapting to life in the UK and she agreed that 10 hours  of  one-to-one
    support such as he had been given in his previous placement would  have
    significantly  enhanced  his  independent  living  skills.  Ms   Butler
    referred to Dr Fairweather's report and to her opinions on some  asylum
    seekers presenting  with  uneven  development  and  asked  Ms  Graziani
    whether she accepted that, in the light of that evidence,  people  like
    the applicant had better independent living skills in some areas, which
    she did. Ms Graziani  accepted  that  the  applicant  had  difficulties
    adapting at the beginning when he first moved to Earls Court  but  said
    that the situation was different now. She did not dispute that  he  had
    contracted a mental illness, adjustment disorder, as a  result  of  the
    move. Ms Butler suggested to Ms Graziani that the applicant could  have
    good independent living skills in some areas but be the age he claimed,
    and Ms Graziani agreed. Ms Graziani agreed that the applicant had  told
    her that he had passed through Germany and France on his journey to the
    UK. Ms Butler referred to the ADCS Guidance and the margin of error  of
    five years in assessing age and asked Ms Graziani if she accepted  that
    what she said could be  within  that  five-year  range,  to  which  she
    replied "yes". She accepted that someone could have bodily hair between
    the ages of 17 and 22 and she agreed that someone of 19  years  of  age
    could have the skills that the applicant  had.  She  agreed  that  that
    could show that the applicant was 19 and not 21.


61. When re-examined by Mr Rowlands and  asked  how  old  she  thought  the
    applicant was, on the balance of probabilities, Ms Graziani  said  that
    it was not an exact science, but she would give him an age of early 20s
    in light of his appearance and her experience  of  working  with  young
    people.


    Fiona Curtis


62. Ms Curtis confirmed her statement of 5 January 2021 (B47)  and  adopted
    it as her evidence in chief. In her statement she  confirmed  that  she
    was the Service Manager  for  SIS  Life  Ltd  (Supporting  Independence
    Services Limited) and was a qualified social worker. She  had  been  in
    her current role since 2006 and had worked as  a  support  worker  from
    2000 and a service manager  from  2006,  engaged  in  the  support  and
    supervision of mothers/fathers with babies, children and  families  and
    young people from the ages of 16 to  25  years  and  the  provision  of
    support to foster placements and respite to children, young people  and
    families and unaccompanied  minors  seeking  asylum,  as  well  as  the
    management and supervision of staff engaged with those  client  groups.
    Ms Curtis confirmed that the applicant  was  placed  within  the  semi-
    independent placement of SIS Life Limited in Ilford on 10 October 2019.
    Ms Curtis stated that the applicant was initially polite  and  friendly
    towards staff and his fellow flatmate. Within a  couple  of  weeks,  he
    requested to be able to undertake his grocery shopping alone. She noted
    that within one month he was seeking  to  advocate  on  behalf  of  his
    flatmate, and he wanted to read his mail and discuss his finances.  She
    had concerns because he seemed to be taking control of his flatmate and
    she had to intervene several times,  particularly  when  the  applicant
    would interpret for his flatmate,  and  she  considered  him  to  be  a
    domineering person who  wished  to  control  his  flatmate.  Ms  Curtis
    referred to the applicant quickly being able to navigate his way around
    London on public transport and asking to meet  friends  in  Elephant  &
    Castle. On 6 December 2017 he was found inebriated and smoking  in  his
    flat and after that she  instructed  staff  to  supervise  his  grocery
    shopping so that he did not buy alcohol. The applicant complained  that
    he was not a child and could manage on his own and, despite  a  request
    being refused, he stayed away from his placement overnight.  Ms  Curtis
    stated that within a few weeks the applicant did not seek  the  support
    of staff but was determined to do things his way. She commented on  the
    photograph of a baby on  his  phone.  Ms  Curtis  said  that  they  had
    received at least four young people from  Eritrea  claiming  to  be  17
    years, since 2013, but their behaviour  and  demeanour  was  consistent
    with such an age. In her experience it was  the  unaccompanied  asylum-
    seeking minors who appeared older than their stated ages who  struggled
    to accept the rules of the placement. Ms Curtis did  not  consider  the
    applicant's presentation to be one she expected of a child.


63. When cross-examined by Ms Butler, Ms Curtis said that there were  about
    14 asylum-seeking minors at SIS Life at the time, as well as the  staff
    and social workers. She confirmed that the applicant  had  a  keyworker
    called  Schantal  who  was  a  student  social  worker  and  was  being
    supervised. Although she was his point of contact, she (Ms Curtis) also
    dealt with all 14 residents  directly.  She  was  also  overseeing  the
    manager of another accommodation in Forest Gate where there were  about
    five or six asylum-seeking  minors,  so  overall  she  had  supervisory
    responsibility for about 20 or 21 residents as well as her line-manager
    responsibilities.  Ms  Curtis  said  that  she  was  there  every  day,
    sometimes until 11pm, and  so  she  had  a  lot  of  contact  with  the
    residents, although Schantal did the keywork and came to her  if  there
    were any issues. Schantal would do the weekly progress reports and pass
    them on to her and they would then be sent  to  Ms  Monakana.  Schantal
    would also give her daily feedback. When asked  why  Schantal  was  not
    giving evidence for the hearing, Ms Curtis said that she was a  student
    on a placement which had ended, and she had moved on. Ms Curtis  agreed
    that there were only three weekly progress reports  submitted,  because
    of the cyber-attack on Hackney. There were many other reports, but they
    had not been accessed. It was possible to search for them. She had  not
    checked Schantal's 'sent' messages to see if they were there.


64. Ms Curtis agreed that many young people under 18  years  of  age  would
    want to do their grocery  shopping  alone,  but  she  said  that  being
    supported in  their  shopping  assisted  SIS  Life  to  evidence  their
    shopping, including how much they spent  and  if  they  were  having  a
    balanced diet. Therefore, they would supervise them  for  a  period  of
    time. Ms Butler asked Ms Curtis why, if she had  concerns  in  November
    2019 about the applicant being domineering, that did not feature in the
    progress report of 15 November 2019. She replied that such  information
    would  not  appear  in  those  reports  because  it  was  a  matter  of
    observation over time. Schantal would just raise concerns with her.  In
    any event Schantal was only a  student  social  worker  and  would  not
    capture everything in her reports as a fully  qualified  social  worker
    would. Ms Butler referred to Dr Fairweather's report and her  diagnosis
    of adjustment disorder. Ms Curtis was not aware of that, but she agreed
    that  the  applicant  had  difficulties  with   the   move   to   adult
    accommodation and made that clear to them. Ms Curtis  agreed  that  17-
    year-olds could legally smoke, but she said that it was  not  permitted
    in the placements and neither was it permitted to have people to  stay.
    Bringing people into the accommodation to stay was a serious breach.


65. Ms Curtis said that she was not aware of  the  ADCS  guidance  for  age
    assessments, but her assessment was based upon her  experience  working
    with young people since 2000. She was aware that the applicant had lost
    his mother and was looking for his brother, but she was not aware  that
    he had lost his entire family and did not know  all  the  details.  She
    only knew about what he shared with Schantal. Ms Curtis said  that  she
    was aware that the applicant had suffered trauma after  being  attacked
    by a gang in South Africa and she accepted  that  trauma  could  affect
    behaviour and that people of the same  age  could  present  and  behave
    differently as a result of traumatic life  events.  She  accepted  that
    people from different cultural backgrounds who had  experienced  trauma
    could present in different ways. She accepted that  the  applicant  may
    present differently to other people she saw because  of  variations  in
    background and trauma. However, she did not accept that  that  affected
    her assessment of his age, as she had worked with  a  number  of  young
    people including Eritreans, many from traumatic backgrounds. She  found
    that the older ones were more resistant to controls. In response to  Ms
    Butler's questions, Ms Curtis accepted that it  was  impossible  to  be
    sure of  someone's  age,  especially  when  they  were  around  18  and
    considering the margin of error referred to in the  ADCS  guidance  and
    accepted that the factors she relied on could not demonstrate that  the
    applicant was 21 rather than 18. However, she had based her  assessment
    on her experience of asylum-seeking minors and the different  types  of
    people she saw, not on physical appearance.


66. When asked by Ms Rowlands about the lay-out of the accommodation  where
    the applicant was living, Ms Curtis  explained  that  there  were  nine
    flats in total, consisting of three-bedroom  flats,  two-bedroom  flats
    and single units which were  mostly  reserved  for  those  with  higher
    needs. The applicant was in a three-bedroom flat in the upper floor  of
    the building, sharing with another Eritrean young man aged 17  who  was
    not age-disputed. Of the other young people she dealt with, there  were
    two other Eritreans whose age was disputed. Ms Rowlands asked Ms Curtis
    if there was anything in particular that led her to conclude  that  the
    applicant was older than claimed  and  she  replied  that  it  was  his
    demeanour, his insistence on  being  independent  and  his  refusal  to
    accept things that he was not allowed to do as a minor. She  said  that
    even those born in the UK say that they cannot wait until they  are  18
    in order to do certain things, whereas the applicant would say that  he
    should be able to do something now.

67. That then completed the evidence. I should  mention  however,  at  this
    point, that prior  to  Ms  Curtis  commencing  her  oral  evidence,  Ms
    Rowlands made an application to adduce the social  workers'  notes  and
    transcripts of the three age assessment  interviews,  and  an  internal
    note referring to the applicant's pre-action protocol letter, which had
    not previously been available  as  a  result  of  the  cyber-attack  on
    Hackney's systems. Information was  still  being  recovered  after  the
    attack and the interview  transcripts  had  now  become  available.  Ms
    Rowlands said that they had come to light after renewed enquiries  were
    made about the issue of whether the applicant had  mentioned  being  in
    Frankfurt in his interviews. Although Frankfurt had not been  mentioned
    in the notes from the Refugee Council, it  did  appear  in  the  social
    workers' notes. After being given an opportunity to  read  through  the
    transcripts of  the  interviews,  Ms  Butler  objected  to  them  being
    admitted at such a late  stage,  given  that  the  applicant's  claimed
    reference to Frankfurt airport had been challenged  in  the  pre-action
    protocol and there had therefore been plenty  of  opportunity  for  the
    respondent to  disclose  the  documents  previously,  the  cyber-attack
    having occurred as long ago as October 2020. Ms Butler  submitted  that
    there had been a serious  failure  by  the  respondent  to  adduce  all
    relevant evidence and there had been a breach of the  duty  of  candour
    and of the directions issued by the Tribunal. She submitted that it was
    unfair for the transcripts to be admitted at this stage of the evidence
    when they included a complex chronology of dates which she  would  need
    to consider and cross-reference and take instructions upon. Ms Rowlands
    maintained her request to adduce the  documents,  submitting  that  the
    contents did not come as a surprise, and they simply set out the  basis
    of the age assessment and did not really add anything to  the  evidence
    already available.


68. I decided to refuse the application for the documents to be admitted. I
    did not consider that the cyber-attack was an adequate explanation  for
    the timing of  the  application,  part-way  through  the  evidence  and
    subsequent to  the  applicant's  evidence,  several  months  after  the
    incident and when much information had been recovered, and when further
    efforts to recover the  transcripts  had  only  been  prompted  by  the
    mention of Frankfurt airport in the evidence. I agreed with  Ms  Butler
    that the interests of fairness required that the application should  be
    refused and I did not, in any event, consider that the respondent would
    be prejudiced in any way by my decision. Accordingly, I  have  not  had
    sight of the interview transcripts or the internal note.


    THE HEARING: SUBMISSIONS

69. Both parties then made submissions before me,  adopting  and  expanding
    upon their skeleton arguments.


    The Respondent


70. Ms Rowlands reminded me of the Tribunal's duties, to assess all of  the
    evidence and make  a  decision  based  upon  the  evidence  as  to  the
    applicant's age. There was no burden of proof and, at  this  stage,  no
    benefit of the doubt. She submitted  that  the  people  who  had  given
    evidence were experienced social workers who had been trained  and  who
    were used to  dealing  with  a  lot  of  young  people  from  different
    backgrounds. The age assessment had been conducted because of the  Home
    Office's concerns about the applicant's age. The inconsistencies in the
    evidence were not particularly relevant.  The  objective  evidence  was
    that the applicant  had  been  in  Spain  in  May  2018  where  he  was
    fingerprinted, he had been in Germany in  October  2018  where  he  was
    fingerprinted and where he sought asylum and he had been in  France  in
    July 2019 where he was fingerprinted. He was never treated as  a  child
    through Europe and he gave different dates of birth  as  an  adult.  He
    said that  that  was  deliberate,  on  the  advice  of  the  agent,  as
    reinforced by his brother, and he was therefore willing to lie in order
    to draw a benefit. It was a well-known fact  that  traffickers  advised
    people to claim asylum as a child and it  was  therefore  not  credible
    that the agent advised the applicant to claim to  be  an  adult  across
    Europe but gave no advice about claiming a younger age in the  UK.  The
    authorities of three European countries treated  the  applicant  as  an
    adult and accepted the adult date of birth he gave and Ms Monakana  had
    stated that her colleagues in Europe would not do that if they had  any
    safeguarding concerns. It was not believable that the social workers in
    Spain,  knowing  that  the  applicant  was  a  child,  would  give  him
    directions to travel to France alone.


71. Ms Rowlands submitted that the applicant was happy to lie  about  other
    things, namely drinking alcohol, about not  being  made  aware  of  the
    purpose of the age assessment and only being given one hour's notice to
    move accommodation. Credibility  was  an  important  part  of  the  age
    assessment, as set out in MVN v London Borough of Greenwich [2015] EWHC
    1942. The age  assessment  required  a  holistic  assessment  including
    appearance, demeanour and credibility,  as  stated  in  B,  R  (on  the
    application of) v  London  Borough  of  Merton  [2003]  EWHC  1689.  Ms
    Rowlands referred to the two psychiatric reports and  the  letter  from
    the Chelsea & Westminster Hospital, submitting that  they  showed  that
    the applicant's mental health problems only arose after his move to the
    Amsterdam Hotel, that there had been a lot of reports of problems  with
    the Amsterdam Hotel, and that that was therefore not evidence that  the
    applicant could not cope with change but simply that he could not  cope
    with that accommodation. Lying about an account, or confabulating,  was
    a stressor  in  itself  and  could  account  to  some  extent  for  the
    applicant's mental health problems.


72. Ms Rowlands  referred  to  MVN  in  relation  to  considering  how  the
    applicant knew his date of birth. She submitted that  his  evidence  on
    that was very limited and was not believable since, if his mother  told
    him his date of birth as he initially claimed, she would have given the
    date in the Ethiopian calendar. He then changed his  account  and  said
    she had only told him his age and he learned his date of birth from the
    letters in South Africa, yet he did not  read  English  at  that  time.
    Further, he did not have a permit there and, if  there  were  any  such
    letters, the question arose as to why they had not been  produced.  His
    uncle could have assisted him, yet he had not told the Red Cross  about
    his uncle.  In  addition,  the  applicant  had  given  an  inconsistent
    chronology and inconsistent evidence about the passport  he  used  when
    travelling from Morocco. He had omitted reference to being  in  Germany
    and had said Frankfurt before correcting himself and was  playing  that
    down because he had claimed asylum there. It was  made  clear  in  B  v
    Merton that appearance was an unreliable  indicator  of  age  and  that
    there was a margin of error of five years either way. The applicant had
    come across as markedly more mature than his  claimed  age  and  had  a
    mature appearance and body shape of a man in his early 20s, which was a
    relevant factor to be taken into account as part of the assessment. The
    applicant had shown an exceptional degree of  independence,  travelling
    to see friends on public transport without  any  help  only  two  weeks
    after arriving here.  That  was  not  explained  by  having  previously
    travelled through  Europe,  as  he  did  not  travel  alone  then.  The
    applicant had an amazing degree of ability to make his own mind up, for
    someone claiming to be a child. Ms Curtis' evidence was that  he  would
    continuously say that he was entitled to do something, which a  younger
    person would not have said. Ms Curtis had years of experience  and  was
    convinced  that  the  applicant  was  older  than  claimed.   She   had
    effectively lived with the applicant for some time  and  had  long-term
    dealings with him, which made  her  evidence  particularly  useful,  as
    stated in R (on the application of AM) v Solihull Metropolitan  Borough
    Council (AAJR) [2012] UKUT 00118. Further, her view was consistent with
    that of Ms Monakana and Ms Graziani.  The  applicant  had  demonstrated
    very good independent living skills and, whilst he  was  provided  with
    support, that was not because he needed it but because  that  was  what
    was given to any 17-year-old. There was a body of professional evidence
    suggesting that he was older than  claimed  and  the  evidence  of  the
    witnesses should be accorded significant weight. There  was  no  cogent
    evidence as to how the applicant knew his date of  birth.  It  was  not
    credible that he would not know his date  of  birth  in  the  Ethiopian
    calendar if he knew it  in  the  western  calendar.  There  was  little
    evidence from the other side. The two witnesses  had  not  attended  to
    give oral evidence  and  there  was  no  explanation  for  that.  Their
    statements could not be accorded weight as a result. In any event, they
    only saw him in a particular setting when he was with minors and  would
    adopt their mannerisms.  There  was  no  explanation  for  the  child's
    photograph on the applicant's phone and he was lying about that too. As
    for the age assessment, there was  no  unfairness  in  the  process  as
    claimed, but even if there was, that was not what this case was  about.
    The third interview was effectively a 'minded to  refuse'  process  and
    the applicant had had a full opportunity  to  explain  everything.  The
    applicant was at least two years older than claimed.


    The Applicant

73. Ms Butler relied upon the case of R (CJ) v Cardiff City Council  [2011]
    EWCA Civ 1590 in submitting that a sympathetic assessment was required.
    She relied upon the case of AS, R (on the application of) v Kent County
    Council  (age  assessment;  dental  evidence)  [2017]  UKUT   446)   in
    submitting that the applicant should be given the benefit of the doubt.
    There was no reliable medical test to assess  age.  The  ADCS  guidance
    referred to a margin of error of five years. The respondent's  position
    of two year's difference fell within that margin of error. With  regard
    to the applicant's evidence, he had given  a  coherent  and  consistent
    account which fitted in with his claimed age.  He  admitted  to  having
    used a false passport to leave Morocco and he admitted to having passed
    through Spain, Germany  and  France.  He  had  not  sought  to  conceal
    anything, as suggested. He had admitted to giving false names and dates
    of birth and had given a plausible explanation for  that.  His  account
    was consistent with the medical evidence. The fact that he arrived here
    chronically malnourished was consistent with his account  of  the  time
    spent in Europe. His  evidence  was  consistent  with  the  psychiatric
    presentation described by Dr Fairweather. Ms Butler submitted  that  Dr
    Fairweather's report was constructive in explaining how the way that he
    presented to the professionals caused him to appear different to  other
    young people, as a result of the trauma  he  had  experienced  and  his
    disruptive development. The applicant's account of how he became  aware
    of his age and date of birth was plausible. Efforts had  been  made  to
    obtain some evidence from South Africa, but it had not been possible to
    do so. Ms Butler  submitted  that  it  was  regrettable  that  the  two
    witnesses could not attend but  their  statements  should  be  accorded
    weight. The applicant's evidence should be accepted as credible.

74. As for the respondent's evidence, the fact that the applicant had shown
    good independent skills was explained by Dr Fairweather on the basis of
    the uneven and disruptive development caused by  his  past  experiences
    and the gruelling circumstances he endured  in  Calais  which  required
    strong survival skills. He was given a significant  degree  of  support
    when he arrived in the UK, including 10 hours of one-to-one support for
    the first six months. Being able to cook and make his way across London
    on public transport was not indicative of him being 19 rather  than  17
    years of age. The social workers repeatedly relied upon  factors  which
    did not show the stated age rather than the claimed  age  and  all  the
    witnesses accepted that. Ms Monakana had  relied  upon  inconsistencies
    that did not exist and was confident that the age assessment was Merton
    compliant when it was not. Bending  the  rules  and  having  a  one-off
    socialising with friends did not show that someone was 19  rather  than
    17. Ms Graziani said that the applicant had adult friends, but his best
    friend was 17. Ms Graziani had rarely met the applicant in  person  and
    she had only known him as an adult apart from  a  few  days  before  he
    turned 18. She relied upon physical  traits  but  accepted  that  there
    could be a five-year margin between 17 and 22. Ms  Curtis  relied  upon
    the applicant's behaviour, but that was not indicative of his age.  She
    said that he was domineering but that was not reflected in the  monthly
    progress reports. No weight should be given  to  her  broad  statements
    about  how  other  asylum-seekers  behaved.  The  statements  from  the
    witnesses only went so far. As for the age assessment, no weight should
    be given to that as it did not meet the Merton guidance and  it  lacked
    procedural safeguards. There was no 'minded to refuse'  process,  there
    were a significant number of open questions at the third interview  and
    there was no opportunity for the applicant to respond to concerns.   Ms
    Butler relied on the case of FZ, R (on the  application  of)  v  London
    Borough of Croydon [2011] EWCA Civ  59  which  emphasised  the  adverse
    effect  of  open  questions.  Further,  the  age  assessment  was   not
    undertaken by two experienced social workers.


75. Ms Butler concluded that the applicant should be afforded  the  benefit
    of the doubt, especially given the two-year difference in  the  age  as
    claimed and accepted, and that he had  given  a  clear  and  consistent
    account which was  strongly  supported  by  Dr  Fairweather,  that  the
    respondent's evidence was not determinative and that no  weight  should
    be accorded to the age assessment. The respondent had  failed  to  show
    that the applicant was more likely than not over 18 years of age.


    The Respondent


76. Ms Rowlands wished to respond. She submitted that R (CJ) v Cardiff City
    Council [2011] EWCA Civ 1590 made  it  clear  that  it  was  the  local
    authority which was to give the applicant the benefit of the doubt  and
    not the Tribunal. It was not the case that  the  respondent  found  the
    applicant two years older than claimed, but that  he  fell  within  the
    range of 19 to 22 years of age. As for the margin of  error,  that  was
    only in relation to appearance, whereas the local authority  assessment
    was an overall assessment taking account of all  factors.  Ms  Rowlands
    referred to Ms Monakana's response to  the  observations  made  by  the
    witnesses supporting the applicant. She submitted  that  the  applicant
    had not been open and honest about being in Germany or the child on his
    WhatsApp page. Ms Graziani had met the applicant more than three  times
    - that was the position at the time of her first statement and she  had
    spent several hours with him since then. The age assessment was  Merton
    compliant. The social workers  had  sufficient  experience.  The  third
    interview was equivalent to a 'minded to refuse' process.


    THE LEGAL FRAMEWORK


77. The legislative framework within which this case is to be considered is
    well-established and there was no disagreement between the  parties  on
    this. It is not, therefore necessary to set out relevant authorities at
    length. In brief, therefore, I set out the following principles.


78. Where the age assessment of the local authority is in  dispute,  it  is
    for the court or Tribunal to reach its own  assessment  of  age,  as  a
    matter of fact (R (A) v Croydon London Borough Council) [2009] UKSC 8).


79. It is clear from R (CJ) v Cardiff City Council  [2011]  EWCA  Civ  1590
    that the application of  a  legal  burden  of  proof  is  an  incorrect
    approach to adopt.  It is not the function of the court  (or  Tribunal)
    to ask whether a local authority has established that a claimant is  an
    adult, nor to ask whether a claimant  has  established  that  he  is  a
    child.  Rather, it is for the court or Tribunal to decide on a  balance
    of probability whether a claimant is or is not at the material  time  a
    child.  The role  of  the  court  or  Tribunal  is  inquisitorial.  The
    Tribunal is required to  conduct  a  "sympathetic  assessment"  of  the
    evidence in favour of the applicant:


         "[21]     It seems to me that once the court is invited to  make  a
         decision upon jurisdictional fact it can do no more than apply  the
         balance of probability  to  the  issue  without  resorting  to  the
         concept  of  discharge  of  a  burden  of  proof.  In  my  view,  a
         distinction needs to be made between a legal burden  of  proof,  on
         the one hand, and the sympathetic assessment  of  evidence  on  the
         other. I accept that in evaluating the  evidence  it  may  well  be
         inappropriate to expect from the claimant  conclusive  evidence  of
         age in circumstances in which he has arrived unattended and without
         original identity  documents.  The  nature  of  the  evaluation  of
         evidence will depend upon the particular facts of the case."


80. In AS, R (on the application of) v Kent County Council (age assessment;
    dental evidence) [2017] UKUT 446) the Upper  Tribunal  made  clear,  at
    [20] and [21], that the application of the 'benefit of the  doubt'  was
    to be applied as follows:



         "[20]    We consider, on reviewing the case law,  that  application
         of the benefit of the doubt is nothing more than an acknowledgement
         that age assessment cannot be concluded with 100% accuracy,  absent
         definitive  documentary  evidence,  and   is   in   the   case   of
         unaccompanied  asylum-seeking  children  who  may  also  have  been
         traumatised, unlikely to be supported by other evidence.   On  that
         basis, its proper application is that where, having considered  the
         evidence, the decision maker concludes there is doubt as to whether
         an individual is over 18 or not, then in those  circumstances,  the
         decision-maker should conclude that the applicant is under 18.


         [21]     Thus, the benefit of the doubt  is  not  of  use  where  a
         specific date or age has to be  determined  except  insofar  as  it
         requires a sympathetic assessment  of  the  evidence  as  indicated
         in CJ v Cardiff.

81. In R (on the application of AM) v Solihull Metropolitan Borough Council
    (AAJR) [2012] UKUT 00118 the Tribunal made general  observations  about
    the impact of evidence of  various  sorts  and  from  various  sources,
    concluding   that   "[14]   ...almost   all   evidence   of    physical
    characteristics is likely to be of very limited value" and "  [19]  ...
    So far as demeanour is concerned, it seems to  us  that  there  may  be
    value to be obtained from observations  of  demeanour  and  interaction
    with others made  over  a  long  period  of  time  by  those  who  have
    opportunity to observe an individual going about his ordinary life. But
    we find it difficult to see that any useful observations  of  demeanour
    or social interaction or maturity can be made in the course of a  short
    interview between an individual and a strange adult."


82. At [21] of MVN v London Borough of Greenwich [2015] EWHC 1942, Picken J
    referred to the ADCS Age Assessment Guidance of October 2015:
         "The Merton guidelines have also been reflected in the  'Practice
         Guidelines on Assessing Age' as developed for local authorities  by
         the London Boroughs of Hillingdon and Croydon. That  document  sets
         out the relevant principles, as helpfully summarised by Miss Luh in
         her opening skeleton argument, without objection from Miss Screeche-
         Powell, as follows:
         (1) The assessment must be a holistic one and must  start  with  an
         open mind, with no imposition on the child to prove his age to  the
         assessing social workers.
         (2) Physical appearance and demeanour  are  notoriously  unreliable
         factors not determinative of age.
         (3) Cultural, ethnic and racial context of the young  person  being
         assessed  must  be  considered  as  these  may  reflect  in   their
         presentation as well as their descriptions of their lives.
         (4) General credibility is not to be determinative of  age.  It  is
         more likely that a young person who tells a consistent  account  of
         his life which supports his claimed age will be the age  he  claims
         to be. Conversely, young people may lie for  reasons  unrelated  to
         age but related to their claims for protection or the reasons  they
         had to leave their country of origin.
         (5) The child should be afforded the benefit  of  the  doubt  where
         evidence can tip one way or the other."
83. And went on to say at [27] that:


         "It would, therefore, appear that the  primary  focus  is  on  the
         credibility of the person's evidence concerning his or her age, but
         that it is permissible to have regard to credibility more generally
         provided that,  in  looking  at  credibility  more  generally,  the
         primary focus to which I have referred is not forgotten."


    DISCUSSION


84. This has not been an easy case to decide. That is owing, in particular,
    to the limited evidence from the  applicant's  side  and  the  lack  of
    supporting documentary  evidence,  as  opposed  to  the  more  prolific
    evidence from the respondent. However, ultimately, I did not find  that
    the local authority's witnesses presented a particularly persuasive  or
    helpful case for the respondent, whereas the case put for the applicant
    was a more powerful one, albeit without the benefit  of  oral  evidence
    from any witnesses other than the applicant himself.


85. The respondent's assessment of the applicant's  age  as  an  adult  was
    based very much upon his level of maturity, independence and behaviour.
    In regard to the latter, reliance was placed upon  his  challenging  of
    the rules imposed by his accommodation placements. It was  also  stated
    that he was not forthcoming with information  and  was  in  fact  being
    deliberately vague and leaving gaps in his account. However,  it  seems
    to me that those conclusions were based upon a limited knowledge of the
    applicant's background and history and a lack of  understanding  as  to
    how his past experiences had impacted upon his behaviour,  as  is  made
    clear in Dr Fairweather's report.


86. I start by examining the evidence produced by the  respondent  and,  in
    doing so, make it clear that, as the above authorities state, there  is
    no burden of proof upon the respondent  to  prove  its  case.  Neither,
    however, is there any burden upon the applicant to prove his case.


87. Turning firstly to the age assessment itself, at page  3  (D48  of  the
    bundle), I have to say that I am not in agreement with Ms Butler in her
    assertion that the assessment was unlawful.  Contrary  to  Ms  Butler's
    assertion, it seems to  me  that  there  was  an  opportunity  for  the
    applicant to respond to adverse points put to him,  albeit  that  there
    was no formal 'minded-to-refuse' procedure. The end of page  1  of  the
    age assessment (page D46) refers to the third session being a review of
    the information obtained in the  first  two  sessions,  with  questions
    aimed at ensuring all information had been collated and checking  areas
    where there were gaps. The top of page  2  (page  D47)  refers  to  the
    applicant  being  given  the  opportunity  to  provide  views  on   any
    inaccuracies and then signing the  document  once  satisfied  that  the
    record was accurate. I agree with Ms Rowlands that  the  applicant  had
    the safeguard of being accompanied by an  appropriate  adult  from  the
    Refugee  Council  who,  if  appropriate,  was  able  to   express   any
    objections, but did  not  do  so.  Further,  contrary  to  Ms  Butler's
    assertion that the age assessment took no account  of  the  applicant's
    vulnerabilities and experience of trauma, it is clear from the  end  of
    page 6 that the author referred to the report from the  Initial  Health
    Assessment showing that  he  suffered  emotional  trauma  due  to  past
    experience and was at risk of mental illness, which might  have  had  a
    negative impact on him. Further references to emotional trauma are made
    at the top of page 13 of the report and in the penultimate paragraph on
    page 15.


88. Having said that, I do have reservations about certain aspects  of  the
    assessment, such that I consider its weight to be limited. I note  that
    one of the assessing social workers, Memory Meck, appears to  have  had
    limited experience and there appears to be no response to the  concerns
    pointed out at [48] of Ms Butler's skeleton argument in regard  to  her
    qualifications at the time of the assessment.  In  addition,  it  seems
    that the author of the report made various unsupported generalisations.
    By way of example, she found that the applicant's "emotional  responses
    and frustrations at the information being asked of him at times  during
    his assessment, is as would be expected from an adult" (top of page 4),
    but offered no explanation for that conclusion; she did not explain  in
    what way he had provided "what seemed to be an implausible  account  of
    background information"(page 4, paragraph  3)  and  "kept  on  changing
    information"  (page 4, paragraph 4) and how "his demeanour and  how  he
    interacted with professionals during the assessments  was  contrary  to
    how a young person aged 17 would behave" (page 15, paragraph 4).


89. Further, I note that  the  author  considered  the  applicant  to  lack
    credibility for various reasons which do not seem to me to be  properly
    explained or justified. At page 6, she found him  to  lack  credibility
    because of his inability to recall details of his  education  in  South
    Africa, yet his account had  always  been  that  he  had  very  minimal
    education in South Africa. At page 13  of  the  report,  she  expressed
    doubts about the applicant's credibility owing to his inability to give
    the exact date of his mother's death when initially asked, despite  him
    giving the day, month and year and describing the event in  detail.  At
    page 14, paragraph 2 the author makes much of an apparent inconsistency
    in the applicant's account of when he travelled to Bilbao but I  cannot
    see any such contradiction in the notes from  the  Refugee  Council  or
    elsewhere. Neither do I find any  reference  to  Frankfurt  airport  in
    those notes, a matter which the assessor referred to at the end of page
    14 and which the respondent considered to  be  relevant  in  suggesting
    that the applicant was not providing an honest account of his  journey.
    Although I am told that the reference did appear in the social workers'
    notes, which were not admitted (for the reasons given at [68] above), I
    do not see it as a particularly material point and indeed it  may  well
    be that it was simply misheard.


90. In addition to these concerns, Dr Fairweather provided  an  informative
    response to some of the matters noted against the applicant in the  age
    assessment, as elaborated upon further at [114] to [116] below, such as
    the fact that his demeanour did  not  change  when  he  talked  of  his
    mother, that  he  had  poor  eye  contact  and  did  not  look  at  the
    interviewers, that he was fiddling with his fingers or  headphones  and
    that he could not always give exact information or dates. Whilst  those
    were matters relied upon by the assessor as undermining the applicant's
    credibility, Dr Fairweather pointed out that they were  also  signs  of
    trauma and of possible mental health concerns. Although, as I mentioned
    above, the assessor referred to the applicant's  emotional  trauma  and
    appeared to have some regard to it when assessing his age, it seems  to
    me that there was no proper  engagement  with  the  relevance  of  such
    concerns.


91. Accordingly, I do not take the age assessment as being  of  significant
    weight in the determination of the applicant's age.


92. There are, likewise, concerns about the evidence of the  witnesses  for
    the respondent, all of whom seemed to lack any proper insight into  the
    applicant's history and the impact that could have had on his demeanour
    and behaviour. Further, they all accepted, when  asked  by  Ms  Butler,
    that the factors upon which they relied to show the applicant's age did
    not necessarily show that he was the age stated in the  age  assessment
    report. In addition, two of the witnesses, Ms Monakana and Ms Graziani,
    were recently qualified/appointed and had only limited contact with the
    applicant, having met him face-to-face on only a few occasions.


93. The first witness to give evidence before me  was  Elizabeth  Monakana,
    the applicant's appointed social worker. It is of note,  as  stated  at
    [4] of her statement, that Ms Monakana  did  not  have  access  to  the
    applicant's casefile  at  that  time,  owing  to  the  cyber-attack  on
    Hackney's systems. It is also of note that she  was  allocated  to  the
    applicant as his social worker a month after commencing her  employment
    with Hackney and only shortly after qualifying as a social worker.  She
    visited  him  about  five  times  in  his  placement  and  three  times
    elsewhere, although she  also  maintained  contact  by  telephone,  and
    clearly her contact with him was limited.

94. The factors  which  Ms  Monakana  relied  upon  in  particular  in  her
    assessment of the applicant's age appear from [7] of her statement  and
    include the fact that he presented as mature and had  good  independent
    skills, that he was able to prepare his own meals and  ensure  that  he
    had sufficient stock of food  in  his  flat,  that  he  challenged  the
    placement rules by allowing a friend to stay overnight in breach of the
    rules and was caught having drunk beer  and  smoked  tobacco  which  he
    initially denied and that he stayed away overnight on  three  occasions
    in breach of the rules. At [11] she referred to his ability to consider
    options and make  his  own  decisions  about  activities,  rather  than
    following those suggested to  him.  However,  when  specifically  asked
    questions about each of these matters at the hearing, she accepted that
    many 17-year-olds drank and smoked even though they were not  permitted
    to and, when referred to parts of Dr  Fairweather's  report  commenting
    upon events as a child affecting the applicant's maturation and ability
    to recall matters, she accepted that  inconsistencies  in  his  account
    could be attributed to trauma to an extent.  Further,  when  questioned
    about her opinion on the applicant's level of independence, Ms Monakana
    agreed that he had had 10 hours of  one-to-one  hour  support  for  the
    first six months he was in the UK and  had  semi-independence  training
    with SIS Life, that he needed support with opening a bank account, with
    his bursary payments and with budgeting and other matters and  that  he
    had spent his entire college bursary from college on branded clothes at
    one time. Although Ms Monakana pointed  out  that  the  same  help  and
    advice was given to everyone and that the applicant actually said  that
    he did not need all the support offered, she also accepted, when  asked
    by Mr Butler, that an  unaccompanied  asylum-seeking  child  travelling
    around  through  Europe  as  the  applicant  had  done  would   develop
    independent skills.


95. It was also apparent from Ms Monakana's oral evidence that much of  her
    assessment of the applicant and knowledge of his behaviour was  through
    third parties, with the applicant's  main  point  of  contact  being  a
    student social worker on a temporary placement, Schantal  Morrison.  Ms
    Morrison  prepared  the  weekly  progress  reports   based   upon   the
    applicant's progress and incidents that had occurred, which  were  then
    discussed with Ms Curtis and passed on to Ms Monakana and it was  those
    reports which largely provided  her  with  the  information  about  the
    applicant. Indeed, when Ms Butler referred Ms Monakana  to  the  weekly
    progress report at page E86 of the bundle where mention was made of the
    applicant having spent  his  entire  college  bursary  on  clothing  in
    January 2020, she said that she was aware of that from the report.


96. Ms Monakana's statement also referred at [9] to the applicant not being
    forthcoming due to inconsistencies in some of  his  accounts,  but  she
    provided no examples of such inconsistencies at that point  other  than
    one, in which the applicant had initially stated that he was Protestant
    but later said that he was Pentecostal Christian. However, when it  was
    pointed out to her at the hearing by Ms Butler that the latter was part
    of the former and that there was therefore no inconsistency, she had no
    comment to make in response. Ms Monakana also referred,  later  in  her
    statement at [13], to the applicant having failed to mention travelling
    through Germany and having inadvertently mentioned Frankfurt airport in
    his age assessment interview which he  then  retracted,  all  of  which
    demonstrated that he  was  intentionally  withholding  information  and
    lying. However, as Ms Butler pointed out, the applicant  had  mentioned
    passing through Germany when interviewed by the  Home  Office  the  day
    after arriving in the UK, as seen at page E166. Finally, in response to
    Ms Butler's question,  Ms  Monakana  accepted  that  the  two-year  age
    difference fell within the five- year  margin  of  error  in  the  ADCS
    guidance.


97. In light of the above it is apparent  that  the  reasons  given  by  Ms
    Monakana in her statement for rejecting the applicant's account of  his
    age simply did not stand up  to  scrutiny  when  she  was  required  to
    elaborate in response to Ms Butler's questions.  Although  Ms  Monakana
    remained adamant that the applicant was older than the age  he  claimed
    to be, I have to agree with Ms Butler that her evidence is  of  limited
    weight.


98. I reach the same conclusion with regard to Ms Graziani's evidence which
    was even less persuasive than that of Ms Monakana and  consisted  of  a
    simple "yes" response to many of Ms Butler's questions. Ms Graziani was
    allocated to the applicant as his personal advisor  on  6  April  2020,
    less than a month  after  being  employed  by  Hackney  as  a  personal
    advisor, although she had previously worked for another local authority
    as a senior support worker. She had had  only  had  three  face-to-face
    visits with the applicant at the  time  of  her  statement  written  in
    November 2020, although she had had telephone contact  and  some  video
    calls owing to the pandemic, and aside from a few  days  she  had  only
    known him as an adult. Her contact with him was therefore  limited  and
    it is clear from her evidence in her statement that he did not open  up
    to her much, that he did not  talk  to  her  about  his  childhood  and
    family, that he only called her when he needed specific help or  advice
    on a matter and that their relationship had broken  down  at  times  in
    particular when he was forced to move to  NASS  accommodation.  In  her
    statements, Ms Graziani's conclusion on the applicant's  age  is  based
    upon his physical features particularly  his  facial  and  bodily  hair
    ([27] of her first statement and [15] of  her  second  statement),  his
    good independent living skills ([28] of her first statement and [15] of
    her second statement) and his account of his  journey  to  the  UK  and
    failure to mention travelling to Germany and France ([31] of her  first
    statement).


99. With regard to the latter point, I refer to my observations made  above
    in respect of Ms Monakana's evidence and note in addition that  at  the
    hearing Ms Graziani accepted in any event that the applicant  had  told
    her that he passed through Germany and France. As  for  the  other  two
    reasons for considering him to  be  older  than  claimed,  Ms  Graziani
    agreed with Ms Butler at the hearing that the age she had suggested for
    the applicant could be in the five-year margin of error range  referred
    to in the ADCS guidance, that someone between the ages  of  17  and  22
    could have bodily hair and that someone aged 19 years of age could have
    the skills the applicant had and that  that  could  show  that  he  was
    currently therefore 19 and not 21. She also agreed with Ms Butler  that
    the applicant needed support and help in adapting to life in the UK and
    was unaware that he had been  given  10  hours  of  one-to-one  support
    before he turned 18. She accepted that 10 hours of  one-to-one  support
    could significantly enhance the applicant's independent  living  skills
    and that people under 18 years of age could navigate their  way  around
    London. Further, when  Ms  Butler  referred  her  to  Dr  Fairweather's
    opinion and conclusions in relation to the effect  of  the  applicant's
    history on his maturity and capacities, Ms Graziani accepted  that,  in
    light  of  that  evidence,  people  like  the  applicant   had   better
    independent living skills in some areas. Ms Graziani  further  accepted
    that the applicant had difficulties adapting at the beginning but  that
    he settled later on and she did not dispute that he  had  contracted  a
    mental health disorder as a result of having to move to  the  hotel  in
    Earls Court. She accepted Ms Butler's  suggestion  that  the  applicant
    could have good independent living skills in some areas  but  still  be
    the age he claimed.


100. It is therefore clear from her evidence  that  Ms  Graziani  knew  very
    little about the applicant, that she spent a  limited  amount  of  time
    with him and  that  their  relationship  was  sometimes  fraught.  More
    importantly, in her oral evidence, when questioned by  Ms  Butler,  she
    accepted that the factors which had led her to  confirm  the  applicant
    was in his early 20s could also apply to someone of the age he  claimed
    to be -  accepting that someone could have bodily hair between the ages
    of 17 and 22, that someone of 19 years of age  could  have  the  skills
    that the applicant had and agreeing  that  that  could  show  that  the
    applicant was 19 and not 21 -   albeit  that  when  re-examined  by  Ms
    Rowlands she reiterated her belief that he was in his early 20s. In the
    circumstances it seems to me that Ms Graziani's evidence  carried  very
    little weight in supporting the respondent's view  of  the  applicant's
    age and, in fact, in view of the concessions she made, could equally be
    taken as supporting the applicant's account of his age.


101. I turn finally to the evidence of Ms Curtis, the only witness  for  the
    respondent who had some years of experience in  her  role.  Ms  Curtis'
    assessment of the applicant's age was based  upon  his  behaviour,  his
    attitude towards authority and his determination for  independence  and
    for living according to his own rules. She found him to be  domineering
    and controlling and considered that his  behaviour  was  not  what  she
    would have expected from a child. However, Ms Curtis accepted,  in  her
    oral evidence, that whilst she was present at the placement every  day,
    the applicant's main point of contact was Schantal, his keyworker,  and
    that Schantal would come to her with issues that had arisen  and  would
    also put matters in the weekly progress reports. Ms Curtis was  unable,
    it seemed to me, to give a proper reason, when questioned by Ms Butler,
    as to why her  concerns  about  the  applicant  being  domineering  and
    controlling did not  appear  in  the  weekly  progress  report  for  15
    November 2019 and I have to agree with Ms Butler  that  if  there  were
    such concerns, and if they had also been felt by Schantal who had  more
    direct contact with the applicant, it was  reasonable  to  expect  that
    they would appear in a report written at that time, whereas the reports
    referred, on the contrary, to the applicant being helpful and polite.


102. It is relevant to note further that,  as  Ms  Curtis  admitted  in  her
    statement, the applicant had  never  shared  with  her  personally  any
    details about his family, relatives or friends, although he  had  given
    some details to his keyworker about his mother having passed  away  and
    about having a brother and sister, and that she  had  no  idea  of  the
    mental health concerns in Dr Fairweather's report, not even being aware
    of the report or the diagnosis therein. She  was  not  aware  that  the
    applicant had lost his entire family before coming to the UK. Although,
    when this was put to her at the hearing, Ms Curtis accepted that trauma
    could affect behaviour and that  people  from  different  cultures  and
    backgrounds could present in different ways, and although she  accepted
    the suggestion that the  factors  she  was  relying  on  could  not  by
    themselves demonstrate that the applicant was 21 rather  than  19,  she
    did not accept that any of that changed her view about  the  applicant,
    given her experience  of  working  with  young  people  from  traumatic
    backgrounds. However, I find myself in agreement with Ms Butler's  view
    that Ms Curtis did not have an open-minded approach to  the  applicant.
    It is clear that her knowledge of the applicant was  limited  and  that
    she had no understanding of his background  and  the  impact  that  his
    previous traumatic experiences could have had  upon  his  attitude  and
    behaviour. For that reason, I consider Ms Curtis' evidence also  to  be
    limited in weight, particularly when  compared  with  the  evidence  of
    those who had more of an insight into the applicant's circumstances.


103. I therefore turn next to the witness evidence presented in  support  of
    the applicant's case, which, aside from the applicant's  own  evidence,
    consists of the written statements of Olubunmi  Babalola  and  Victoria
    Nassozi, as summarised at [25] and [26] above.


104. Ms Babalola was the applicant's personal tutor and ESOL lecturer for  a
    period of eight months at the  time  he  turned  18  according  to  his
    claimed age and she has provided both a  letter  of  support  dated  22
    January 2020 and a statement dated 2 November 2020, confirming that she
    had no reason to doubt that he was the age he  claimed  to  be.  Unlike
    with the witnesses for the respondent, the applicant discussed personal
    issues with Ms Babalola and she therefore had  some  insight  into  his
    background, although it is not clear from her statement to what  extent
    that was. She saw him interacting with his peers aged between 16 and 18
    years and also observed him as a student. At [7] Ms Babalola said  that
    she had experience of students who looked  older  than  their  age  and
    could tell the difference and she gave a clear explanation for that  by
    way of various detailed examples of behaviour, comparing it to that  of
    other young people. It is also of note that Ms Babalola  has  made  her
    observations from different experiences and  perspectives,  both  as  a
    teacher and as a mother to three sons who had  passed  the  applicant's
    age. Ms Monkana, at [11] of  her  second  statement,  responded  to  Ms
    Babalola's evidence suggesting  that  the  applicant  would  have  been
    adapting his behaviour before her by observing and imitating others and
    that other students in his class  may  also  have  been  age  disputed.
    However, I do not find that  as  a  reason  to  dismiss  Ms  Babalola's
    evidence, particularly given her length of experience  and  the  nature
    and extent of that experience.


105. Likewise, Ms Nassozi confirmed her view that the applicant was the  age
    he claimed to be. As with Ms Babalola, Ms Nassozi's  evidence  at  [10]
    indicates that the applicant discussed some personal issues  with  her,
    although again it is not clear from her statement to what  extent  that
    was. It is relevant to note that they spoke every day  in  addition  to
    having weekly key-work sessions and that, whilst her  involvement  with
    the applicant partly coincided with the period in which Ms Graziani was
    involved, her level of contact with him was clearly much more  frequent
    and regular albeit over a shorter period of time.  Whilst  Ms  Graziani
    and the other two witnesses spoke of the applicant's  independence,  Ms
    Nassozi's  evidence  suggests  that  he  simply  looked  elsewhere  for
    additional support and she referred to his  need  for  assistance  with
    independent  living  skills  and  the  help  she  provided   for   him.
    Interestingly,  whilst  the  respondent's  witnesses   considered   the
    applicant's  lack  of  respect  for  the  rules,  including  having  an
    overnight visitor, to be an indication of being older than claimed (see
    [20] of Ms Curtis' statement), Ms Nassozi considered that that  was  an
    example of him being juvenile (at [12] of her  statement).  Ms  Nassozi
    also commented, at [15], that she never saw the applicant  with  anyone
    older than 18 and it is relevant to note that that is  consistent  with
    the evidence of the respondent's witnesses who all spoke  of  his  best
    friend being a 17-year-old Eritrean boy.


106. It is unfortunate that neither witness appeared before the Tribunal  to
    give oral evidence  and  no  particular  reason  was  given  for  their
    absence, other than that it was more difficult  for  the  applicant  to
    ensure the attendance of witnesses than it was for the  respondent.  Ms
    Rowlands did not, as a result, have an opportunity to cross-examine the
    two witnesses and that clearly affects the weight that I  can  give  to
    their statements. However, that does not mean that I  cannot  give  any
    weight to  their  evidence  and  that  is  particularly  so  where  the
    witnesses for the respondent have  not  been  particularly  helpful  or
    persuasive. It is also relevant, when considering weight, that both  Ms
    Babalola and Ms Nassozi have more years of relevant experience  working
    with young people than  the  respondent's  witnesses,  particularly  Ms
    Monakana and Ms Grazioni, and appear to have spent more time  with  the
    applicant.  It is also relevant to note the observations of  the  Upper
    Tribunal, albeit referring to the age assessment itself, in the case of
    R (AM) v Solihull, at [20]:


         "The asserted expertise of a social worker conducting an  interview
         is  not  in  our   judgement   sufficient   to   counteract   those
         difficulties. A person such as a teacher or even a  family  member,
         who can point to consistent attitudes, and a number  of  supporting
         instances over a considerable period of time, is  likely  to  carry
         weight that observations made in the artificial surroundings of  an
         interview cannot carry. "

107. Accordingly, whilst I am mindful of the lack of opportunity  for  their
    evidence to be tested and the implications of  that  in  terms  of  the
    weight to be accorded to their evidence, I do find the evidence  of  Ms
    Babalola and Ms Nassozi helpful and I  take  it  into  account  to  the
    extent that I am able to do so.

108. Finally, I come to the applicant's own  evidence.  The  respondent  has
    pointed to several areas  of  concern  in  his  evidence  which  it  is
    believed undermines his credibility as a whole and the  credibility  of
    his claim to have been a minor when arriving  in  the  UK.  As  I  have
    already identified above, reliance has been placed upon inconsistencies
    in his evidence or his lack of recall of events, which I do not  accept
    exist, such as whether his religion was Protestant or Pentecostal,  the
    date his mother died and how he travelled to Bilbao. The age assessment
    relies upon a discrepancy in the applicant's evidence of when  he  left
    Eritrea, in the  Initial  Health  Assessment,  where  his  account  was
    recorded as him having left Eritrea for South  Africa  at  the  age  of
    eight or nine, but I agree with Ms  Butler  that  that  was  clearly  a
    misunderstanding or  error  as  it  omits  the  applicant's  period  of
    residence in Ethiopia to which he had otherwise consistently  referred.
    Otherwise, as already  mentioned  above,  the  references  in  the  age
    assessment to the applicant having given  an  "implausible  account  of
    background information", to have "kept  on  changing  information"  and
    that "the assessment seemed to lack credibility" are little  more  than
    unsupported and unexplained statements.


109. Reliance is also placed by the respondent on  the  applicant's  evasive
    response when questioned about a picture on his mobile phone of a young
    girl. The suggestion appears to be that the applicant has a  child  and
    is therefore older than claimed. However, that is  simply  speculation.
    In any event the evidence in that regard is inconsistent and it is  not
    clear if there was one or more pictures. In her statement at [18] (page
    B51) Ms Curtis referred to a picture of a  baby  which  was  the  phone
    screensaver, whereas Ms Monakana referred  in  her  statement  at  [10]
    (page B28) to a WhatsApp display picture of a young girl aged 4  or  5.
    The most that I can draw from this part of the respondent's evidence is
    that the applicant may not have been forthcoming about a photograph  on
    his phone, but otherwise I do not see that it  carries  any  particular
    weight in the assessment of his age.


110. The applicant's credibility was also  questioned  in  relation  to  his
    account of his move  from  the  SIS  Life  supported  accommodation  in
    Hackney to the Amsterdam Hotel in Earls Court on 22 September 2020.  It
    is the respondent's case that he lied about what happened, claiming  to
    have been given only one hour's notice whereas Ms Graziani stated  that
    she had given him advance notice on Friday 18 September 2020 about  the
    move the following Monday, 21 September 2020 and  had  advised  him  to
    pack his belongings.  The  respondent  considers  that  to  be  another
    example of the applicant manipulating the truth. However, I do not find
    any inconsistency in the evidence in that regard. The applicant did not
    deny having been forewarned about the accommodation move by Ms Graziani
    and his account  of  being  given  an  hour's  notice  on  the  day  is
    consistent with Ms Graziani's evidence at [19] of her  statement,  that
    she received an email from the Routing IA validation team on Monday  21
    September at 14.50 giving notice of the collection time  at  16.30  the
    same day and she then called the applicant to let him  know.  The  fact
    that he was  at  a  friend's  house  one  hour  away  is  not  entirely
    inconsistent with the expectation that he would be given  ample  notice
    of the time of the move on the day and certainly not, in  my  view,  to
    the extent that that should be considered as an example  of  him  being
    manipulative.


111. Much is made by the respondent's witnesses of the applicant's  apparent
    failure to mention having travelled to Germany, the false name which he
    gave and the name appearing in the forged passport and his  mention  of
    Frankfurt airport at his age assessment interview which he then changed
    to Johannesburg. With regard to the latter, I refer to my  observations
    above and do not see that to be a  matter  of  significance  or  indeed
    consider it may have been misheard by the age assessor, as it does  not
    appear in the notes of the Refugee Council and it  makes  no  sense  in
    what is otherwise a consistent account of flying from  Johannesburg  to
    Cassablanca. Further, it is clear that, whilst Ms Monakana  noted  that
    he did not mention to her that he had been in  Germany,  the  applicant
    mentioned travelling there when interviewed by the Home  Office  in  an
    interview shortly after his arrival and Ms Graziani also accepted  that
    he had mentioned to her having travelled through Germany.  Ms  Rowlands
    submitted that the  applicant  was  being  deliberately  evasive  about
    having spent time in Germany and his evidence at the  hearing  that  he
    was there for 1 day was contradicted by the information at  pages  E122
    and E166 showing that he was fingerprinted there on 17 October 2018 and
    claimed asylum on 22 October 2018. However, the document at  page  E123
    from the Federal Office for Migration and Refugees in Germany  suggests
    that his claim was never considered there but that he was  to  be  sent
    back to Spain, which was not entirely inconsistent with his account  of
    being arrested and detained in various countries and returned to  other
    countries. As for the false name given in Germany and the name  in  the
    forged passport used to leave South Africa, it seems to me  that  there
    was some confusion about  which  name  was  used  when.  The  applicant
    admitted to having used a forged passport to  leave  South  Africa  and
    admitted to using false names in Europe and I cannot see  how  anything
    material turns on this.


112. It seems to me that, contrary to the respondent's view,  the  applicant
    has given a coherent and consistent  account  of  his  background,  his
    history and his journey to the UK and his experiences in the UK. He has
    had  to  repeat  his  account  on  various   occasions   to   different
    professionals, including medical  and  legal  professionals,  the  Home
    Office and social workers. It is not the  case  that  one  account  has
    simply been adopted by all as part of their own  assessments,  but  the
    assessments have been by parties on behalf of the applicant  and  those
    acting for the respondent and by professionals having varied  interests
    in the evidence,  from  medical,  social  care  and  housing  to  legal
    interests. Other than the reference in the initial health assessment to
    the applicant having left Eritrea for South Africa at the age of  eight
    or nine, which I have found above to have  been  a  simple  error,  the
    account he has given to all those professionals about his  family,  his
    living circumstances, his experiences and his journey  to  the  UK  has
    remained consistent.


113. In so far as the age assessors  were  concerned  with  the  applicant's
    demeanour, in regard to how he interacted with professionals during the
    assessments and avoided eye contact, the fact that  his  demeanour  did
    not change during the interview including when he spoke of his  mother,
    that he appeared irritated and frustrated at times, that he played with
    his fingers or  headphones,  that  he  gave  little  information  about
    childhood memories, that he seemed to leave gaps and did not give exact
    details or gave vague answers and that he  had  little  memory  of  his
    education, these have been addressed by the psychiatric report from  Dr
    Fairweather, as already discussed at [90] above.


114. Dr Fairweather diagnosed the applicant as  having  adjustment  disorder
    with depressed mood and developmental disruption. She  considered  that
    the adjustment disorder had developed as a  result  of  his  move  from
    supported accommodation to NASS accommodation. However, in response  to
    the question posed by the respondent, recorded at [2.3] of  her  second
    report (page G59), as to whether the applicant's  current  presentation
    resulting from the move to alternative accommodation was not  the  same
    as when he was interviewed for the age assessment,  particularly  given
    Dr Singh's lack of concern about psychiatric issues at the time he  saw
    the applicant, Dr Fairweather stated at  [2.3.3]  that  she  could  not
    entirely rule out him suffering psychiatric disorder at the  time  when
    he was interviewed for the age assessment. She referred at [6.5.1.2] of
    her first report to the applicant's  demeanour  not  changing  being  a
    possible sign of trauma, at [6.5.1.3] to his lack of  eye  contact  and
    fiddling with his finger and headphones being signs of  a  disorder  of
    anxiety, at [6.5.1.4] to his limited emotional responses  and  lack  of
    information being a possible sign  of  psychiatric  disorder  including
    PTSD and at [6.5.4.1] to his unwillingness to talk about  some  aspects
    of his life being consistent with a post traumatic state. At [8.2.4] Dr
    Fairweather identified some of the applicant's symptoms  as  consistent
    with PTSD although she said that she would not currently make a  formal
    diagnosis. At [8.2.6] she stated that any one of  the  experiences  the
    applicant had suffered would have a profound  impact  on  a  child  and
    would  cumulatively  pre-dispose  him  to  developing   a   psychiatric
    disorder. At [8.2.7] she referred to his adolescent development  having
    been disrupted because of these events. At [8.3.3]  she  explained  how
    the differential effects of trauma led  to  difficulties  in  providing
    evidence, to impaired ability to recall events and  provide  clear  and
    consistent chronologies and at [8.3.4] she related that  in  particular
    to the applicant, referring to the impact of his depressive symptoms on
    his memory and ability to recall information.


115. Dr Fairweather's observations at [8.2.9] are particularly pertinent  to
    the conclusions drawn by Ms Monakana and Ms Curtis from the applicant's
    level of maturity and independence.  She states that:


         "When considering a young person's capacities, it is  important  to
         conceptualise maturity as more than just chronological age. This is
         particularly  the  case  among  asylum-seeking  youth  who  due  to
         atypical and traumatic experiences may be adept in  some  ways  (eg
         early responsibility to care for self  or  others)  yet  apparently
         delayed in others (eg if they did not receive a formal  education).
         As  a  result  they  are  more  likely  to  present  with  'uneven'
         development  and  may  not  match  expected  norms   in   receiving
         countries. This can be confusing for professionals  when  presented
         with a young person such as [FAD]."


         and at [8.2.10]:


          "I understood [FAD]  to  present  with  disrupted  development  in
         certain areas. He has  a  poorly  developed  ability  to  identify,
         communicate and manage his emotional state. He struggled  to  fully
         describe his current  mental  state  and  make  links  between  his
         feelings and thoughts. He  could  say  little  more  than  he  felt
         stressed. He lacked an  ability  to  manage  his  feelings  in  our
         interview despite the formal context of a medico-legal  assessment.
         I observed this in  respect  of  his  irritability  and  dismissive
         approach to me. In this respect  he  presented  more  as  an  early
         adolescent in respect of what research studies have noted about the
         ability to process emotional reactions in oneself and others"

116. Dr Fairweather did not  provide  an  indication  of  her  view  of  the
    applicant's age, and indeed that was neither her  instruction  nor  the
    purpose of her report, but it is clear  that  her  view  was  that  the
    applicant presented as a young adolescent in some ways but  as  a  late
    adolescent in others. Her reports are informative in the explanation as
    to how and why the  applicant's  behaviour  reflected  both  and  as  a
    response to the views  taken  by  the  social  workers  and  the  other
    witnesses and they provide some context for the gaps in his history and
    the information he provided to the assessors.


117. There are, I accept, some aspects of  the  applicant's  evidence  which
    the  respondent  considers  particularly  material  and  which  I  find
    troubling. The first is his account of how he knew his date  of  birth.
    In the absence of any documentary evidence of his date  of  birth,  his
    evidence as to how he knew it was clearly significant.  The  respondent
    considers it lacking in credibility that the applicant would have  been
    told his date of birth by his mother in the western calendar but not in
    the Ethiopian calendar. I have to agree that that is unusual.  However,
    the applicant later said that his mother actually only told him his age
    and pointed out the date of birth in the documents received  when  they
    were living in South Africa.  His  evidence  clearly  changed  in  that
    respect,  but  the  explanation  he  now  gives  is  not   implausible,
    particularly as it is a matter of  public  record  that  birthdays  and
    dates of birth are not important  in  many  third-world  countries  and
    particularly so when the applicant's  family  were  living  as  illegal
    immigrants in Ethiopia without a settled or stable life.


118. The other significant matter is the evidence of  the  applicant  having
    provided  various  different  dates  of  birth  and   identities   when
    fingerprinted in France, Spain and Germany, giving  him  a  much  older
    age, as disclosed in the documents at pages E118 to E123. That evidence
    is relied upon by the respondent as evidence that the applicant was not
    a credible witness in general and, further, as evidence that  the  date
    of birth now relied upon was only one of various others he  had  given,
    none of which could therefore  be  accepted  as  genuine.  It  is  also
    asserted by the respondent as material that the applicant's claim to be
    an adult was never questioned by the immigration authorities in France,
    Spain or Germany or the UN social workers in  Spain  and  that,  as  Ms
    Monakana said, her colleagues in other countries would  have  exercised
    their safeguarding duties if they had any doubts that the applicant was
    not an adult. Ms Butler's response to that was that they had no  reason
    to treat him as a child if he was presenting himself  as  an  adult.  I
    have to agree that it is reasonable to expect that the  authorities  of
    those countries were unlikely to provide the applicant with support  as
    a child when he was not requesting it and when he was claiming to be an
    adult, particularly as he did not present as  a  young  child.  I  also
    agree that the applicant has presented an explanation for giving  false
    dates of birth as an adult whenever stopped  in  those  countries,  but
    then giving his true date as a child when arriving in the UK, and  that
    that explanation is not entirely implausible. He explained that he  did
    not want to be restricted in his movements in any of those countries as
    he wanted to locate his brother whom he understood to be in the UK  and
    therefore presented as an adult so that he would be free to move about.
    Further, that by giving different names and dates of birth he would not
    be located within any records. Had the applicant used  the  same  adult
    date of birth throughout Europe but then presented a  child's  date  of
    birth on entry to the UK his explanation may not have held any  weight,
    but I cannot discount the explanation he has given,  particularly  when
    considering the broad range of dates of birth he  gave,  as  Ms  Butler
    pointed out in her submissions.


119. Clearly, the applicant's propensity  to  present  different  identities
    gives  rise  to  some  concerns  about  his  overall  credibility   and
    accordingly, as I said at [84] above, this has not been an easy case to
    decide. However, there are weaknesses in the evidence from  both  sides
    and, having undertaken a sympathetic assessment of the evidence,  as  I
    am required to do, I  am  ultimately  persuaded  that  the  applicant's
    account is true.


120. As previously noted at [112], the applicant has provided  a  consistent
    account of his background, his history and his journey to  the  UK  and
    his experiences in the UK. The chronology of events he has recounted is
    largely consistent with the age he claims. The date  of  birth  he  has
    given for his brother is consistent with the age gap he claimed and the
    age he has provided for his residence in Ethiopia  is  consistent  with
    the stage of education reached (grade two or three).  The  concerns  of
    the age assessors and the respondent's witnesses leading them to  their
    conclusions on the applicant's age, in relation to his  demeanour,  his
    maturity and his independence, have  been  cogently  addressed  by  the
    psychiatric  report  of  Dr  Fairweather  when  assessed  against   his
    traumatic childhood, his loss of family members, his lengthy journey to
    the UK including his traumatic separation from his brother, his arrival
    in the UK chronically undernourished  as  a  result  of  the  gruelling
    circumstances of living in the jungle in Calais and the decline in  his
    mental health after being moved into adult accommodation. As  mentioned
    above, the respondent's witnesses  all  accepted,  in  response  to  Ms
    Butler's questions, that the factors upon which  they  relied  did  not
    necessarily demonstrate that the applicant was  not  the  age  claimed.
    There is the additional evidence of  the  two  witnesses  who  did  not
    appear before the Tribunal which, although of limited weight in itself,
    provides further support when taken cumulatively with all the evidence.
    Furthermore, the reliance upon physical  appearance  is  a  notoriously
    unreliable basis for assessment, as found in NA, R (on the  application
    of) v London Borough of Croydon [2009] EWHC 2357 at [27] and there  is
    nothing obvious about the applicant's appearance  in  any  event  which
    would tend towards being determinative of his age.


121. Accordingly, taking all the evidence before me into account  and  doing
    the best I can with that evidence, I am satisfied  that  the  applicant
    was born on the date he claimed. I acknowledge that there is no  actual
    evidence of a date of birth for the applicant, but the overall evidence
    is supportive of the age he claims to be and  is  consistent  with  the
    date of birth he has repeatedly given.




    DECISION


122. I find that the applicant was born on 13 April 2002  and  is  currently
    19 years of age and I make a declaration to that effect.



    Costs


123. Costs submissions were made by both parties in writing.  Neither  party
    was  required  to  attend  the  hand-down  hearing  and  neither  party
    attended.


124. The respondent's submissions were that the appropriate order  was  that
    there be no order for costs. That submission was based upon a  starting
    point that the applicant had failed in his challenge to the  lawfulness
    of the age assessment, albeit that his age had been accepted; that  the
    judgment had expressed  concerns  about  the  applicant's  conduct  and
    credibility; and that the local authority's role was limited  to  being
    investigative and they had no  stake  in  the  outcome.  The  applicant
    submits, however, that he should be awarded his costs  in  full  as  he
    succeeded in his claim, that  he  was  publicly  funded  and  that  the
    respondent had rejected a reasonable offer of settlement.


125. The  applicant  requests  that  the  respondent's  submissions  not  be
    considered owing to their late filing following a "generous"  extension
    of time granted by the Tribunal. The  submissions  were  due  two  days
    before the handing down of the judgment, which would  have  been  by  9
    August 2021 and the extent of the delay, namely one  day,  was  not  as
    extensive as the applicant claims. In any event the applicant  had  the
    opportunity to respond to the respondent's submissions by attending the
    hand-down which he chose not to do. In  the  circumstances,  and  given
    that the respondent's submissions  raise  no  novel  matters  requiring
    further input from the parties, I see no reason why I should not  admit
    and consider them.

126. Contrary to the assertion of each party, the relevant challenge in  the
    grounds included both the conclusion as to the applicant's age and also
    the lawfulness of the age assessment, as is apparent from the Statement
    of Issues at page A82. I do not agree with the  respondent,  therefore,
    that the applicant's grounds all failed in light of  the  finding  that
    the age assessment was lawful. On the contrary the applicant  succeeded
    in his case as  to  his  age.  Having  said  that,  I  agree  with  the
    respondent that there were concerns about the applicant's conduct which
    gave rise to the age  assessment  in  the  first  place  including  the
    evidence of his previous use  of  different  identities  and  dates  of
    birth. For the reasons given at [6] of the respondent's submissions,  I
    do not consider that the applicant's offer of a compromise reduced  the
    impact of those concerns.

127. For those reasons, I am in  agreement  with  the  respondent  that  the
    applicant should not be entitled  to  his  full  costs  despite  having
    succeeded overall in relation to his chronological age, although  I  do
    not agree that the appropriate order would be no order as to  costs.  I
    consider the appropriate order to be that the applicant should  recover
    50% of his reasonable costs, to be assessed if not agreed.

