
IAC-FH-LW-V1

                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                 EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT GIVEN FOLLOWING HEARING

                                                                JR/3067/2016

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                                                            16 February 2017


                                  The QUEEN
                           (ON The application OF)
                            sayed mizanur rahman
                                                                   Applicant


                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE COLLINS


                               - - - - - - - -

Mr M Biggs, Counsel, instructed by J A R Solicitors appeared on behalf of
the Applicant.

Mr R  Harland,  Counsel,  instructed  by  the  Government  Legal  Department
appeared on behalf of the Respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                    ON AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                              APPROVED JUDGMENT
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -



    MR JUSTICE COLLINS:


1.  This is an application for judicial review to challenge the decision  of
    the Secretary of State given on 19  December  2015  to  reject  and  to
    certify a claim made by the applicant under  Article  8  for  leave  to
    remain which he made on 29 August 2015. The essence of the  claim  when
    lodged was that the applicant should be given an in  country  right  of
    appeal rather than have his application certified.  There is a  history
    to this which I need to set out so far as material.


2.   The applicant is a national of Bangladesh.  He came to this country  to
    study, initially in May 2007.  He had a very unfortunate time because a
    number of colleges which he attended lost their  licences  and  he  was
    compelled to make further applications during  the  time  that  he  was
    here. The Secretary of State refused those applications.   He  appealed
    and  his  appeals  were  allowed,  so  understandably  he  had   to   a
    considerable extent lost faith in the Home Office and the way the  Home
    Office had treated him.  In any event, the result of all this was  that
    he was here lawfully until his last material  leave  expired  in  2014.
    The appeal decision was in his favour and so  the  Secretary  of  State
    knew by May 2014 that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had decided that he
    ought to be given further leave to remain.


3.   For reasons which are not explained which show an unfortunate  lack  of
    competence in dealing in time  with  applications,  it  took  the  Home
    Office nearly a year to make any decision,  and  in  the  meantime  the
    applicant was not able to pursue his studies because he  had  no  leave
    and no college would be prepared to take him on without such leave.


4.   It seems that a letter was sent in  April  2015  which  indicated  that
    leave was to be granted.  That  letter  was  sent  to  the  applicant's
    previous solicitors who by then were not on the record, and indeed,  as
    I understand it, were no longer in practice.  The  result  was  that  a
    subsequent letter dated 27 May 2015 was sent to  the  applicant.   This
    was a short letter and what it said was:-


         "Please find enclosed your passport along with a letter setting out
         your conditions of leave.   These  were  previously  sent  to  your
         Representatives A K Solicitors, however, the package  was  returned
         by the Post Office to us as your Representative did not go  to  the
         Post Office to retrieve it."


     This  is  not  surprising  since  they  were  no  longer  in  business.
    Unfortunately, it seems that the accompanying letter was not with that.


5.   Mr Harland submits, and has  always  submitted,  that  having  received
    that letter it was incumbent on the applicant to make enquiries of  the
    UKVI and see what leave he had obtained.  Unfortunately,  a  subsequent
    letter was sent on 12 June 2015 and  that  was  addressed  to  his  new
    solicitors, so clearly the Home Office had  received  information  that
    the new solicitors were the correct solicitors. That was a  request  to
    re-enrol his biometric information.  As I say, the letter was  12  June
    2015, but the material part of it is, to say  the  least,  unfortunate,
    and  I  quote,  under  the  heading  "REQUEST  TO  RE-ENROL   BIOMETRIC
    INFORMATION" this is said:-


     "Thank you for providing your biometric information at  Post  Office  -
         London, Poplar on 22 July 2015."


     That of course is a bad start because  the  letter  is  dated  12  June
    2015.  It goes on:-


     "I apologise for any inconvenience this may  cause,  but  unfortunately
         the biometric information process was  not  successful.   Therefore
         you must return to a participating Post Office branch to have  your
         biometric information taken  so  that  we  can  proceed  with  your
         application.


     If you do not enrol your biometric information  your  application  will
         be rejected as invalid.  This will apply even if you have  provided
         all the other relevant information, documentation  and  payment  to
         validate your application."


6.   That could  not  be  clearer.   It  says  in  terms  that  without  the
    biometric information the application will not be allowed and the  only
    application to which that refers, and can refer, is the application  he
    had made for leave to remain, an  application  which  resulted  in  the
    favourable appeal and which the Secretary of State had not got round to
    deciding by then, despite chasing letters from his then solicitors.


7.   It may be, as Mr Harland submits, that  prudence  would  have  dictated
    that further enquiries were made because of the discrepancy between the
    letter of 12 June and that of 27 May, but  if  one  goes  back  to  the
    letter of 27 May what it states is that it  is  a  letter  setting  out
    "your conditions of leave".  It does not actually  say  in  terms  that
    leave has been granted, and it may well be, and certainly could  be  in
    the light of all the correspondence, that a reasonable  assumption  had
    been made that all that that  letter  did  was  to  set  out  what  was
    proposed and leave could not be granted as  the  12  June  letter  made
    clear until the biometric information was properly enrolled, and  I  am
    told that the applicant did take the necessary steps.


8.   It was not he says until the  beginning  of  August  that  he  received
    confirmation that leave had been granted, but that leave ran from April
    and came to an end at the end of August, thus he had a very short  time
    within which he could make the necessary applications to a  college  in
    order to pursue his studies, and it is his case that he was  unable  to
    achieve any progress in that regard within the very short time that was
    allowed.  Essentially, what is submitted  on  his  behalf  is  that  he
    ought, at the very least, to have been given from the  date  in  August
    some 60 days which would be the normal period which is  provided  where
    someone has been unable to pursue his education because of the loss  of
    licence by whatever college he was then attending.


9.   Mr Harland draws attention to  his  evidence  and  indeed  the  medical
    evidence that has been produced and which was to an extent relied on in
    the Article 8 claim that suggested that he really was not able to study
    at that time.  There is a letter of November 2015 from the Whipps Cross
    University Hospital which he was apparently attending  which  indicated
    that he had not been able to work over the  last  five  or  six  months
    because of pain that he was suffering from spondylitis and he needed to
    take painkillers.  It is perfectly  clear  that  he  did  have  medical
    problems which had affected and were likely to continue to  affect  his
    studies, but they did not mean, he says, and I see no reason to  reject
    this evidence on his behalf, that nonetheless he wanted to be  able  to
    study and despite his illness he reckoned that he was able  to  do  so,
    and as I say, the main complaint is that he was unable to do it  within
    the very short period which was available to him as a result of the way
    the Home Office had acted.


10.  That the Home Office has acted in my judgment in  a  thoroughly  unfair
    fashion, is undoubted.  The two letters of  27  May  and  12  June  are
    entirely inconsistent and the letter of 12 June, on  the  face  of  it,
    makes as clear as it could be that his application had not been by then
    allowed.  True, he could have taken steps and it is said that the  UKVI
    would have reacted appropriately if he had taken the  necessary  steps.
    The history of this case does not mean that  one  can  have  confidence
    that that would indeed have occurred, but I have no doubt,  as  I  have
    said, that the way that the applicant has been dealt with was not fair.
     Now of course fairness is something which the Home Office has  boasted
    to be a necessary part of its immigration policy and practice and  that
    must be right, and it seems to me quite clear that if  there  has  been
    unfairness, that is something which is capable of  persuading  a  court
    that the decision resulting from such unfairness is one  which  is  not
    lawful.  Much will depend upon the circumstances of the  case,  but  in
    this case, somewhat inevitably, since  there  is  no  right  of  appeal
    against an unfair decision, the claim has been based on Article 8.


11.  His Article 8 claim, so far as his ability to integrate  in  Bangladesh
    and his private life here independently of the  ability  to  study,  is
    very weak.  He was  here  precariously  and  accordingly  Section  117B
    applies.  Nevertheless, what one has to consider is whether it would be
    proportionate to require him to return.  It is accepted that there  has
    been an interference with his private life and accordingly it is proper
    to rely, or to be able to rely on Article 8.


12.  Article 8(2) provides as follows, and I quote:-


     "There shall  be  no  interference  by  a  public  authority  with  the
         exercise of this right except such as is in accordance with the law
         and is necessary in  a  democratic  society  in  the  interests  of
         national security, public safety or the economic well-being of  the
         country,  for  the  prevention  of  disorder  or  crime,  for   the
         protection of health or morals, or for the protection of the rights
         and freedoms of others"


     and what is relied on essentially in these cases is  "necessary.....for
    the economic wellbeing of the country", but it has to be in  accordance
    with the law, and if the decision is so unfair as to mean  that  it  is
    not in accordance with the law, then Article 8(2) will  apply  to  show
    that to refuse on the Article 8 claim would be disproportionate.  It is
    not  necessary  to  go  into  the  details  as  to  whether  there  are
    exceptional circumstances.  "Exceptional" does not mean something  that
    is totally out of the ordinary. It simply means that  it  is  something
    that does not accord with the terms of the Rule, but  it  is  incumbent
    upon the Secretary of State to act in a manner which is  in  accordance
    with Article 8 and so the decision must be, inter alia,  in  accordance
    with the law.  That means beyond any question that to certify the claim
    was not lawful, and therefore  the  certification  at  the  very  least
    cannot stand.


13.   It seems to me, that in the circumstances of  this  case  matters  may
    well go further, but all I need do, because this  is  the  only  relief
    essentially that is sought is to quash the certification.   This  means
    that a fresh decision is going to have to be made.  It seems to me that
    in the light of the history that I have set out, and in the unfair  way
    in which this applicant has been dealt with by  the  Home  Office,  the
    obvious course is to give him an immediate 60 day period to enable  him
    to take the necessary steps to find a college or institution  at  which
    he can further and complete the education upon which  he  has  spent  a
    considerable sum of money hitherto.  If, within that period  he  cannot
    find anywhere, then it is likely that any further application to remain
    here will fail, but I cannot dictate what the Secretary of  State  must
    do.  All I can do is to say that in my judgement the Secretary of State
    will be in difficulty if she does not act speedily,  and  if  she  does
    not, in the interests of fairness and good administration, act  in  the
    way that I have suggested.


14.  In those circumstances this application succeeds.~~~~0~~~~




                                                                      UTIJR6


                                                                JR/3067/2016


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice







                       The Queen on the application of

                            Sayed Mizanur Rahman
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent



     Before Mr Justice Collins sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal




            Application for judicial review: substantive decision

Having considered  all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  the  parties'
respective representatives, Mr Biggs,  of  Counsel,  instructed  by  J  A  R
Solicitors, on behalf  of  the  Applicant  and  Mr  R  Harland  of  Counsel,
instructed by the Government Legal Department, on behalf of the  Respondent,
at a hearing at Field House, London on 16th February 2017.

Order


(1)  The decisions of the respondent are quashed both  in  relation  to  the
      certification under s.94 and to unfairness as set out in the  judgment
      annexed, leave having been given to amend the grounds to  include  the
      unfairness allegations.

(2)  Costs are to be dealt with following written submissions  if  such  are
      made within successive periods of 14 days.
                                    [pic]
         Signed:


                                     The Honourable Mr Justice Collins




        Dated:                  22 June 2017





Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------
 Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

 A party may appeal against such a decision to the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3).





