


                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                                  JR/3111/2019; JR/3119/2018
                                                  JR/2695/2018; JR/7440/2018
                                                  JR/6885/2019; JR/6886/2018
                                                                JR/3298/2018

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                                                           20th January 2020


                                  The QUEEN
                           (ON The application OF)
                           manpreet singh & others
                                                                  Applicants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON
                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                               - - - - - - - -
Mr A Metzer QC & Dr A Van Dellen of Counsel, instructed by Mr Sharaz
Hussnain Ahmed, Director of 12 Bridge Solicitors
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
      FINDINGS OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL EXERCISING ITS HAMID JURISDICTION

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -




   Introduction

   1. The Upper Tribunal has an inherent jurisdiction to govern its own
      procedure and part of that jurisdiction mandates that we ensure that
      the lawyers interacting with the Upper Tribunal conduct themselves
      according to proper professional standards. The Upper Tribunal cannot
      afford to have its limited resources absorbed by abusive applications
      by those who repeatedly bring meritless applications. Further,
      substantial time spent on meritless and abusive applications also
      risks a loss of public confidence in the processes of the Upper
      Tribunal. We are also aware that the immigration client group can be
      particularly vulnerable and open to exploitation by representatives.

   2. We emphasise that the primary duty of solicitors and barristers is to
      the Court and Upper Tribunal, and to the cause of truth and justice.
      If a weak case is advanced on instructions from a client then it must
      be done in a way which is professionally proper: in particular there
      must a candid disclosure of material which is relevant to the matter
      to be decided but which might not assist the applicant and a case must
      not be advanced which is inconsistent with the evidence put before the
      Secretary of State. Part of the duty to the court which we explore in
      this decision is that placed on the qualified lawyer to take ownership
      and responsibility for the applications advanced: a firm of solicitors
      cannot meet its duty to the Court and Upper Tribunal by allowing
      unqualified caseworkers who are inadequately supervised or
      unsupervised to make unmeritorious applications.

   3. We guide ourselves with reference to the decision in R (Hamid) v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] EWHC 3070 (Admin),
      and the subsequent decision of R (Sathivel)  & Ors v Secretary of
      State for the Home Department [2018] EWHC 913 (Admin).

   4. The purpose of the present hearing is to decide whether it would be
      appropriate to refer Mr Sharaz Ahmed, director of 12 Bridge
      Solicitors, to the Solicitors Regulation Authority (SRA) for
      investigation.  What is said in a Hamid decision is not binding on the
      SRA, but may assist their further exploration of this matter, should
      we conclude that it is appropriate to make a referral.

   5. This is a decision which has been written by Upper Tribunal Judge
      Lindsley but to which the other members of the panel have contributed.

   The Present Proceedings

   6. On 20th September 2018 Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson issued a notice to
      show cause to 12 Bridge Solicitors, when refusing permission for
      judicial review and certifying the matter as totally without merit in
      the case of Babita Giri (JR/32998/2018). A response was received from
      12 Bridge Solicitors dated 4th October 2018 but it is unclear who
      wrote the response. It was decided at that point that no referral to
      the SRA was appropriate. On 8th July 2019 Upper Tribunal Judge
      Lindsley issued a show cause notice in the case of Manpreet Singh
      (JR/3119/2019), when refusing permission and certifying the
      application as totally without merit. A statement of truth in response
      was received from Ms Taskeen Ahmed dated 8th August 2019.   On 11th
      July 2019 Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan issued a show cause
      direction in the case of Blerim Dema (JR/3110/2019), when refusing and
      certifying the application as totally without merit and a response was
      received to this notice from 12 Bridge Solicitors dated 8th August
      2019 again from Ms Taskeen Ahmed.

   7. On 30th August 2019 Mr Sharaz Hussnain Ahmed was written to as the
      director of 12 Bridge Solicitors by The Hon. Mr Justice Lane, the
      President of the Upper Tribunal (IAC), with respect to these three
      cases and four further matters of concern, and required to provide a
      further statement of truth. On 13th September 2019 Mr  Ahmed responded
      with a statement of truth on behalf of 12 Bridge Solicitors. 12 Bridge
      Solicitors were notified at the beginning of November 2019 that it had
      been decided that the issues raised in the letter of 30th August 2019
      would be further considered at a hearing. This was eventually listed
      for 20th January 2020 due to issues that prevented Mr Ahmed attending
      the Upper Tribunal at earlier proposed dates. Mr Ahmed produced a
      further statement of truth dated 6th January 2020 for the hearing, and
      reliance was also placed on the earlier statements of truth issued on
      behalf of the firm in that statement.

   8. Mr Ahmed was very ably represented by Mr Metzer QC and Dr Van Dellen
      at the hearing. Firstly, we dealt with the preliminary issue raised by
      Mr Metzer QC which was whether we had to recuse ourselves due to an
      issue of apparent bias.  It was then agreed that the hearing would
      involve a series of questions with respect to the structure of the
      firm, followed by questions regarding issues of professional conduct
      arising out of the cases. Mr Metzer QC said he had various concessions
      and clarifications relating to the cases but we asked that he
      contribute these as we went through them. At the end of the hearing Mr
      Metzer QC, Dr Van Dellen and Mr Ahmed were given the opportunity to
      make any final submissions that they wished us to hear.

   Preliminary Issue

   9. Mr Metzer QC made an application that the panel should recuse itself
      on the basis that all panel members had issued notices to show cause
      against 12 Bridge Solicitors and there was therefore apparent bias on
      the basis we had predetermined the issues before us. He relied upon
      Porter v Magill [2002] 2 AC 357 as cited in the case of Sarabjeet
      Singh v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 492 which held that the question when
      determining apparent bias is whether the fair minded and informed
      observer, having considered the facts would conclude that there was a
      real possibility that the tribunal was biased. Mr Metzer QC said that
      the issuing of the show cause notices would create an objective
      impression of bias against 12 Bridge Solicitors by the panel members.
      The panel found that there was no possibility that a fair minded and
      informed observer would conclude there was a real possibility the
      tribunal was biased. Judge Jackson had actually decided not to make a
      referral to the SRA at that stage as a result of reading what had been
      said by 12 Bridge Solicitor in response to her show cause notice;
      Judges Lindsley and O'Callaghan had not come to any conclusion on the
      responses raised in reply to our show causes notices. The fact of
      prior involvement in litigation is not a matter which requires recusal
      per se and often judicial continuity will be of advantage to the
      parties and administration of justice, see Stubbs v The Queen; Davies
      v The Queen; Evans v The Queen [2018] UKPC 30. It is notable that
      Hamid issues are regularly dealt with by the judge who decides the
      substantive application and before whom the questionable professional
      behaviour has arisen, with the practical advantage that they are well-
      versed in the factual and procedural background to the case. Further,
      in some Hamid hearings so many applications are involved that it might
      be hard to find a judge who had not previously refused and certified
      as meritless an application related to those Hamid proceedings, see R
      (on the application of Hoxha) v SSHD (representatives: professional
      duties) [2019] UKUT 124. We made clear to Mr Ahmed and his
      representatives at the start of the hearing that we had not in any way
      prejudged him, and indeed that the purpose of the hearing was to more
      fully understand his position on the issues raised in the show causes
      notices and letter from the President, and only then to decide if
      further investigation by the SRA was necessary. It was therefore
      correct that we refuse the application to recuse ourselves.

    The Structure of 12 Bridge Solicitors & Role of Staff Members

  10. 12 Bridge Solicitors is a branch of the solicitors' firm Landmark
      Legal LLP: Landmark Legal LLP has its offices in Harrow Road and 12
      Bridge Solicitors in Hounslow. Mr Ahmed, the director of 12 Bridge
      Solicitors, is a barrister who currently divides his time between
      these two solicitors offices, and he has also been in practice as a
      self-employed barrister at New Temple Chambers for the past 8 years.
      From 2015 to mid-2018 he was also head of Law Lane Chambers (now
      called 3 Bolt Court Chambers it would appear) as a self-employed
      barrister.

  11. Mr Ahmed explained that he currently divides his time roughly as
      follows: 40% at 12 Bridge Solicitors; 40% at New Temple Chambers; and
      20% at Landmark Legal LLP. He said that although his entry with New
      Temple Chambers webpage does not say he is an immigration specialist
      this is because it is a chancery set and in fact some of the cases in
      which he is said to have appeared are immigration cases. Mr Ahmed
      explained that he has worked in the field of immigration as a
      qualified solicitor and then as a barrister for the past 20 years  He
      said his pattern of attendance at 12 Bridge Solicitors was generally
      to go there after court, and when he has his own appointments.

  12. Mr Ahmed explained that at 12 Bridge Solicitors there are four
      immigration specialists. He is there on average about 40% of the time.
      Ms Taskeen Ahmed/Hussain is a solicitor who is a full-time employee of
      Landmark LLP, and at 12 Bridge Solicitors 40% of her time, but is
      primarily a family lawyer with Landmark LLP at the Harrow Road office.
      Ms Taskeen Ahmed/Hussain has about 17 years' experience of immigration
      work having qualified as a solicitor in about 2002/3. Mr Ahmed could
      not explain why Ms Ahmed/Hussain does not feature on the website for
      12 Bridge Solicitors. In addition there are two caseworkers, Fatima
      Shakeel (full time) and Alida Lusha (a part time worker). Both
      caseworkers have undertaken immigration work for about 7 years.

  13. Ms Lubna Sabri, a solicitor who is listed as a consultant immigration
      solicitor at 12 Bridge Solicitors on the Law Society website is not in
      fact presently undertaking this area of work, and instead works as a
      conveyancer. Mr Ahmed could not explain why Mr Arman Alam is still on
      the 12 Bridge Solicitors website as a barrister employed by them as
      this is not the case, as he left a year ago to be self-employed
      counsel. Mr Ahmed confirmed that Mr Irshad Ahmad, a solicitor who does
      appear on that website but not on the Law Society listings for 12
      Bridge Solicitors, is employed by them but does not undertake any
      immigration work. Mr Irshad Ahmad attended the hearing before us with
      Mr Sharaz Ahmed but did not give any evidence or make any other
      contribution to the hearing.

  14. Mr Ahmed explained that Ms Taskeen Ahmed, who signed two of the
      statements of truth for 12 Bridge Solicitors, is listed with the Law
      Society under her married name as Taskeen Hussain. Mr Ahmed could not
      explain why she used both her maiden and married names in her
      professional life, but did say that the firm works primarily using
      first names both with each other and clients. We were a little
      concerned by Mr Ahmed's lack of clarity about what name or names are
      used and that the use of two professional surnames might be confusing
      to clients, particularly if they had cause to complain.

  15. Mr Ahmed explained that at the time when all the applications which
      have raised issues of concern were dealt with, the supervisory system
      that operated at 12 Bridge Solicitors was that the caseworker would
      see the client and then discuss with him or Taskeen Ahmed/Hussain any
      proposed judicial review challenge. He or Taskeen Ahmed/Hussain would
      then form a view as to whether this was an appropriate course of
      action. The client was charged a fixed fee of �1200 plus
      disbursements. If an applicant could not afford the extra disbursement
      fee for counsel to draft the grounds, then either he or the caseworker
      would draft them. The bundle including claim form, grounds and
      documents would then be prepared by a caseworker for either Mr Ahmed
      or Taskeen Ahmed/Hussain to look through. This checking procedure
      would take the supervising lawyer  about 40 minutes even for bundles
      that ran to several hundred pages. The claim form would then be signed
      on behalf of the firm by the caseworker.

  16. Mr Ahmed explained that he altered this supervisory system since the
      Upper Tribunal alerted 12 Bridge Solicitors to the ongoing problems in
      August 2019. He confirmed that Taskeen Ahmed/Hussain is no longer
      involved in the process of supervision for Judicial Review
      applications (although she continues to supervise applications for
      leave to remain prepared to submit to the Home Office), and is more
      focused on family work. Mr Ahmed looks at all decisions of the Home
      Office which might be subject to judicial review; and grounds for
      judicial review will be drafted by him or external counsel and no
      longer by caseworkers. He said that they were now undertaking fewer
      judicial reviews, partly as a result of the letter from the President
      he was turning away borderline work and partly because of a general
      downturn in work.  The reduced number of applications meant that it
      was easier for him to find time to draft the grounds himself. He
      accepted with the new system he might have to turn away clients with
      no funds to instruct external counsel if he had no time to draft the
      grounds himself, although his former colleague and barrister, Mr Alam,
      would sometimes take on pro bono work. Mr Ahmed's task was also easier
      because since mid 2018 he had given up his work with Law Lane Chambers
      so he had more time to devote to 12 Bridge Solicitors.

  17. In addition, after receiving the letter from the President in August
      2019, Mr Ahmed had led a workshop on judicial review for his staff in
      which he identified for them what a good, bad and very bad decision
      from the Secretary of State might look like. 12 Bridge Solicitors has
      not however involved any external trainers in their training.

  18.  At the end of hearing, in response to questions from the Panel, Mr
      Ahmed said that when he was not available as a supervisor for his
      caseworkers (for instance when he was on holiday and it was not
      possible to be in touch via mobile phone or when he was in court or
      unwell so likewise could not be contacted) it was possible for those
      caseworkers at 12 Bridge Solicitors to be in touch with Mr Arman Alam
      of counsel to assist. We were assured that Mr Alam would be happy to
      assist the caseworkers if they contacted them directly, which we
      accept may well be the case, but it was clear that there was no formal
      arrangement for him to act as a supervisor and no prior planning to
      ensure his availability on known dates when Mr Ahmed may be
      unavailable.  This would be important particularly for urgent
      applications to ensure that there was someone available to supervise.



  19. The panel had concerns that Mr Ahmed has spread himself too thinly as
      a supervisor for the caseworkers as 12 Bridge Solicitors in the past,
      particularly at the point when he had four places of work, and
      although this has now reduced, he is still working from three
      different places, not including regularly appearing in court.  We
      remain concerned that the supervisory cover that is in place is still
      insufficient to make certain that caseworkers have adequate support in
      an area of law which often involves emergency work. There would still
      appear to be significant periods of time in a normal week where there
      is no supervisor available on site to the caseworkers at 12 Bridge
      Street.  We were particularly concerned that given Mr Ahmed's
      commitment to work as a self-employed barrister, there would often be
      times when he would not be contactable for many hours whilst in court.
      It is our view that the alternative suggestion of support and
      supervision with Mr Alam needs to be formalised urgently. We were
      pleased to hear that training had taken place for the caseworkers but
      hope that in the future that they will be given a more formal and
      extensive programme of updating training preferably delivered by a
      reputable external agency, particularly as this area of law is one
      which is very fast-moving.

    Issues Arising from the Cases

  20.  In relation to the issues which arose from the cases the panel had a
      common concern that the statement of truth from Mr Ahmed dated 6th
      January 2020 attempted to justify the errors made in a way we did not
      find consistent with the law or professional practice rather than
      apologise for those errors and explain why they would not happen in
      the future. In the process of justification of the errors we found
      that this often put the behaviour of 12 Bridge Solicitors in a worse
      light, see particularly the discussion of JR/3119/2019 below. However
      in the course of our hearing, Mr Ahmed stated that the contents of his
      statement of 6th January 2020 only set out the thinking of the
      misguided caseworkers who had drafted all bar one of the applications
      for judicial review considered in this decision, rather than
      objectively assessing the facts of each case and personally responding
      to them.  Mr Ahmed stated that in doing so he had not intended to
      endorse or justify what the caseworkers had done as the correct or a
      legitimate approach. This was not at all clear from the statement
      itself which, as above, gave the impression of seeking to justify the
      errors identified.  We were concerned that Mr Ahmed might not
      understand how to produce a professional statement for a court in
      which he ought to have distinguished matters which came from his own
      knowledge and understanding; matters which were evidence from his
      colleagues; and what he had gleaned from the files held by 12 Bridge
      Solicitors. However, by the end of the hearing we were reassured that
      Mr Ahmed did not maintain that the original thinking of the
      caseworkers was correct, and that he did in fact accept that the Upper
      Tribunal had legitimate concerns as articulated in our letters and
      questions. He unconditionally apologised for the lack of appropriate
      quality in the grounds and other errors.

  21. In short summary, the concerns that arose out of JR/3119/2019
      (Manpreet Singh) were that the grounds related to a challenge to a
      certification of a human rights claim under s.94 of the 2002 Act when
      the decision under challenge was one refusing a fresh claim under
      paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules. The response in the hearing
      statement of Mr Ahmed was that as the fresh claim refusal upheld that
      previous certification there was a legitimate reason for challenging
      the certification. However this explanation ignored the fact that the
      certification decision had been challenged unsuccessfully in a
      previous judicial review and so to launch a new challenge to it
      without reference to this fact would have been an abuse of process and
      a failure to comply with the duty of candour.

  22. The grounds in JR/3119/2019 also demonstrated a fundamental lack of
      understanding of the decisions of the Supreme Court  in R on the
      application of Agyarko & Ors v SSHD [2017] UKSC 11 and House of Lords
      in Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40. There were inaccurate statements
      of fact in the grounds and a lack of understanding of the requirements
      of the Article 8 ECHR Immigration Rules for those without valid leave
      to remain, with an insistence, not supported by decisions of the
      higher courts or coherent argument, that meeting the financial
      requirements in the Immigration Rules for those lawfully present and
      being in a genuine relationship when not fulfilling the requirements
      of the Rules to qualify as a partner could somehow lead to a situation
      where an applicant unlawfully present in the UK had realistic
      prospects of success in an Article 8 ECHR appeal. The same lack of
      understanding on these issues arose in other cases certified as
      totally without merit in this sample, see particularly JR/6885/2019
      below.

  23.  A concern that arose from the JR/3100/2019 (Blerim Dema) was that a
      refusal of a judicial review of a previous fresh claim was not
      adequately addressed in the grounds when it was clear that the
      circumstances of the applicant and his partner had not substantially
      changed. It was unclear what evidence had been included with that
      previous fresh claim either from the grounds or from the evidence
      itself, as it was undated. It was accepted by Mr Ahmed that the
      caseworker's thinking, that this was justified because the pre-action
      protocol response mentioned a previous judicial review, was not a
      proper excuse and that in the future previous judicial reviews should
      be clearly highlighted and be easy for a judge considering the
      application to understand what was the "fresh" evidence, and what
      evidence had  been previous considered by a tribunal.

  24. The application in JR/2695/2019 (Ahmed Shariff Peerally) led to
      concerns that 12 Bridge Solicitors were trying to convince the Panel
      in their statement of truth for the hearing that medical evidence had
      been submitted with the application for judicial review, when the
      judicial review bundle contained no such evidence. The panel were very
      concerned that the application was a human rights one based on medical
      grounds, which appeared to have absolutely no current medical
      evidence.  Further, that it was unclear from the application, grounds
      and indeed hearing statement whether 12 Bridge Solicitors founded
      their challenge primarily on Article 3 or Article 8 ECHR; and in any
      case how an appeal could have any prospects of success on the facts of
      the case. Mr Ahmed explained that he would not personally have
      advanced a judicial review challenge on the facts of this case or
      advanced such a claim with no medical evidence. He also accepted that
      he had not supervised the drafting of the grounds of appeal to the
      Court of Appeal which were the same as those in the original grounds,
      and informed the Panel that he would always draft grounds of appeal to
      the Court of Appeal himself in the future rather than delegating this
      to his caseworkers.  The position previously appeared to be that
      applications were made to the Court of Appeal based solely on
      instructions from the client rather than any objective assessment of
      the merits of such an application.

  25.  The application JR/7440/2018 (Amoon Amjad) raised issues of 12 Bridge
      Solicitors challenging a decision of the Secretary of State refusing
      to accept a fresh claim under paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules
      dated 30th October 2018 but failing to include a challenge to a
      further decision refusing a fresh claim under paragraph 353 dated 5th
      November 2018 even though the proceedings were lodged on 12th November
      2018, and thus after both decisions. Clearly even if the judicial
      review led to the quashing of the decision of 30th October 2018 the
      situation of the applicant would be in no better a situation as the
      claim was already re-refused in the decision of 5th November 2018.
      This error was compounded by including post-decision evidence in the
      bundle, which was in fact attached to the submissions refused in the
      decision of 5th November 2018. Mr Ahmed confirmed that he understood
      that the second decision was the one which ought to have been
      considered when assessing whether there was merit in a judicial review
      challenge, and that it was not generally correct to append post-
      decision evidence to a judicial review.

  26. JR/6885/2019 (Majinder Singh) led the panel to explore with Mr Ahmed
      further issues regarding the cases of  Agyarko and  Chikwamba, and the
      faulty understanding of the requirements of the principles in these
      cases. It was clear that it had not been understood that financial
      independence or being well-off could only be a neutral matter in a
      human rights appeal where the applicant was not lawfully in the UK and
      was relying upon a consideration outside of the Immigration Rules,
      applying Rhuppiah v SSHD [2018] UKSC 58. It was also clear that it was
      not understood by Mr Ahmed or his caseworkers  that  Chikwamba is a
      case about it not always being proportionate under Article 8 ECHR to
      require an applicant to return to obtain entry clearance when they
      clearly qualify to remain  in the UK, and thus that it could not have
      application where it was accepted that a key requirement of the
      Immigration Rules as a spouse (the English language test) was not met.
      Mr Ahmed confirmed to the panel that he understood these
      misapplications of case law had taken place.

  27. JR/6886/2018 (Arshad Mahmood &5) contained arguments in the grounds
      seeking permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal that ten years'
      unlawful or precarious presence in the UK was a significant period of
      time; and arguments in the grounds for judicial review that the
      decision failed to deal with s.55 of the Borders, Citizenship and
      Immigration Act 2009 lawfully and specifically, without any supporting
      evidence or even explanatory argument, that to return children to
      Pakistan who had been present in the UK for four years would be
      harmful to their education. It was accepted by Mr Ahmed that there had
      been a failure to understand the law relating to the  best interests
      of the child as protected by s.55 of the Borders, Citizenship and
      Immigration Act 2009, and that the argument relating to the ten year
      period of presence had been inappropriately applied.

  28. In relation to JR/3298/2018 (Babita Giri) Mr Ahmed accepted that he
      had been personally  responsible for this judicial review, unlike the
      other cases above where the failings arose due to a lack of
      supervision. He accepted that he had improperly issued what he
      described as a 'protective' judicial review claim without any detailed
      grounds to preserve the applicant's position pending a further
      decision from the Home Office in response to further submissions.
      Although in a different context, this claim raises similar concerns to
      those in JR/7440/2018 (Amoon Amjad) demonstrating a lack of
      understanding of which decision it is appropriate to challenge.  Mr
      Ahmed gave his apologies and an assurance that this would not happen
      again in the future.

   Submissions

  29. Mr Metzer QC placed reliance on the skeleton argument drafted by
      himself and Dr Van Dellen and submitted that Mr Ahmed had conceded
      that errors had been made by 12 Bridge Solicitors; he had been candid
      about the failings and that proper professional standards had not been
      maintained; and he had taken the fact of the hearing to heart and
      shown he took the criticisms extremely seriously. Mr Metzer QC argued
      however that there were now proper and sufficient supervisory
      procedures in place. Further, there was no evidence that there was
      persistence in flouting proper professional behaviour after a warning;
      no one at or connected with 12 Bridge Solicitors had previously been
      referred to the Bar Standards Board or the SRA; and thus that in
      accordance with the guidance in Hamid at paragraph 10, 12 Bridge
      Solicitors should not be reported to the SRA.

   Conclusions

  30. We do not accept that it is not open to us to make a referral of 12
      Bridge Solicitors to the SRA simply because this was the first time
      that Mr Ahmed had been required to attend a Hamid hearing and in the
      context that this was the first time issues of a failure to comply
      with professional standards had been raised with the firm. We do not
      even find that this is factually accurate, given that three show cause
      notices were issued by separate Upper Tribunal Judges prior to Mr
      Ahmed receiving a letter from the President of the Upper Tribunal
      (IAC) about these and other matters, which in turn led to this
      hearing. We find that there was a persistent pattern of professionally
      substandard work revealing a number of failings in relation to the
      duty to the Upper Tribunal: a failure to include relevant documents
      including a previous judicial decision; the inclusion of irrelevant
      and misleading post-decision material; legal argument which was
      totally without merit; and a failure by the qualified staff to
      properly supervise those without legal training who were operating
      well beyond their knowledge and understanding drafting grounds for
      judicial review and grounds of appeal to the Court of Appeal.

  31. However, we conclude, albeit with some hesitation, that we will not
      refer Mr Ahmed to the SRA on this occasion. This is primarily due to
      Mr Ahmed's oral evidence, which exhibited contrition and acceptance of
      the errors that 12 Bridge Solicitors had made; and because this oral
      evidence set out details of staff training and a more robust structure
      for supervision. However, should further errors relating to the
      professional duties of 12 Bridge Solicitors come to light then Mr
      Ahmed should expect that it is very likely that  we would decide to
      make a referral given the history, set out above, of falling below
      acceptable standards of supervision which has resulted in cases with
      multiple legal and professional errors. We draw Mr Ahmed's attention
      to our on-going concerns regarding supervision when he is not
      available and urge him to adopt a programme of on-going training from
      a suitable external and reputable source for all of his staff.

   Signed: Fiona Lindsley

   Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

   Dated: 26th February 2020







