























                                                                      UTIJR6


                                                                JR/4627/2018

                              Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber

                       Judicial Review Decision Notice






                       The Queen on the application of

                             MD TAREK AZIZ ROMAN


                                                         Applicant
                                  -and-


                          SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                             Respondent


                                  Before


                    Upper Tribunal Judge Finch on 1 April 2019




                  Application for judicial review: substantive decision

      Having considered all documents lodged and having heard Mr. P.  Turner
      of counsel, instructed by Hubers Law on behalf of the  Applicant,  and
      Mr. N. Ostrowski  of  Counsel,  instructed  by  the  Government  Legal
      Department, on behalf of the Respondent, at a hearing at Field  House,
      London on 1 April 2019.

Decision: the application for judicial review is refused


THE HISTORY OF THE APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW


1.    The Applicant is a national of  Bangladesh.   He  entered  the  United
    Kingdom as a student on  7  July  2012  and  was  subsequently  granted
    further leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student until 23  January
    2017. He applied for leave to remain outside the Immigration  Rules  on
    19 January 2017 but on 19 March 2017 he varied this application to  one
    for leave to remain on the grounds of  private  and  family  life.  His
    application was refused on 1 December 2017  and  certified  as  clearly
    unfounded.

2.    On 14 December 2017 he applied for leave to  remain  on  compassionate
    grounds. It is the  Respondent's  case  that  on  5  January  2018  the
    Applicant was notified of the need to enrol his  biometrics  within  15
    working days but that he did not do so. It  is  also  the  Respondent's
    case that he was sent a further notification letter on  9  April  2018,
    giving  him  10  days  to  enrol  his  biometrics.    The   Applicant's
    application was rejected on 30 April 2018, on the ground  that  he  had
    not enrolled his biometrics. He served a pre-action protocol letter  in
    relation to this decision on 12 June 2018 and the Respondent replied to
    this letter on 25 June 2018, maintaining his decision.

3.     Meanwhile,  on  18  June  2018  the  Applicant  had  made  a  further
    application for leave to remain on compassionate grounds.

4.    The Applicant lodged his claim for judicial review  on  4  July  2018,
    challenging the decision dated 1 June 2018. The  Respondent  filed  his
    acknowledgment of service and summary grounds of defence  on  9  August
    2018.  Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman refused the  Applicant  permission
    on the papers on 7 November 2018.

5.    On 17 January 2019, Upper Tribunal Judge Blum  granted  the  Applicant
    permission after an oral hearing.

THE SUBSTANTIVE HEARING

6.    Time for the Respondent to file and  serve  his  detailed  grounds  of
    defence was extended until 28 February  2019  and  these  grounds  were
    filed on that date. Time for the  Applicant  to  file  and  served  any
    further evidence and his comprehensive hearing bundle was also extended
    until 18 March 2019. In fact, the Applicant filed  his  hearing  bundle
    and authorities bundle on 20 March 2019.

7.    The Respondent received the Applicant's skeleton argument on 13  March
    2019 and I subsequently extended time for the Respondent  to  file  and
    serve his skeleton argument until 29 March 2019 and it  was  served  on
    that date. Both counsel made oral submissions and I  have  referred  to
    these submissions, where relevant, below.

SUBSTANTIVE DECISION

RELEVANT LEGAL PROVISIONS

8.    The power to require an applicant  to  provide  biometric  information
    derives from regulations made under section 5 of  the  UK  Borders  Act
    2007.

9.    Section 7 of the UK Borders Act 2007 states that:

    "(1)   Regulations under section 5(1) must include provision about  the
           effect  of  failure  to  comply  with  a  requirement   of   the
           regulations.
      (2)   In particular, the regulations may-
                 ...
           (b)   require or permit an application or  claim  in  connection
           with immigration to be disregarded or refused
           ..."


10.   Regulation 3 of the Immigration (Biometric  Registration)  Regulations
    2008 ("the Regulations") states that:

    "(1)   A person subject to immigration control must apply for the issue
           of a biometric immigration document where he-
      (a)  satisfies the condition in paragraph (2)...
    (2)    The condition is that whilst in the United  Kingdom  the  person
           makes an application-
      (a)  for limited leave to enter or remain..."

11.   Regulation 23(1) states that:

      "Subject to paragraphs (3) and (4), where a person who is required  to
    make an application for the issue of a biometric  immigration  document
    fails to  comply  with  a  requirement  under  these  Regulations,  the
    Secretary of State-

    (a)    make take any, or any combination, of the actions  specified  in
           paragraph (2); and
    (b)    must consider giving a notice under section 9 of the UK  Borders
           Act 2007".


12.   Paragraph (2) states:

      "The actions specified are to-
      (a)   refuse an application for a biometric immigration document;
      (b)  treat the person's application for leave to enter or  remain  or
           for entry clearance as invalid..."

13.   Home Office guidance on Biometric Information states:

      "A standard  route  application  made  in  a  category  that  requires
    biometric    information enrolment is valid if:
      - The application meets the normal validation requirements. And
      - The applicant attends at a participating Post Office to enrol their
        biometric information  within  15  days  from  the  date  of  their
        biometric information notification letter. No appointment is needed
        to enrol at a Post Office.
    ...
    You must send a warning letter to applicants, after the  15-day  period
    has passed if they have not attended at a Crown Post  Office  to  enrol
    their biometric information.
    If the applicant does not attend at a participating post office,  after
    the further warning period, set out in the  warning  letter,  you  must
    reject their application".

14.   Paragraph 39E of the Immigration Rules states that:

      "This paragraph applies where

      (1) the application was made within 14 days of the  applicant's  leave
    expiring and the Secretary of State considers that  there  was  a  good
    reason beyond the control of the  applicant  or  their  representative,
    provided in or with the application, why the application could  not  be
    made in-time; or
      (2) the application was made:
      (a)   following the refusal of a previous application for leave  which
           was made in-time or to which sub-paragraph (1) applied; and
            (b)  within 14 days of:
                 (i)   the refusal of the previous  application  for  leave;
    or
           (ii)  the expiry of any leave extended  by  section  3C  of  the
                 Immigration Act 1971; or
           (iii) the  expiry  of  any  time-limit  for  making  an  in-time
                 application for  administrative  review  or  appeal  (where
                 applicable); or
           (iv)  any  administrative  review  of  appeal  being  concluded,
                 withdrawn or abandoned or lapsing".


ALLEGED BREACH OF THE REGULATIONS

15.   In his claim form,  the  Applicant  challenged  the  decision  by  the
    Respondent, dated  30  April  2018,  that  he  had  not  made  a  valid
    application for leave  to  remain,  as  he  had  failed  to  enrol  his
    biometrics, as requested. It was his  case  that  neither  he  nor  his
    previous solicitors had received the letters, dated 5 January 2018  and
    9 April 2018, inviting him to enrol his biometrics. Therefore,  it  was
    submitted that the decision, dated 30  April  2018,  was  unlawful  and
    irrational.

16.   The Applicant accepts that  Universal  Solicitors  received  a  letter
    from  the  Respondent,  dated  5  January   2018,   acknowledging   his
    application for leave to remain and stating that there may be  a  delay
    in  considering  his  application  due  to  the   complexity   of   his
    application.

17.   It is the Respondent's case that he also sent  the  letters,  dated  5
    January 2018 and 9 April 2018, requiring the  Applicant  to  enrol  his
    biometrics in accordance with section 7 of the UK Borders Act 2007  and
    the Immigration (Biometric Registration) Regulations 2008. He relied on
    an extract from a copy of the Applicant's GCID Case Record Sheet, which
    had been heavily redacted.  On page 3  of  11  of  the  sheet,  it  was
    possible to read:

                                        "Unit:-   DPTS9:- 05-Jan-2016
      3911 issued to rep and applicant

    Unit:-   DPTS9:- 09-Apr-2018".

18.   This indicates that letters  of  these  dates  had  been  drafted  and
    prepared for service. The  letters  said  to  have  been  sent  to  the
    Applicant on 5 January 2018 and 9 April 2018 were  written  by  a  case
    worker in the Data Proc Team Sheffield 9, which abbreviated would  read
    "DPTS9".  This  indicates  that  the  letters  were  prepared  by   the
    appropriate part of the  Home  Office.  At  the  hearing,  I  was  also
    informed that "3911" was the code for the type of letter sent.

19.   The Applicant relied on the fact that the Respondent  had  not  lodged
    any evidence to confirm that the letters, dated 5 January  2018  and  9
    April 2018, had actually been posted to the Applicant. There was also a
    copy of an email sent by Universal Solicitors to the Respondent  on  24
    April 2018, requesting service of a biometric letter.

20.   When granting permission, Upper Tribunal Judge Blum found that  "given
    the unnecessary extent to which the GCID notes were redacted it is,  at
    least at this stage, arguable that the Respondent  unlawfully  rejected
    the 14 December 2017 application, as invalid, by failing to comply with
    his guidance on the obtaining of biometric information".

21.   At the hearing, counsel for the Applicant also noted that  the  copies
    of the letters relied upon by the  Respondent  had  not  actually  been
    signed by the case worker and that neither copy contained the  required
    2D Bar Codes required by the Regulations. Counsel  for  the  Respondent
    tried to take further instructions  on  these  submissions  during  the
    hearing without success. However, on 2 April 2019 the Government  Legal
    Service sent copies of the two letters including 2D Bar  Codes  to  the
    Upper Tribunal and to the Applicant's solicitors. The first letter  had
    been  sent  to  Universal  Solicitors,  who  were  at  that  time   the
    Applicant's solicitors, and the second had been sent to  the  Applicant
    himself. The Respondent said that previous version of these letters had
    been provided as the result of an administrative error and  I  have  no
    reason to believe that this was not the case.  The  Applicant  had  not
    raised the absence of the Bar codes until the date of  the  substantive
    hearing and the Government Legal Service had provided letters contained
    the Bar codes by 10.17 on the day after the hearing.  I have also taken
    into account the fact that the copies  of  these  letters,  which  were
    attached to the summary grounds of defence, did have 2D Bar  Codes  and
    that these letters should have been included in the Consolidated Bundle
    .

22.   It was not necessary for the purposes  of  this  hearing  to  reach  a
    finding as to whether these letters had been served, as claimed, as the
    determining issue was whether the application made by the Applicant had
    become academic, as explained below.

WHETHER THE CLAIM HAD BECOME ACADEMIC

23.   When granting permission, Upper Tribunal Judge  Blum  noted  that  the
    Applicant had made a further application for leave to remain on 18 June
    2018 on the same basis  as  his  previous  application  and  that  this
    application was still pending before the Respondent. He also noted that
    the Applicant did not have any leave to remain after  1  December  2017
    and, therefore, section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971 did  not  apply.
    As a consequence, his immigration status would not have been  adversely
    affected by his having to rely on his later application for leave.

24.   However, he was persuaded  by  counsel  for  the  Applicant  that  his
    application was not entirely academic "because a declaration  that  the
    rejection of his December 2017 application was unlawful may  result  in
    the original, not insubstantial fee being returned to him".

25.   The Applicant now accepts that this fee  was  refunded  prior  to  the
    permission hearing. This is confirmed by the copy of a  cheque  (number
    589813), dated 6 June 2018, which was made out to the Applicant by  the
    Respondent for the sum of �933 and was cashed by the  Applicant  on  12
    June 2018. At the hearing, counsel for the Applicant stated that at the
    time of the permission hearing, the Applicant had not yet informed  his
    solicitors that the application fee had been refunded to the Applicant.



26.   However, counsel  then  submitted  that  the  term  "fee"  had  to  be
    interpreted to include the fees paid by  the  Applicant  to  his  legal
    representatives, as well as the application fee  and  that,  therefore,
    the application for judicial review was not academic. He also submitted
    that the phrase that he had used at the  permission  hearing  had  been
    "the costs of making the  application".   However,  the  Applicant  did
    accept the accuracy of the Attendance Note  made  by  the  Respondent's
    counsel in relation  to  the  permission  hearing.  Counsel  stated  at
    paragraph 4 of his Note that "Mr. Turner stated that the claim was  not
    academic because the applicant had paid  a  significant  fee  for  this
    application to be considered". The plain and ordinary meaning  of  this
    statement was that he was referring to the  application  fee  and  this
    would appear to be how it was interpreted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Blum
    who referred to the not insubstantial fee being returned to him. In  my
    view, this indicates that permission was given in relation to an unpaid
    application  fee,  not  fees  paid  by  the  Applicant  to  his   legal
    representatives,

27.   In  any  event,  payments  made  to  legal  representatives  would  be
    primarily relevant to any costs to be awarded to the  Applicant  if  he
    succeeded in all or part of his case.

28.   I recognise that I continue to have a wide discretion in  relation  to
    the awarding of  costs  to  either  party.  However,  during  the  open
    correspondence relating to competing  consent  orders  drafted  by  the
    parties, those representing the Applicant accepted that  he  would  pay
    the Respondent's reasonable costs to the date of the consent order. The
    fact that a pragmatic approach had been taken in relation to costs, for
    the purposes of negotiating a consent order, does not detract from  the
    fact that this wider definition of a fee was raised for the first  time
    at the substantive hearing and  without  giving  notice  that  such  an
    argument.

29.   I have also taken into account the fact that  the  Applicant  did  not
    disclose,  for  the  purposes  of  the  permission  hearing,  that  his
    application fee had been refunded and that  this  had  led  to  further
    costs being accrued by both parties.

30.   For all of these reasons I find  that  any  legal  fees  paid  by  the
    Applicant did not detract from the fact that the Applicant's claim  had
    become academic when he made a further application  for  leave  in  the
    same terms.

31.   Counsel for the Applicant also submitted that his case had not  become
    academic as the decision that his first  application  was  invalid  had
    continued to have an adverse effect on his subsequent application.

32.   Counsel for the Applicant firstly  submitted  that  the  cases  relied
    upon by the Respondent in his Authorities Bundle  were  irrelevant.  In
    particular, he submitted that in all three cases the claims had  become
    academic as the Applicants had already achieved the substance  of  what
    they had applied for by another route by the time that their cases came
    to court. In the case of R v Secretary of State for the Home Department
    ex parte Salem [1999] 1 AC  450,  the  Applicant's  benefits  had  been
    restored and he had a received a back payment for the period  in  which
    such benefits had been stopped. In  R  (Zoolife  International  Lrd)  v
    Secretary of State for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs [2007]  EWHC
    2995  (Admin)  London  Zoolife  International  Ltd's  objections  to  a
    particular inspector had been taken into account and acted upon.

32.   Finally, in  The  Queen  on  the  application  of  Lamot  &  Others  v
    Secretary of State for Justice [2016] EWHC 2564  (Admin),  one  of  the
    three prisoners had been released from prison, one had been transferred
    to open conditions and one had been assessed as being  suitable  for  a
    transfer to open conditions.

33.   Counsel for the Applicant submitted that, in contrast, there  remained
    a finding that the Applicant had made an invalid application.  However,
    the cases in question were relied upon for the  principles  which  they
    developed and the factual matrix of cases do not have to  be  identical
    for the legal principles to be binding. In any event, the substance  of
    the Applicant's claim had been that the Respondent  had  erred  in  law
    when he had found that the Applicant's first application had  not  been
    validly  made.  The  moment  that  the  Respondent  accepted  that  the
    Applicant had made a valid application, his claim in  relation  to  the
    first application became academic, as the substance of  the  claim  was
    that his application should have been accepted as valid and considered.
    Once this consideration had occurred the appropriate remedy was then  a
    challenge to the second  decision  and  the  time  period  for  such  a
    challenge is yet to expire.

34.   In  addition,  as  a  matter  of  legal  principle,  counsel  for  the
    Applicant had not indicated how the test in the leading cases had  been
    met in the Applicant's case.  At page 457A  of  ex  parte  Salem,  Lord
    Slynn of Hadley found that:

      "The discretion to hear disputes, even in  the  area  of  public  law,
    must, however, be exercised with caution and appeal which are  academic
    between the parties should not be heard unless there is a  good  reason
    in the public interest for doing so, as for example (but only by way of
    example) when a discrete point of statutory construction  arises  which
    does not involve detailed consideration of the facts and where a  large
    number of similar cases exist or are anticipated so that the issue will
    most likely need to be  resolved in the near future".

35.   Counsel for the Applicant was not able to identify any discrete  point
    of statutory construction or a large  number  of  similar  existing  or
    potential cases, which would have meant that the current claim was  not
    academic.

36.   Similarly, in paragraph  36  of  R  (Zoolife  International  Lrd)  Mr.
    Justice Silber found that:

      "In my view,  these  statements  show  clearly  that  academic  issues
    cannot and  should  not  be  determined  by  courts  unless  there  are
    exceptional circumstances such as where two conditions are satisfied in
    the type of application now before the court. The first condition is in
    the words of Lord Slynn in  Salem  (supra)  that  "a  large  number  of
    similar cases exist or are anticipated" or at least other similar cases
    exist of are anticipated and the second condition is that the  decision
    in the  academic  case  will  not  be  fact-sensitive.  If  the  courts
    entertained academic disputes in the type of application now before the
    court but which did not satisfy  each  of  these  two  conditions,  the
    consequence would be a regrettable waste of valuable court time and the
    incurring by one or more parties of unnecessary costs".

37.   Again, counsel for the Applicant has  not  identified  anything  about
    the present claim which is exceptional. I have also taken into  account
    the fact that Silber J also observed at paragraph 18, that:

      "These points are particularly potent at the present  time  where  the
    administrative court is completely overrun with immigration, asylum and
    other cases and where it would be contrary to the overriding objectives
    of the CPR for an academic case to be pursued, after all, one of  those
    overriding objectives is 'dealing with a case justly  [which]  includes
    so far as  practicable...allotting  it  an  appropriate  share  of  the
    court's resources while taking into account the need to allot resources
    to other cases".

38.   In The Queen on the application of Lamot, Mrs Justice Simler  referred
    to ex parte Salem and R (Zoolife International Ltd) and went on to find
    at paragraph 23 that "these claims challenge decisions  make  in  2014,
    all now superseded...". At  paragraph  24  she  also  noted  that  "the
    suggestion that other prisoners have an interest in  these  claims  has
    not been substantiated by reference to any  such  prisoners".  Applying
    the principles to the facts of the current case gives rise  to  similar
    factual findings. As noted by counsel for the Respondent, the claim  is
    a classic case of the relevance of the first decision  being  overtaken
    by subsequent events. In  this  case,  the  consideration  of  a  valid
    application on the same facts.  Counsel  for  the  Applicant  submitted
    that,  in  contrast  to  paragraph  5  of  Lamot,  there  had  been  no
    significant material  development.  However,  in  the  context  of  the
    Applicant's case the significant development was  that  the  Respondent
    had accepted that the Applicant had made a valid  application  and  had
    reached a decision on the substance of his application, which he  could
    now challenge.

39.   Counsel for the Applicant also submitted that the first  decision  had
    an on-going and adverse effect on the second decision. At most, he  was
    able to point to the fact that under the heading  Immigration  History,
    it was noted that the first decision had been rejected. It did not even
    mention that this  application  had  been  found  to  be  invalid.   In
    addition, when considering whether  the  Applicant  had  made  a  fresh
    claim, the Respondent referred back to an  earlier  decision,  dated  1
    December 2018, and did not refer to the decision that his  application,
    dated 14 December 2018, had been invalid. Therefore, when reaching  his
    decision, the Respondent did not give any weight to the  fact  that  he
    had made an earlier invalid application. It was not a factor which  was
    said to have an adverse effect on any assessment of the credibility  of
    his claim, which depended on his entitlement to leave to remain outside
    the Immigration Rules on human rights grounds. In addition, as noted by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Blum, the fact that the  earlier  application  had
    been deemed to be invalid had not meant that he had overstayed.

40.   In his oral submissions, counsel for the Applicant also accepted  that
    paragraph 39E did not apply to the Applicant's current claim.  This was
    a realistic concession as the Applicant did not have extant leave  when
    he made his application, dated 14 December 2017, and in recognition  of
    this fact the Applicant had applied for leave outside  the  Immigration
    Rules. In particular, the application stated that:

      "     Our instructions confirm  that  our  client  has  established  a
    settled private and family life with his sister and her family  in  the
    UK and is effectively the primary carer of  his  sister's  three  minor
    children all of whom are British citizens.

      We would confirm that we thus  make  this  application  for  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of the above under Article  8
    of the ECHR outside the immigration rules...".

41.   For all of the above reasons, I find that the  claim  brought  by  the
    Applicant is now academic and that his application for judicial  review
    should be refused

Order

(1)   The Applicant's claim is refused.


(2)   The  decision  will  be  formally  handed  down  and,  therefore,  the
      attendance of counsel is not required.


Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal


(3)   I refuse permission to appeal to the Court  of  Appeal  because  there
      was no merit in the oral submissions  made  at  the  oral  hearing  on
      behalf of the Applicant.

Costs

(4)   The  Applicant  do  pay  the  Respondent's  reasonable  costs,  to  be
      assessed if not agreed.



                  Nadine Finch
       Signed:

                 Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


       Dated:    4 April 2019
















Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to the above parties on:.

Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

A party may appeal against such a decision to  the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 7 Days of the date the Tribunal's decision on  permission  to  appeal
was given (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3(2)).
