
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: JR/4288/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



HEARD IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

(IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER)

On 30th January 2019



                                   Before


                  THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE JULIAN KNOWLES



                                   Between


                       THE QUEEN ON THE APPLICATION OF

                                  (1) [P G]

                                  (2) [S E]


                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss A Sheehra Instructed by Nag Law Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr V Mandalia Instructed by the Government Legal
Department.




                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.    At the conclusion of the hearing on 30 January 2019 I  announced  that
      the application for judicial review was  allowed  for  reasons  to  be
      given later. These are my reasons.

Background

2.    This is primarily a  challenge  by  way  of  judicial  review  of  the
      Secretary of State's decision of 22  March  2018  refusing  the  First
      Applicant indefinite leave to remain (ILR). That decision  was  upheld
      on Administrative  Review  on  1  May  2018.  That  decision  is  also
      challenged, The Second Applicant is the First Applicant's husband. His
      claim for ILR as the spouse of a person with ILR  was  refused  on  22
      March 2018 at the same time as the refusal of ILR for his wife. Hence,
      his challenge is wholly contingent on his wife's claim succeeding.

3.    On 3 February 2007 the Applicant entered the UK lawfully  and  in  due
      course on 23 September 2010 she was granted leave to remain as a  Tier
      1 General Migrant. In 2010 and 2011 she received medical treatment  in
      India for gynaecological problems. She was absent from the UK from  13
      October 2010 to 21 March 2011 and then from 5  August  2011  until  12
      September 2011. These periods are agreed to amount to 194 days.

   4. On 18 September 2015, prior to the expiry of her leave to remain,  she
      applied for ILR based upon her five years' residence in the  UK  under
      the Tier 1 category. In support of her  application  she  submitted  a
      letter  dated  15  September  2015  and  she  also  submitted  medical
      [pic]evidence from her treating doctor in India explaining her absence
      from the UK.  The  First  Applicant  attended  for  interview  with  a
      caseworker and supplied information at the interview.

   5. The relevance of the explanation for her 194-day absence  is  that  in
      December 2012 the Immigration Rules (HC 395) were amended to  allow  a
      maximum absence from the UK of 180 days in five consecutive periods of
      12 months calculated backwards from  the  date  of  decision.  I  will
      return to the Immigration Rules later

   6. On 23 January 2016 the Secretary of State refused her application, but
      this refusal was withdrawn following the issuing of legal proceedings.
      The application was refused again on 7 September 2016 but  again  this
      refusal was withdrawn following the issuing of legal proceedings.

7.    On 7 December 2017 a Statement of Changes  in  Immigration  Rules  (HC
      309) was presented to Parliament pursuant to s 3(2) of the Immigration
      Act 1971.  The amendments relevant to this claim took effect  from  11
      January 2018.  I will address these changes later.  In  summary,  they
      permitted the Secretary of State to calculate the relevant  period  of
      five years (during which the applicant was permitted to be absent from
      the UK for no more than 180 days in a twelve month period)  as  ending
      with either the date of the application; the date of the decision:  or
      any date up to 28 days after the date of the application,  which  ever
      date is most beneficial to the applicant.

8.     On  16  February  2018  the  Secretary  of  State  requested  further
      information from the First Applicant.

9.    On 22 March 2018 the application for ILR was refused and this  refusal
      was upheld following the making of representations (on 5  April  2018)
      and an Administrative Review on 1 May 2018.

10.   The principal basis for the refusal was that the  Applicant  had  been
      absent for 194 days in the year 19 September 2010 - 18 September 2011,
      and therefore 14 days over the permitted 180-day  period  in  any  12-
      month period in the five years prior to the date of  the  application,
      so that she could not demonstrate a continuous period of five years in
      the UK

11.   The Secretary of State calculated the relevant periods as follows:


      19 September 2010 - 18 September 2011   194 days


      19 September 2011 - 18 September 2012   0 days


      19 September 2012 - 18 September 2012   102 days


      19 September 2013 - 18 September 2014   17 days


      19 September 2014 - 18 September 2015   0 days


  12. These periods are not in dispute. What  is  disputed  is  whether  the
      Secretary of State correctly applied the Immigration Rules to them  so
      as to refuse the First Applicant ILR.


  13. Before turning to the reasons for  refusal  in  more  detail  and  the
      grounds of challenge, it is convenient first to set out  the  relevant
      Immigration Rules.

Immigration Rules

  14. The relevant rule in force  at  the  time  of  the  First  Applicant's
      application for ILR was made in 2015 para 245AAA General  requirements
      for indefinite leave to remain:


             "For the purposes of references in this Part  to  requirements
             for indefinite leave to remain, except for those in paragraphs
             245BF, 245DF and 245EF:


          a) "Continuous period of 5  years  lawfully  in  the  UK"  means,
             subject to paragraphs 245CD, 245GF and 245HF, residence in the
             United Kingdom for an unbroken period with  valid  leave,  and
             for these purposes a period shall not be  considered  to  have
             been broken where:


             (i) the applicant has been absent from the UK for a period  of
             180 days or less in any  of  the  five  consecutive  12  month
             periods preceding the date of the  application  for  leave  to
             remain, except that any absence from the UK for the purpose of
             assisting with the Ebola crisis which began in West Africa  in
             2014 shall not count towards the 180 days,  if  the  applicant
             provides evidence that this was the purpose of the  absence(s)
             and that his Sponsor agreed to the absence(s).


             ...


             (c) Except for periods where the applicant had leave as a Tier
             1 (Investor) Migrant, a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant, a  Tier
             1 (Exceptional Talent) Migrant or a  highly  skilled  migrant,
             any absences [pic]from the UK during the five years must  have
             been a purpose that is consistent with the  applicant's  basis
             of stay here, including paid annual leave, or for  serious  or
             compelling reasons."

  15. As I have said, on 7 December 2017  amendments  to  para  245AAA  were
      presented to Parliament, and these took effect  on  11  January  2018.
      There were further amendments on 15 January 2018  but  these  are  not
      relevant to this claim.


  16. As amended with effect from 11 January 2018, para 245AAA specified:


             "The following rules apply to all requirements for  indefinite
             leave to remain in Part 6A and Appendix A:


          a) References to a  "continuous  period"  "lawfully  in  the  UK"
             means, subject to paragraph (e), residence in the  UK  for  an
             unbroken period with valid leave, and  for  these  purposes  a
             period shall be considered unbroken where:


             (i) the applicant has not been absent from the  UK   for  more
             than 180 days during any 12 month  period  in  the  continuous
             period, except that any absence from the UK for the purpose of
             assisting with a national  or  international  humanitarian  or
             environmental crisis overseas shall not count towards the  180
             days, if the applicant provides evidence  that  this  was  the
             purpose of the absence(s) and that their Sponsor, if there was
             one, agreed to the absence(s) for that purpose;


             ...


          c) Except for periods where the applicant had leave as a  Tier  1
             (Investor) Migrant, a Tier I (Entrepreneur) Migrant, a Tier  1
             (Exceptional Talent) Migrant or a highly skilled migrant,  any
             absences from the UK during  the  relevant  qualifying  period
             must have been for a  purpose  that  is  consistent  with  the
             applicant's basis of stay here, including paid  annual  leave,
             or for serious or compelling reasons.


          d)  The  continuous  period  will  be  considered  as  ending  on
             whichever of the following dates is  most  beneficial  to  the
             applicant:


          i) the date of application:
         ii) the date of decision; or
        iii) any date up to 2R davs after the date of application"


17.   'Continuous period' is defined by para 245CD(d)(ii) to be five years.

18.   The Statement of changes In Immigration  Rules  stated  at  p2,  after
      dealing with amendments which are not relevant to this claim stated:

             "The other changes set out in this statement shall take effect
             on 11 January 2018.  However, in relation to those changes, if
             an application has been made for entry clearance or  leave  to
             remain before 11 January 2018, the application will be decided
             in accordance with  the  Immigration  Rules  in  force  on  10
             January 18."

19.   The Secretary  of  State  is  also  able  to  grant  ILR  outside  the
      Immigration Rules.  In the present context, he is able to do  so  even
      where the applicant has broken their continuous leave by being outside
      the UK for more than 180  days  in  a  12-month  period.   The  policy
      ('Indefinite leave to remain: calculating continue period in  UK')  in
      its current form (Version 17, 6 July 2018) is as  follows,  which  the
      parties agreed was  not  relevantly  different  to  the  policy  which
      applied as at the date of the First Applicant's application:


             "Exceptional cases


             This section tells you  about  the  exceptional  circumstances
             when you can grant the applicant indefinite  leave  to  remain
             (ILR) outside the rules when their continuous leave is broken.
             Absences of more than 180 days in a 12-month period before the
             date  of  application  (in  all  categories)  will  mean   the
             continuous period has been broken. However, you  may  consider
             the grant of indefinite leave  to  remain  (ILR)  outside  the
             rules if the applicant provides evidence to show the excessive
             absence was due to serious or compelling reasons.


             The applicant must provide evidence in the form  of  a  letter
             which sets out full details of the compelling reason  for  the
             absence and supporting documents.


             Serious or compelling reasons will vary but can include:


             [pic]     serious illness of the applicant or a close relative


             ..."


The Secretary of State*s decisions

  20. The operative parts of the decision letter of 22 March  2018  were  as
      follows.


  21. Having set out the relevant dates when the First Applicant was outside
      the UK the letter continued:


             "You are absent from the United Kingdom for  a  total  of  313
             days during the qualifying period of 5  years  for  Indefinite
             Leave to Remain which is the period 19 September  2010  to  18
             September 2015 and for more than  180  days  in  one  12-month
             period as shown above.


             Between the period of 19 September 2010 and 18 September  2011
             you had 194 days absence  from  the  United  Kingdom  from  14
             October 2010 to 21 March 2011 and from 5  August  2011  to  12
             September 2011. This is  more  than  the  180  days  permitted
             therefore you are deemed to have broken your continuous period
             as outlined in Paragraph 245AAA(a).


             Consequently you have not spent a continuous period of 5 years
             in the United Kingdom as specified in paragraph  245CD(e)  and
             (d)."


22.   The Secretary of State then turned  to  whether  the  First  Applicant
      qualified for ILR outside the  Immigration  Rules  as  an  exceptional
      case. and concluded that she did not. The letter said:


             "You have stated in your application form dated  15  September
             2015 that your absence from the  United  Kingdom  was  due  to
             maternity and treatment  for  my  polycystic  ovarian  disease
             (sic).


             In addition the letter provided with your application dated 18
             September 2015 providing  an  explanation  tor  your  absences
             states:


                  'Having left for India for medical  treatment  on  the  14
                  October 2010, I was diagnosed with my  polycystic  ovarian
                  disease (PCOD) with bleeding on the 23rd Oct 2010, and was
                  receiving treatment for  regulation  for  my  periods  and
                  remained under observation until  19th  of  Mar  2011  and
                  advised by my doctor to take time off work, get  bed  rest
                  and avoid all travel for a period of not less  than  three
                  months.  At  the  end  of  that  time,  having   recovered
                  sufficiently I returned to the UK on the 21st of Mar 2011.
                  Again I left for India to review for my PCOD treatment  on
                  5th of Aug 2011 and from 10th of Aug 2011 to 10th Sep 2011
                  I went for regular check-up and I came back to the  UK  on
                  12th of Sep 2011.'


             To support this you have provided:


             1. A medical certificate dated 9 December 2014  from  Thornton
             Road Surgery.


             2. A letter from Dr  Umaparvathy,  Consultant  Obstetrician  &
             Gynaecologist dated 21 March 2013


             We have carefully considered  your  claim  about  your  health
             issues. It is noted that the letter from Dr Umaparvathy states
             that you were under her care from 23 October 2010 to 19  March
             2011 and that you came for a review on 10 August 2011 and  had
             treatment until 10 September 2011.


             You have failed to provide documentary evidence  support  your
             claims that you were advised to take time  off  work  and  bed
             rest for a minimum of three months.


             Furthermore you have provided no evidence  to  show  that  you
             were unfit to travel.  In  addition  it  is  also  noted  that
             treatment for PCOD is available in the United Kingdom  and  no
             evidence has been provided to confirm why you were required to
             return to India from 5 August 2011 to 12 September 2011 for  a
             review when treatment is available in the United Kingdom.


             Consequently  in  view  of  the  fact   that   this   is   not
             compassionate or compelling the  Secretary  of  State  is  not
             satisfied that your circumstances  are  such  that  discretion
             should be exercised outside the Immigration Rules."


23.   Following this refusal, the First Applicant  made  representations  to
      the Secretary of State in support  of  an  application  Administrative
      Review. This  set  out  factual  information  provided  by  the  First
      Applicant in her interview with the case worker.  The  representations
      expressly said that the information was not new.

24.   The decision was upheld on 1 May 2018 in the following terms:


             "Thank you for your application of 5 April 2018 for  a  review
             of the decision to  refuse  your  application  for  Indefinite
             Leave to Remain as a Tier I (General) Migrant


             We have carefully considered the points that you raised in the
             administrative review  application.  We  have  maintained  the
             original [pic]decision for the reasons given below.


             Claimed you failed to tell the Home Office something  relevant
             to your application


             You claim that the decision to  refuse  your  application  was
             incorrect because it failed to  take  account  of  information
             which you failed to tell [pic]the Home Office (sic).


             However, your application was considered and  decided  on  the
             basis of the evidence and information submitted and  confirmed
             before the date on which the application was decided. We  will
             not consider new evidence or information  when  reviewing  the
             decision that was provided after that decision has been taken,
             unless it meets the requirements specified in paragraph AR2 .4
             of  Appendix  AR  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  It   is   your
             responsibility to ensure that  all  appropriate  evidence  and
             information is submitted with the  application  for  leave  to
             remain.


             You applied for  indefinite  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  1
             (General) Migrant and the application was  therefore  assessed
             under Part 6. As  stated  in  the  original  refusal  decision
             letter, you failed to satisfy paragraphs 245AAA and  245CD  of
             the Immigration Rules as  you  do  not  meet  requirements  of
             245CD(c)  and  (d)  with  reference  to  paragraph  245AAA(a).
             Therefore, we have maintained the original decision.


             You state within your administrative review that you  suffered
             from post-partem bleeding when your son was born.  You  stated
             your mother came to assist  you,  however  shortly  after  the
             birth of your son your grandfather passed away and your mother
             returned to India. You state that you were extremely weak  due
             to severe bleeding and therefore, your only  solution  was  to
             return to India with your mother when your  son  obtained  his
             passport. You state that when you were in India you decided to
             consult a famous genealogist (sic), Dr  Umpaparvathy  and  you
             were  diagnosed  with  polycystic  ovarian   disease   (PCOD).
             Following your diagnosis you claim Dr  Umpaparvathy  suggested
             to carry  out  the  treatment  and  as  you  were  already  on
             maternity leave you accepted. You claim you  were  advised  by
             oral communication that you were not in a position  to  travel
             and needed to take a complete  rest.  You  state  you  have  a
             medical   certification   to   prove   that   you   were    in
             [pic]treatment. Your advise that your  treatment  took  longer
             than expected which resulted in complications with your  son's
             visa documents and, as your maternity leave was due to come to
             an end you returned to  the  UK  to  prepare  the  appropriate
             documentation. You state that you were required to  return  to
             India to receive further treatment as you did not want to  see
             another doctor in the UK and starting  from  scratch  as  your
             health is important to you, however, you assert that you  took
             these days paid annual leave.


             You argue that we are unable to assess the seriousness of  the
             medical issues you have faced. You state  the  seriousness  of
             PCOD differs from person to person in  which  you  experienced
             the highest severity of this condition and you state this will
             not be shown on  any  formal  medical  certificate.  You  have
             provided your NHS number for reference to enable  verification
             that you are under a UK GP regarding this  medical  condition.
             Furthermore, you state that you have  provided  evidence  from
             your GP in 2014 which states the your required to take off two
             days monthly from work. In light of  the  above,  you  request
             that due to your serious and  compelling  circumstances  rased
             within  your  application,  the  decision   to   refuse   your
             application to be reconsidered.


             Careful consideration to be given to  the  points  you  raised
             within your  administrative  review.  However,  whilst  it  is
             accepted that you provided medical evidence to establish  that
             you were receiving treatment in  India,  you  have  tailed  to
             provide evidence to establish you were unable  to  travel  and
             were required to bed rest for minimum of 3 months, whilst  you
             claim this was advised orally, it is considered that the  onus
             is on the applicant to provide evidence in  support  of  their
             application regarding their absence  in  excess  of  180  days
             within a 12 month period. Furthermore, whilst  you  clam  that
             you did not want to see a doctor in the UK  once  you  already
             started treatment in India, as this treatment is available  in
             the UK it is  considered  that  the  original  caseworker  was
             correct in their assessment of  your  application,  as  it  is
             considered from the evidence you have provided in the  support
             of your application does not establish your absences from  the
             UK for over 180 days within a 12 month  period,  were  due  to
             compassionate and. compelling circumstances.


             In light of the above, the decision to refuse your application
             for indefinite leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Gen)  migrant,  is
             maintained.


Submissions of the parties


25. The Applicant submits that the decision of the  Secretary  of  State  as
      contained in the letter of 22 March 2018 and the Administrative Review
      should be quashed because:


 a. The Secretary of State had a residual  discretion  t:o  apply  the  more
    generous provisions in [pic]the post-11 January  2018  version  of  para
    245AAA which he did not consider exercising in her favour  (and  had  he
    done so, she would have qualified for continuous residence in  the  UK).
    She relies on R (Shaikh) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2014] EWHC  2586  (Admin)  in  support  of  the  existence  of  such  a
    discretion. She also submits that such a discretion was created  by  the
    policy which came into force on 11  January  2018  which  addressed  the
    circumstances in which the provisions of the new para 245AAA(d)  (Ground
    l).


 b. On the information provided by the First  Applicant,  the  Secretary  of
    State should have exercised his discretion to grant her ILR outside  the
    Rules on the grounds that there were serious and compelling grounds  for
    her absence from the UK in excess of 180 days (Ground 2).


 c. The Secretary of State acted in a manner that was procedurally unfair in
    that, whilst he sought further information in February 2018  (which  the
    First Applicant supplied) he did not  engage  with  her  concerning  her
    medical history as set out at  her  interview  or  ask  for  documentary
    support for what had been advanced by way of explanation (Ground 3).


 d. There was a failure to carry  out  a  lawful  assessment  of  the  First
    Applicant's  best  Interests  under  s  55,  Borders,  Citizenship   and
    Immigration Act 2009 (Ground 4)[pic]


26.   In response the Secretary of State submits that:


      a. The Immigration Rules were correctly applied. The relevant version
         of para 245AAA which applied in the First Applicant's case was that
         in force on 10 January 2018 and the beneficial changes  which  came
         into force on 11 January 2018 did not apply to her application.  as
         HC 309 expressly provided. There is no such general  discretion  as
         contended for by the First Applicant, did  the  policy  which  came
         into force on 11 January 2018 in line with the  amendments  to  the
         Rules in that day create a discretion in the Secretary of State  to
         apply the more generous version of para 245AAA.


      b.    The Secretary of  State's  decision  to  refuse  to  grant  ILR
         outside of the rules on the grounds that the material  put  forward
         by the First Applicant did not amount  to  serious  and  compelling
         grounds was one that was open to him.


      c.    There had been no procedural unfairness having  regard  to  the
         nature  of  the  operation  of  the  points-based  system  in  the
         Immigration Rules.


      d.    The Secretary of State had  been  entitiled  on  the  facts  to
         conclude that the need to maintain the  integrity  of  immigration
         control outweighed any possible effects on the  First  Applicant's
         children that might result from her and her husband and the family
         unit outside the UK.


Discussion


Ground 1


  27. I have come to the clear conclusion that this ground of  challenge  is
      without merit. The December 2017 Statement of Changes  in  Immigration
      Rules (HC 309) explicitly provided that the  version  of  para  245AAA
      which applied in relation to the First Applicant, given  the  date  of
      her application, was that in force on 10 January 2018, and  thus  that
      the more generous version of para 245AAA (flexible might be  a  better
      description)  which  came  into  force  on  11  January  2018  had  no
      application in her case. It is common ground that if  that  is  indeed
      the case, then the First Applicant failed to qualify under  the  Rules
      for ILR because of her 194-day absence from the  UK  in  the  year  19
      September 2010 - 18 September 2011.

  28. Counsel for the Secretary of State accepted  that  the  letter  of  22
      March 2018 wrongly quoted (in part) the 11  January  2018  version  of
      para 245AAA, however in my judgment that error did not  undermine  the
      Secretary of State's decision. Notwithstanding that error, it is plain
      that the Secretary of State had well in mind that the relevant  period
      was five years ending with the date of the application, and  no  other
      period and he correctly determined that  there  had  been  an  absence
      during a 12 month period during that time of more than 180 days.

  29. The case of R (Shaikh) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department,
      supra, does not support the proposition that the  Secretary  of  State
      has a free-standing discretion to consider an [pic]application for ILR
      outside the Rules and published policies, the exercise of  which  must
      be considered in every case, to apply a more  flexible  version  of  a
      paragraph in the Rules - more flexible because of an amendment to  the
      paragraph as compared to an earlier version - to  an  application  for
      ILR, notwithstanding that the Rules expressly provide  that  the  more
      flexible provision should not apply because the  application  for  ILR
      was made before it came into [pic]force. Indeed. the existence of such
      a general discretion would render otiose the carefully [pic]delineated
      transitional provisions contained in the Rules.

30.   The residual and rare nature of the discretion  identified  in  Shaikh
      is apparent from [25] where the judge said (quoting earlier authority)
      that the discretion '...  is  not  to  be  considered  every  time  an
      application is to be made, and that the cases in which  it  should  be
      considered and exercised are bound to be rare' and that '... it  is  a
      discretion that is likely to be sparingly exercised'. It is also clear
      that the decision in Shaikh turned on its own facts, as the judge said
      at [35]: '... this is a case on its own particular facts  taking  into
      account all of the circumstances.' The facts  of  Shaikh  were  indeed
      unusual and striking in that the applicant had neglected to  sign  his
      application form and this error could have easily  been  remedied.  It
      was not through culpability on the part of the Secretary of State, and
      the applicant had, to an extent, been misled. The judge, in support of
      his conclusion that the Secretary of State should have considered  the
      application under a discretion outside the Rules and allied  policies,
      quoted with approval the  judgement  of  Sullivan  J  in  Forrester  v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008] EWHC  2307  (Admin),
      [16], to the effect that not to have done so produced a  result  which
      was '... thoroughly unreasonable and disproportionate, inflexible  ...
      without the slightest regard for the facts  of  the  case,  or  indeed
      elementary common sense and humanity.'

31.   There are no such special facts in this case. The First Applicant  did
      not quality for ILR under the rules because of her  194  days  outside
      the UK in 2010/2011. The remedy against injustice in her case was  the
      exceptional discretion provided under the  relevant  published  policy
      for the Secretary of State to grant ILR  where  the  absence  was  for
      serious and compelling reasons. There is no scope in this case for the
      exercise of any further residual discretion and the Secretary of State
      did not err in failing to do so (and  in  particular  because  he  was
      never asked to do so).

32.   Nor does the policy which came into force on  11  January  2018  avail
      the First Applicant. That policy came into effect so as  to  aid  case
      workers in the application going forward of the new provisions in  the
      Rules which came into force on 11 January 2018. It did not  and  could
      not create a discretion or duty in the Secretary of State to  consider
      applying the new version of para 245AAA in the First Applicant's  case
      when the Rules provided that it would  not  apply  in  her  case.  The
      policy, like the new version of that paragraph, simply did  not  apply
      to her.

33.   This ground of challenge therefore fails.


Grounds 2 and 3


34.   Both of these grounds concern the  Secretary  of  State's  refusal  to
      grant  ILR  outside  the  Rules  on   the   grounds   of   exceptional
      circumstances. At the conclusion of the hearing I was  satisfied  that
      the Secretary of State's  decision  was  unlawful  and  could  not  be
      sustained and it was  for  that  reason  that  I  announced  that  his
      decision would be quashed for reasons to be given later.

35.   A number of things are clear in  relation  to  the  First  Applicant's
      case as made to the Secretary of State that she should be granted  ILR
      outside the Rules on the grounds of exceptionality:  (a)  she  gave  a
      detailed account of events and the reasons for her  seeking  treatment
      in India to the caseworker at her interview when she applied for  ILR;
      (b) she submitted medical and other evidence in support of  her  case;
      (c) the Secretary of State twice made  adverse  decisions  which  were
      later  withdrawn  following  the  threat  or   issuing   of   judicial
      proceedings; (d) in  February  2018  the  Secretary  of  State  sought
      further information from the First Applicant; (e)  the  exceptionality
      claim was refused primarily on the basis at the  First  Applicant  had
      not supplied documentary evidence to support the oral factual  account
      which she had given to the case  worker;  (f)  at  no  stage  had  the
      Secretary of State indicated that that account  was  not  accepted  or
      that it should be further evidenced by written material.

36.   These matters, taken together, persuaded  me  that  the  Secretary  of
      State's treatment of the First Applicant had been procedurally  unfair
      so that his decision to refuse ILR cannot stand. The  decision  letter
      of 22 March 2018 and the Administrative Review  of  1  May  2018  both
      amount,  in  substance,  to  a  rejection  as  untrue  of  the   First
      Applicant's case as she had put it forward to the case worker  at  her
      interview. It seems to me, therefore, that the  following  passage  of
      the judgment of Laws J (as he then was)  in  R  v  London  Borough  of
      Hackney ex parte Decorcdova (1995) 27 HLR 108 is  directly  in  point.
      The judge said:


             "In my judgment where an authority lock, stock and  barrel  is
             minded to disbelieve an account  given  by  an  applicant  for
             housing where the circumstances described in the  account  are
             critical to the issue whether the authority ought to offer her
             accommodation in a particular area, they are bound to  put  to
             the applicant in an interview, or by some  appropriate  means,
             the matters  that  concern  them.  This  must  now  surely  be
             elementary law in relation to the function of  decision-makers
             in relation to subject matter of this kind. It applies in  the
             law of immigration, and  generally  where  public  authorities
             have to make decisions which affect the rights  of  individual
             persons. If  the  authority  is  minded  to  make  an  adverse
             decision because it not  believe  the  account  given  by  the
             applicant, it has, to give the  applicant  an  opportunity  to
             deal with it."


37.   In the present case by early 2018 the Secretary of State had  had  the
      First Applicant's account of her medical treatment in India,  and  her
      explanation for her absence there, for some  two  and  a  half  years.
      There had been much communication between the First Applicant and  her
      solicitors and the Secretary of State in the course of  the  decision-
      making process which, as I have said, involved  two  abortive  adverse
      decisions. Then, in  2018,  the  Secretary  of  State  sought  further
      information from the First Applicant about financial matters but never
      once raised any issue about the medical aspects of her  case.  Because
      he refused the application tor ILR on exceptionality  grounds  on  the
      basis that the First Applicant had not substantiated her account - and
      he therefore did not accept it as true - fairness  demanded  that  the
      Secretary of State should have put the matters of concern squarely  to
      the First Applicant so that she could deal with them. His  failure  to
      do so vitiates the lawfulness of his decision.

38.   There are other points which can  be  made  as  to  why  the  decision
      should  be  quashed.  These  include:  that   the   wrong   test   for
      exceptionality was quoted in the 22 March 2018 letter, which  referred
      to the test as being 'compassionate or compelling' when, as I have set
      out, the basis for being granted ILR outside the  rules  is  that  the
      absence for more  than  180  days  was  for  'serious  or  compelling'
      reasons. Also, the Administrative Review said:


             "You claim that the decision to refuse  your  application  was
             incorrect because it failed to  take  account  of  information
             which you failed to tell the Home Office (sic).


             However, your application was considered and  decided  on  the
             basis of the evidence and information submitted and  confirmed
             before the date on which the application was decided. We  will
             not consider  new  evidence  information  when  reviewing  the
             decision that was provided after the decision has  been  taken
             [pic]


39.   The first sentence of this passage makes no sense and it is not  clear
      (to me at least) what the Secretary of State was trying  to  say.  The
      second paragraph was irrelevant because, as the [pic]First Applicant's
      representations made clear, what she  was  setting  out  in  them  was
      information that had been provided to the case worker in 2015 and  was
      not new information.

40.   For these reasons, I quashed the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  in
      respect of the First Applicant.

Ground 4

41.   In these circumstances, I need not say anything about this  ground  of
      challenge.

Conclusion

42.   For these reasons, the decision of the  Secretary  of  State  refusing
      the First Applicant ILR is quashed. It follows that the refusal of ILR
      for the Second Applicant must also be quashed.


  Mr Justice Julian Knowles






            07 NOV 2019
