




                                                            JR/4936/2019 (V)

                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber

                       Judicial Review Decision Notice


                     The Queen on the application of S D
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


                     Before Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


            Application for judicial review: substantive decision


Having considered  all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  the  parties'
respective representatives, Mr C Jacobs, of  Counsel,  instructed  by  Ahmed
Rahman Carr Solicitors, on behalf of the Applicant and,  Ms  J  Anderson  of
Counsel, instructed by the Government Legal Department,  on  behalf  of  the
Respondent, at a remote hearing at Field House, London on 16  November  2020
which has been consented to by the parties.

The form of the remote hearing was video by Skype. A face  to  face  hearing
was not held because  it  was  not  practicable  and  all  issues  could  be
determined in a remote hearing. The documents that I was referred to are  in
bundle of 502 pages, the contents of which I have recorded. The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  applicant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction  applies
both to the applicant and to the respondent. Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

                                  JUDGMENT


      1. The applicant challenges the respondent's decision of 23 July  2019
         granting leave to remain  under  the  restricted  leave  to  remain
         policy following a decision to deprive him of British citizenship.


      2. The applicant is a Turkish national born on 15  November  1973.  He
         arrived in the UK in February 2002 and was granted indefinite leave
         to remain [ILR] in recognition of his  refugee  status  on  2  June
         2003. He was naturalised as a British citizen on 12 November  2007.




      3.  In  extradition   proceedings   concluded   in   the   Westminster
         Magistrates' Court in December 2012, the District Judge [DJ]  found
         that when the applicant applied for asylum, he deliberately  failed
         to disclose his previous convictions in Turkey.  The  DJ  concluded
         that the applicant was at real  risk  of  Article  3  treatment  on
         return to Turkey and dismissed the extradition proceedings.


      4. On 28 July 2017, the Respondent made  a  decision  to  deprive  the
         applicant of his British citizenship under  section  40(3)  of  the
         British  Nationality  Act  1981  [the  deprivation  decision].  The
         applicant's appeal was  allowed  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but
         dismissed on appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  on  23  May  2018  [the
         deprivation  appeal].  Edis  J  and  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
         McGeachy  found  that  the  applicant  deliberately  concealed  his
         previous  convictions  in  his  asylum  application  and   in   his
         application for  British  citizenship.  Permission  to  appeal  was
         refused by Underhill LJ on  17  October  2018.  The  applicant  was
         served with a  deprivation  order  on  23  July  2019  and  granted
         restricted leave to remain [RLR].


      5. The applicant has the  following  previous  convictions  in  Turkey
         prior to coming to the UK:


          a. July 1994: Convicted of three counts of robbery and membership
             of a proscribed organisation. Sentenced to life imprisonment.


          b. December  1995:  Convicted  of  murder  and  possession  of  a
             firearm. Sentenced to 20 years and 5 months imprisonment.


         In October 2001 the applicant was temporarily released from  prison
         in Turkey on health grounds. He left Turkey and came to the  UK  in
         February 2002.


    Relevant legal provisions


    6.   The RLR policy states:

         Application of the restricted leave policy
         Restricted leave is a form of leave outside the  Immigration  Rules
         granted to certain individuals who cannot be removed  from  the  UK
         because to do so would be a breach of their human rights.
         Restricted leave will normally be granted where a foreign national
           . is excluded from protection under Article 1F  of  the  Refugee
             Convention or from a grant of  humanitarian  protection  under
             paragraph 339D of the Immigration Rules
           . would be excluded had they made a protection claim
           . would be excluded from protection and  a  previous  protection
             claim was refused without  reference  to  Article  1F  of  the
             Refugee Convention or paragraph 339D of the Immigration  Rules


           . is subject to Article 33(2) of the Refugee Convention  because
             they are a danger to the security of the UK
           . is subject to Article 33(2) of the Refugee  Convention  having
             been convicted by final judgment  of  a  particularly  serious
             crime they pose a danger to the community of the UK and  where
             their removal would breach their human rights.
         ................
         Restricted leave cases must be reviewed regularly with  a  view  to
         removal as soon as possible. If there is no longer an ECHR  barrier
         to removal, the individual will not qualify for a further grant  of
         restricted leave and enforcement action  must  be  prioritised.  An
         ECHR barrier to removal includes, but is not limited to:
           . Article 2 - right to life
           . Article 3 - prohibition of torture
           . Article 6 - right to a fair trial
           . Article 8 - right to respect for private and family life
         It is in the public interest to seek the removal of  an  individual
         subject to the restricted leave policy. It is for this reason  that
         cases  are  reviewed  regularly  and  individuals   excluded   from
         qualifying for ILR under the  Immigration  Rules.  It  is  only  in
         exceptional circumstances that  an  individual  granted  restricted
         leave will be granted ILR. Where a decision has been taken to grant
         ILR on the basis of exceptional circumstances, which is  likely  to
         be rare, this would be granted outside of the Rules.

      7. The relevant sections of the Refugee Convention are set out below:


             Article 1A(2): "As a  result  of  events  occurring  before  1
             January 1951  and  owing  to  a  well-founded  fear  of  being
             persecuted  for  reasons  of  race,   religion,   nationality,
             membership of a particular social group or political  opinion,
             is outside the country of his nationality and  is  unable,  or
             owing  to  such  fear,  unwilling  to  avail  himself  of  the
             protection of that country; or who, not having  a  nationality
             and being outside the country of his former habitual residence
             as a result of such events, is unable or, owing to such  fear,
             is unwilling to return to it."


             Article 1C(3) : "This Convention shall cease to apply  to  any
             person falling under the terms of section A if he has acquired
             a new nationality and enjoys the protection of the country  of
             his new nationality.


             Article 1F: "This Convention shall not  apply  to  any  person
             with whom there are serious reasons for considering that:


               a) he has committed a crime against peace, a war crime, or  a
                  crime against humanity, as defined  in  the  international
                  instruments drawn up to make provision in respect of  such
                  crimes;


               b) he has committed a serious non-political crime outside the
                  country of refuge prior to his admission to  that  country
                  as a refugee;


               c) he has been guilty of acts contrary to  the  purposes  and
                  principles of the United Nations.


      8. In Deliallisi (British citizen: deprivation appeal:  Scope)  [2013]
         UKUT  00439  (IAC),  the  Tribunal  made  the  following   relevant
         findings:


             "46. As can be seen, the general provisions in  the  1971  Act
                  regarding leave to enter and remain are  expressly  stated
                  not to apply where a person is a British  citizen.  We  do
                  not consider that it is compatible with the scheme of that
                  Act to regard indefinite leave to  remain  (or  any  other
                  sort of leave) as having some sort of vestigial existence,
                  whilst the person concerned remains a British  citizen.  A
                  person cannot be both a British citizen  and  concurrently
                  subject to indefinite leave to remain. Upon becoming  such
                  a citizen, the appellant became a person to  whom  section
                  1(1)  applied.  As  Mr  Deller  put  it,  the  appellant's
                  indefinite leave to remain simply ceased to exist.


              52.  ...  We  reiterate  that  it  is  incoherent   with   the
                  legislation to  assume  indefinite  leave  to  remain  can
                  remain extant, in the case of a person who  is  a  British
                  citizen, or that,  without  express  statutory  provision,
                  such leave automatically reappears on deprivation of  that
                  citizenship.


              53. Accordingly, for the purposes  of  these  proceedings,  we
                  find that, were the appellant to be  deprived  of  British
                  citizenship, he would not fall to be treated as  a  person
                  having indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom."


      9. In Hysaj (Deprivation of  Citizenship:  Delay)  [2020]  UKUT  00128
         (IAC),  in  relation  to  status  on  deprivation,   the   Tribunal
         concluded:


             93.  Further, in deprivation matters, where refugee status was
                  granted on a true understanding  of  relevant  facts,  the
                  subsequent securing of  British  citizenship  brings  into
                  operation the  second  paragraph  of  article  1A(2)  that
                  provides if a person has more than  one  nationality,  the
                  term 'country of his nationality' shall mean each  of  the
                  countries of which he is a national.  This  is  consistent
                  with the surrogacy  principle.  If  a  recognised  refugee
                  acquires British citizenship, then by operation of article
                  1C(3), his Convention status ceases because he enjoys  the
                  protection  of  the  country  of  his   new   nationality.
                  Paragraph 132 of the  UNHCR  Handbook  on  Procedures  and
                  Criteria for Determining Refugee  Status  under  the  1951
                  Convention and the 1967 Protocol relating to the Status of
                  Refugees details that where refugee status has  terminated
                  through the acquisition of a new nationality, and such new
                  nationality has been lost, depending on the  circumstances
                  of such loss, refugee  status  may  be  revived.  However,
                  revival is not automatic and  therefore  must  be  applied
                  for. In the  appellant's  matter  it  is  clear  that  the
                  original claim for international protection was made on  a
                  false basis and he could never meet  the  requirements  of
                  article 1A(2). Even if he wished to seek to  'revive'  his
                  former status based on his original claim it would  be  an
                  application devoid of merit.


             94.  The cessation provision of  article  1C(3)  of  the  1951
                  Convention is mirrored by  Council Directive 2004/83/EC of
                  29 April 2004, the  Qualification  Directive,  at  article
                  11(1)(c) and has been  transposed  into  domestic  law  by
                  paragraph 339A(iii) of the  Immigration Rules.


             95.  The Tribunal confirmed in Deliallisi, at [43]-[53],  that
                  upon deprivation a foreign national does not  continue  to
                  enjoy ILR  which  had  been  granted  prior  to  acquiring
                  citizenship. The power to grant leave to enter  or  remain
                  under section 3 of the Immigration  Act  1971  ('the  1971
                  Act') is limited to those persons subject to   immigration
                  control. ILR is a status enjoyed by  persons  who  do  not
                  possess a right of abode in this country and so it  simply
                  ceases upon a recipient becoming a person to whom  section
                  1(1) of the 1971 Act applies. Whilst the respondent enjoys
                  discretion to grant ILR consequent to deprivation, we  are
                  satisfied that there is  no  process  in  place  by  which
                  automatic  revival  of  such   status   can   occur   upon
                  deprivation of British citizenship. The leave system is  a
                  permissive system of immigration control and revival is  a
                  significant and far reaching legal  concept,  particularly
                  as to settled  status,  that  requires  express  statutory
                  provision that it be intended.  There  is  no  revival  of
                  previously held ILR status upon deprivation."






    The applicant's grounds and submissions


     10. The applicant's primary position is that the respondent  could  not
         lawfully have made a grant of RLR under the RLR policy  unless  and
         until she had either revoked  the  applicant's  refugee  status  or
         excluded him from the protection of  the  Refugee  Convention  with
         reference to Article 1F.


     11. The applicant submits the respondent failed to consider Article  1F
         and part 11 of the Immigration Rules. The respondent could rely  on
         her policy  if  the  applicant  had  been  formally  excluded  from
         protection under the  Refugee  Convention  (paragraph  339  of  the
         Immigration Rules) and he had failed to exercise a right of  appeal
         or had been unsuccessful on appeal against the decision to  exclude
         him.


     12. Mr Jacobs referred to the decision of 23 July 2019  [RLR  decision]
         and submitted the respondent had erroneously applied the RLR policy
         to the applicant without determining whether he met the criteria of
         that policy. Given the draconian nature  of  the  RLR  policy,  the
         respondent was required to take a procedural step  before  invoking
         the policy i.e. granting leave to remain  as  a  refugee,  revoking
         refugee status or applying Article 1F which would give  rise  to  a
         right of appeal.


     13. The respondent's position that the applicant had to  make  a  fresh
         asylum claim, following [93] to [95] of Hysaj,  was  incorrect.  Mr
         Jacobs submitted the respondent could  not  lawfully  have  made  a
         grant of RLR unless and  until  she  had  revoked  the  applicant's
         refugee status or excluded him from  the  Refugee  Convention  with
         reference to Article  1F.  The  RLR  decision  did  not  deal  with
         exclusion (actual or hypothetical) which was required by the  terms
         of the RLR policy.


     14. In addition, the respondent granted leave  in  line  with  findings
         which were not  made  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  dismissing  the
         applicant's appeal against deprivation of  citizenship.  The  Upper
         Tribunal did not consider whether the applicant would  be  excluded
         under Article 1F.


     15. Mr Jacobs submitted  the  facts  of  this  case  were  unusual  and
         compelling. He referred to the  extradition  decision  of  DJ  Zani
         dated 11 December 2012. In  summary,  the  applicant  disputes  the
         murder of his sister  and  his  first  conviction  was  arguably  a
         political crime.  There  was  no  factual  determination  on  these
         issues.


     16. The DJ found that there was a real risk that, in the event  of  the
         applicant's return to prison in Turkey, his Article 3 rights  would
         be breached by reason of his ethnicity linked  with  his  political
         views. Mr Jacobs submitted this factual finding  demonstrated  that
         the applicant was still at  risk  of  persecution  if  returned  to
         Turkey. This finding was not challenged and was not  considered  by
         the Upper Tribunal in the deprivation appeal. Mr  Jacobs  submitted
         that at the time of  the  respondent's  referral  for  approval  of
         deprivation of citizenship (10 April 2017),  the  respondent  could
         not have known that the  applicant  would  not  have  been  granted
         asylum because relevant factual findings had not been made.


     17. Mr Jacobs submitted the deprivation decision was made under section
         40(3) British Nationality Act 1981. The decision was  not  made  on
         the basis that the applicant would not have  been  granted  asylum.
         There had been no consideration of whether the applicant  had  been
         convicted of 'trumped up' charges. The  issue  on  deprivation  was
         whether the applicant had concealed a material fact. There had been
         no factual finding and no decision  that  the  applicant  would  be
         excluded from protection under Article 1F.


     18. Mr Jacobs submitted the RLR policy did not apply to those  with  an
         ongoing fear of persecution. The policy was draconian in nature and
         prevented the applicant from building a  private  life  in  the  UK
         because the intention was to remove undesirable persons as soon  as
         possible. The applicant was not removable and therefore he was left
         'in  limbo'.  His  presence  was  tolerated  while  the  respondent
         explored whether he could be removed.


     19. Mr Jacobs stated the RLR policy was predicated  on  exclusion.  The
         applicant's position was that there was no finding under any of the
         relevant bullet points  or  they  did  not  apply,  save  that  the
         applicant's removal  would  breach  his  human  rights.  Mr  Jacobs
         submitted that where there was an extant fear of persecution  there
         had to be a finding that  the  applicant  would  be  excluded.  The
         respondent did not  dispute  the  findings  of  DJ  Zani  that  the
         applicant had a well-founded fear of persecution  or  the  evidence
         that the applicant had been convicted of 'trumped up' charges.  The
         grant of leave had to be in line  with  the  RLR  policy,  but  the
         factual findings were absent.


     20. Mr Jacobs submitted the provisions of Article 1A(2)  could  not  be
         treated  as  a  nullity  when  the   applicant   acquired   British
         citizenship  because  he  maintained   a   well-founded   fear   of
         persecution. Paragraph 132 of the UNHCR Handbook  anticipated  this
         scenario and recognised there may be circumstances in which refugee
         status  may  be  revived.  This  paragraph  was  relevant  to   the
         application of Article 1C(3) where a  well-founded  fear  remained.
         There had to be a process  whereby  Refugee  Convention  protection
         could be revived. The respondent had to look at  the  circumstances
         of the loss of citizenship  and  determine  if  the  applicant  was
         excludable for the purposes of the RLR policy.


     21. It was accepted by the DJ in December 2012 that the applicant had a
         well-founded fear of persecution. There had been no material change
         in Turkey and  the  applicant  had  lost  his  British  nationality
         because he failed to disclose a material fact. This did not detract
         from his underlying asylum claim and there had been no  finding  on
         exclusion. There was no reason  from  the  respondent  why  Article
         1A(2) was not engaged. The respondent had to give effect to this.


     22. Mr Jacobs submitted there was no reason why  protection  under  the
         Refugee Convention should not continue now that Article  1C(3)  had
         fallen  away.  There  was  no  procedure  or  primary   legislation
         supporting  the  respondent's   position   that   the   applicant's
         protection under the Refugee Convention was  extinguished  when  he
         acquired British citizenship. The respondent was required  to  give
         effect to the Refugee  Convention  by  granting  a  form  of  leave
         commensurate with Refugee Convention protection.


     23.  Alternatively,   the   respondent   should   issue   a   decision,
         acknowledging the  grant  of  refugee  status,  but  excluding  the
         applicant under Article 1F. This decision would generate a right of
         appeal and if the applicant was not successful, the respondent  had
         the necessary criteria to apply the RLR policy.


     24.  The  decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Hysaj  had  not  been
         promulgated when permission for judicial review was granted in this
         case. Mr Jacobs submitted that Hysaj could be distinguished on  its
         facts. In that case the appellant was not a refugee and  had  never
         enjoyed Refugee Convention  status  because  he  was  Albanian  not
         Kosovan. The Tribunal's conclusions at [93] (see above) were obiter
         because there were no arguments or submission on the points  raised
         therein. The decision was not binding but illustrative  of  current
         thinking.  Alternatively,  the  conclusion  that  revival  was  not
         automatic and must be applied for was wrong. The fact that  revival
         was not automatic did not mean the respondent did not have to  give
         effect to Article 1A(2) and issue a decision  which  brought  about
         the continuation of protection. The respondent could not apply  the
         RLR policy without determining those matters. The respondent  could
         not rely on the absence of procedural provision.


     25. In response to a question from me, Mr Jacobs submitted it  was  not
         appropriate for the applicant to make an asylum application because
         the applicant had already discharged the burden of  proof  in  2003
         and, after depriving the applicant of British citizenship,  it  was
         for the respondent to determine the basis of the grant of leave. At
         that point, the respondent had  to  decide  if  the  applicant  was
         entitled to Refugee Convention protection or whether the  applicant
         was excluded. The respondent must issue a decision to that  effect.
         The respondent could not make a decision under the RLR policy until
         she demonstrated that the policy applied. It was not appropriate to
         require the applicant to remedy  the  unlawfulness.  There  was  no
         dispute  the  applicant  still  held   a   well-founded   fear   of
         persecution. It was for the  respondent  to  prove  exclusion.  The
         respondent had to make a decision on this issue  at  the  point  of
         deprivation of citizenship. In this case the respondent had applied
         the wrong policy.


     26.  Mr  Jacobs  accepted  that  the  grant  of   British   citizenship
         extinguished  the  applicant's  ILR,  but   not   the   applicant's
         protection under the Refugee Convention because the  applicant  met
         the requirements of Article 1A(2) unless and until  the  respondent
         showed otherwise. The applicant had been recognised  as  a  refugee
         and that decision had not  been  revoked,  notwithstanding  he  had
         changed his status. Mr  Jacobs  submitted  that  recognition  as  a
         refugee continued not withstanding British citizenship.  There  had
         been no material change in circumstances save for  the  application
         of Article 1C(3) which no longer applied.


     27. In response  to  a  question  from  me,  Mr  Jacobs  submitted  the
         applicant's disclosure of his previous convictions did  not  amount
         to a material change in circumstances because  there  had  been  no
         finding of fact made  as  to  whether,  in  the  applicant's  case,
         prosecution amounted to persecution.


     28. Mr Jacobs submitted there had been procedural  unfairness  in  this
         case. Hysaj was wrongly decided and there was no procedural bar  to
         the respondent issuing a decision stating that Article 1F  applied.
         The Refugee Convention and paragraph 11  of  the  preamble  of  the
         Qualification Directive 2004/83/EC required this. It was  a  simple
         procedural step, issuing a decision with a right of  appeal,  prior
         to considering the form of leave.  There  did  not  have  to  be  a
         prescribed procedure for this to happen.


     29. The Refugee Convention was binding. Article 1C(3) should be applied
         in accordance  with  paragraph  132  of  the  UNHCR  Handbook.  The
         respondent had to look at the circumstances. It  was  incumbent  on
         the respondent to consider the deprivation decision and  decide  if
         it would breach international instruments not to revive  underlying
         refugee  protection.  This  was  not  automatic  and   required   a
         procedural step by the respondent.


     30. Mr Jacobs agreed there had to be an assessment of  the  applicant's
         asylum claim, but this had to be  done  by  the  respondent  before
         considering whether to grant leave to remain. The decision to grant
         RLR  was  unlawful  because  the  respondent  had   not   addressed
         exclusion.


     31. Section 3 of the Immigration Act 1971 enabled  the  respondent,  at
         the point of deprivation, to consider the  basis  for  a  grant  of
         leave.  The  respondent  could  grant  leave  under   the   Refugee
         Convention or defer the  grant  of  leave  until  she  had  decided
         whether the applicant should be excluded.


     32. Mr Jacobs referred to [43] of Deliallisi  and  submitted,  in  that
         case, the appellant was never entitled to ILR. In this case, it was
         accepted the applicant was a refugee and that he continued to  have
         a well-founded fear of persecution. Even if  the  applicant  cannot
         concurrently have British citizenship and ILR, the  respondent  was
         not prevented from granting ILR or another form of leave until  the
         'exclusion question'  was  resolved.  Had  the  respondent  made  a
         decision there would have been a  right  of  appeal  under  section
         82(1)(c) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum 2002 Act.


     33. Mr Jacobs submitted the respondent had a discretion  to  grant  ILR
         and therefore there was a process in place to revive ILR status. It
         was  for  the  respondent  to  decide  in  what  circumstances  the
         applicant's status could be revived.


     34. The RLR decision did not deal with exclusion and did  not  say  why
         the RLR policy  applied.  There  had  to  be  a  finding  that  the
         applicant met the  criteria  in  the  RLR  policy.  The  respondent
         proceeded on the basis of Upper Tribunal  findings  which  did  not
         exist. Mr Jacobs accepted that the Upper Tribunal was  not  obliged
         to make findings on exclusion in the deprivation  appeal,  but  the
         respondent treated this decision as if the Upper Tribunal had  made
         findings on exclusion.


     35. The respondent stated in response to the pre-action protocol letter
         that she was granting leave  in  line  with  the  Upper  Tribunal's
         findings. Mr Jacobs submitted the rationale was that,  because  the
         applicant had concealed a material fact when applying  for  British
         citizenship,  the  RLR  policy   applied.   This   was   the   only
         justification offered by the respondent. There was no consideration
         of the underlying refugee claim or Article 1F.  These  issues  were
         still extant and should have been considered by the respondent. The
         respondent proceeded on an erroneous basis, acted unlawfully and in
         a manner which was procedurally improper.






    The respondent's grounds and submissions


     36. Ms Anderson addressed the challenge to the form  and  substance  of
         the RLR decision and submitted the applicant's RLR  expired  on  23
         January 2020 and, therefore, any challenge to the RLR decision  was
         academic. She referred to the respondent's explanatory letter of 24
         January 2020 which set  out  the  position  at  the  time  the  RLR
         decision was made. The two points raised in the grant of permission
         to apply for judicial review were academic.  The  reasons  for  the
         decision were clear.


     37. Ms Anderson submitted there  was  no  issue  with  the  applicant's
         immigration history and the applicant's citizenship had come to  an
         end. At this stage something had to be done, the issue was by whom.
         The RLR policy applied to those who would be excluded under Article
         1F. Prima facie the applicant's criminal convictions would lead  to
         exclusion. There was a fundamental difference  between  Article  1F
         and Article 33(2). If Article 1F applies a person  is  outside  the
         scope of the Refugee Convention. Under Article 33(2)  a  person  is
         within  the  Convention   but   excluded   from   protection   from
         refoulement.


     38. The application of the RLR policy to the applicant  did  not  leave
         the applicant 'in limbo' following R (MS  (India))  v  SSHD  [2017]
         EWCA Civ 1190 at [109]. Notwithstanding the restrictions under  the
         policy, the applicant could pursue his private life.


     39. Ms Anderson submitted the issue before the Tribunal was whether the
         applicant should make an asylum claim or the respondent should make
         a further decision. The deprivation decision dated 28 July 2017  at
         34) stated:"


             "Once you have been deprived  of  citizenship,  you  will  not
             revert to refugee status and you will not have leave to remain
             in the UK. It will be open to you to make a  claim  under  the
             Refugee Convention. You may be granted  a  form  of  leave  to
             remain if there are barriers to your removal.  In  any  event,
             your position will remain under review.


         The position was made clear to  the  applicant  and  there  was  no
         procedural unfairness. There was no challenge to this part  of  the
         deprivation decision.


     40. The fact of  the  applicant's  convictions  was  not  disputed.  Ms
         Anderson submitted the applicant  is  not  prevented  from  putting
         forward his asylum claim in which he challenges the  basis  of  his
         convictions. The applicant has not made an  application  under  the
         immigration rules and any grant of leave would have to  be  outside
         the  immigration  rules.  There  was  no  other   form   of   leave
         appropriate, save for refugee leave, but  the  respondent  was  not
         obliged to grant such leave where  there  was  no  application  for
         asylum. There was no extant grant of refugee status.


     41. Ms Anderson submitted refugee  status  was  different  to  being  a
         refugee. There was a distinction between the Refugee Convention  in
         international law and recognition as refugee on  the  basis  of  an
         application. The applicant obtained refugee status on an  erroneous
         basis. His refugee status had changed  by  operation  of  law.  The
         appropriate solution was for the applicant to make an asylum  claim
         so that his claim could  be  examined  in  the  right  context  and
         appropriate findings made.


     42. The Tribunal could not make those findings in this application  for
         judicial review and it was not for the respondent to  pre-emptively
         decide the applicant's  claim.  It  was  not  appropriate  for  the
         respondent to make a decision on exclusion on the basis of evidence
         from other sources until the applicant had positively  put  forward
         his  claim  disclosing  all  relevant   matters.   This   was   not
         procedurally preferable even if technically possible.


     43. There was no reason why the applicant had not made an asylum claim.
         He had been put on notice in the deprivation decision. It would  be
         procedurally unfair for the respondent to  decide  the  applicant's
         claim without giving the applicant an opportunity  to  put  forward
         his case.


     44. Ms Anderson submitted the applicant had been granted leave  on  the
         basis he was a refugee, but his leave had been extinguished.  There
         was no underlying entitlement because the applicant's asylum  claim
         had never been properly  determined.  If  Article  1F  applied  the
         applicant was never within the scope of the Refugee Convention.  He
         was in the same situation as the Albanian appellants claiming to be
         Kosovan. If nothing had changed, save  for  cessation  due  to  the
         grant of nationality, then there  had  to  be  a  new  decision  on
         entitlement to refugee status. Being a refugee in the past was  not
         sufficient because recognition did not exist. The applicant had  to
         apply again and a new recognition decision  had  to  be  made.  The
         application had to be made on the current facts.






    Applicant's response


     45. Mr Jacobs submitted the letter of 24 January  2020  post-dated  the
         grant of permission and had nothing to do with the  decision  under
         challenge. The applicant was not challenging the period  of  leave,
         he was challenging the application  of  the  RLR  policy.  The  RLR
         decision of 23 July 2019 was unlawful. The fact that the  applicant
         had chosen not to  make  another  application  did  not  make  this
         application for judicial review academic. The Tribunal could  still
         make a declaration. The respondent accepted that there was  a  live
         issue as to what should be done.


     46. Mr Jacobs accepted that Article 33(2) did not apply. In MS  (India)
         exclusion decisions had been made. The RLR policy could  not  apply
         to the applicant unless something was done to make  it  applicable.
         There were statements before the First-tier Tribunal  stating  that
         the applicant had not murdered his sister.  The  respondent  was  a
         party to these proceedings and the material was before her. It  was
         unlawful and unreasonable to require the applicant to make a  fresh
         asylum claim. Nothing had changed. There  had  been  no  revocation
         decision. The factual basis of the applicant's claim  was  restated
         and  accepted  by  the  DJ  in  the  extradition  proceedings.  The
         applicant's account of torture was accepted and it was unreasonable
         for a  victim  of  torture  to  be  re-traumatised  to  enable  the
         respondent to make a decision on exclusion when the burden  was  on
         the respondent.


     47. Mr Jacobs submitted that a decision under  Article  1A(2)  survived
         Article 1C(3) where there was a deprivation  decision  and  refugee
         status was extant. Where nothing had changed  in  relation  to  the
         applicant's  well-founded  fear  it  was  unfair  to  require   the
         applicant to make a claim. The respondent could have accepted  this
         position and  indicated  she  was  considering  her  position.  The
         applicant did not accept the notice in the deprivation decision  of
         28 July 2017 and this letter did not prevent any unfairness in  the
         decision making process.


     48. The issue was whether Article 1F  applied  and  the  applicant  was
         excluded  from  the  protection  of  the  Refugee  Convention.  The
         applicant was a prima facie refugee in 2003  and  it  was  for  the
         respondent to prove exclusion. It was not right to say  asylum  was
         granted on a false basis. There had to be an exclusion decision.


     49. Mr Jacobs did not accept that what had previously been granted  had
         fallen away. The issue was whether the applicant's rights under the
         Refugee Convention were subject to exclusion. The  applicant  would
         have a right of appeal and an opportunity to be heard. There was an
         extant Article 1A(2) claim. UNHCR guidance  should  be  taken  into
         account.


     50. It was not possible to revive refugee status in  Hysaj  because  it
         never existed. This issue had to be resolved before the RLR  policy
         could be applied. The rights  under  the  Refugee  Convention  were
         substantive and what was said in Hysaj was not binding because  the
         Upper Tribunal did not hear argument on this point. There should be
         a procedural step before the respondent could apply the RLR policy.




     51. Mr Jacobs submitted  the  respondent  had  acted  unreasonably  and
         unlawfully in applying the RLR policy which should  not  have  been
         applied in this case. The respondent had  to  deal  with  exclusion
         when considering the course of action to take after the deprivation
         of citizenship.






    Conclusions and reasons


     52. It is accepted that the applicant's ILR was  extinguished  when  he
         became a British citizen. The Immigration Act 1971 does  not  apply
         to British citizens. The applicant cannot be a British citizen  and
         concurrently subject to ILR. The applicant's  grant  of  ILR  as  a
         refugee  was  extinguished  on  12  November  2007  when   he   was
         naturalised as a British citizen.


     53.  Article  1C(3)  of  the  Refugee  Convention  provides  that   the
         Convention shall cease to apply to any  person  falling  under  the
         terms of section A if he has acquired a new nationality, and enjoys
         the  protection  of  the  country  of  his  new  nationality.   The
         Immigration Rules provide at paragraph 399A(iii) that  the  Refugee
         Convention ceases to apply when the applicant has  acquired  a  new
         nationality and enjoys the protection of the  country  of  his  new
         nationality. Article 11(1)(c) of the Qualification Directive states
         that a third country national or stateless person shall cease to be
         a refugee if he or she has acquired a new  nationality  and  enjoys
         the protection of his or her new nationality.


     54. I find that the applicant's recognition as a refugee ceased when he
         was granted British citizenship on 12 November 2007. Article  1C(3)
         expressly provides that the Refugee Convention shall cease to apply
         to a person who met the requirements of Article  1A(2)  if  he  has
         acquired a new nationality and enjoys the protection  of  that  new
         nationality. Article 11(1)(c) makes it clear that  the  applicant's
         refugee status ceased when he became a British citizen.


     55. I am not persuaded by Mr Jacobs' submission that the applicant  met
         the requirements of Article 1A(2) unless and until  the  respondent
         showed otherwise. The applicant's refugee status ended by operation
         of law. It did not require the respondent to revoke recognition  as
         a refugee. Further, the applicant could not be a refugee whilst  he
         held British citizenship because he was not 'outside his country of
         nationality'. I  find  that  the  applicant's  refugee  status  was
         extinguished on 12 November 2007.


     56. I am not persuaded  that  refugee  status  remains  extant  on  the
         acquisition of British citizenship for the reasons given above  and
         the UNHCR Handbook does not lead to an alternative  interpretation.
         The term 'revived' means to bring something back to  life,  health,
         existence or use. The applicant's leave or refugee  status  has  to
         have lapsed or become unavailable before it  can  be  revived.  The
         UNHCR handbook states that  refugee  status  may  be  revived.  The
         mechanism by which it can be brought back  into  existence  is  the
         subject of this judicial review application.


     57. There was no dispute that the decision to deprive the applicant  of
         British citizenship did not operate so as to revive  or  re-instate
         the applicant's previous  grant  of  ILR  or  refugee  status.  The
         applicant's appeal against the deprivation decision was  dismissed.
         The applicant has no outstanding applications.


     58. The Upper Tribunal, in  the  deprivation  appeal,  did  not  decide
         whether  the  applicant  should  be  recognised  as  a  refugee  on
         deprivation  of  citizenship.  The  applicant  submitted  that  the
         respondent  should  have  considered  whether  the  applicant   was
         entitled to a grant of indefinite leave to remain as a refugee when
         she made the order depriving him of citizenship.


     59. It is the applicant's position that he is still a refugee. However,
         I am of the view that this, in itself,  does  not  entitle  him  to
         remain lawfully in the UK. He has to obtain recognition of  refugee
         status. There is a mechanism in place to achieve this. He can apply
         for asylum. Mr Jacobs submits that it is  unreasonable  to  require
         the applicant to do so because the burden is on the  respondent  to
         show that he would be excluded under Article 1F. I disagree for the
         reasons set out below.


     60. The applicant's grant of refugee status in 2003 was not based on  a
         true understanding of the relevant facts. There is no dispute  that
         he failed to disclose  previous  convictions  of  serious  criminal
         offences. The respondent has not considered  these  convictions  or
         the applicant's account disputing these  convictions  because  this
         account has never  been  put  before  the  respondent.  It  is  not
         appropriate for the respondent to rely on the applicant's  evidence
         in the extradition proceedings. The respondent was not a  party  to
         those criminal proceedings  and  they  were  not  determinative  of
         whether the applicant was entitled to be recognised  as  a  refugee
         notwithstanding his previous convictions.  The applicant  can  rely
         on his previous asylum application  and  his  current  well-founded
         fear. He will not be  re-traumatised  given  that  his  account  of
         torture is accepted.


     61. It is not appropriate for the respondent to decide the  applicant's
         entitlement to refugee status in the absence of an application  for
         asylum. A decision that the  applicant  should  be  excluded  under
         Article 1F without giving  the  applicant  an  opportunity  to  put
         forward his own account in full would be procedurally unfair. It is
         not appropriate to  rely  on  the  evidence  and  findings  in  the
         extradition proceedings, absent  witness  statements  and  evidence
         from the applicant, in a decision to exclude the applicant from the
         Refugee Convention.


     62. There has  been  a  material  change  in  circumstances  since  the
         applicant was granted refugee status  in  2003.  He  has  disclosed
         previous convictions for serious criminal offences.  The  applicant
         has to show that he is a  refugee  on  the  basis  of  his  current
         circumstances. I agree with  Mr  Jacobs  that  there  has  been  no
         factual determination of the issues relevant to exclusion. The most
         appropriate way to resolve this is for the  applicant  to  make  an
         application for asylum. He is not prevented from doing so by virtue
         of a grant of RLR (now expired).


     63. The purpose of the RLR policy is to grant a form of leave to  those
         persons who are  not  entitled  to  protection  under  the  Refugee
         Convention and they cannot currently be removed because  to  do  so
         would breach their rights under the ECHR. It is clear on the  facts
         of this case that Article 33(2) does not apply.  The  applicant  is
         under no misapprehension that the policy was applied to him because
         the respondent considered that he would have  been  excluded  under
         Article 1F. Any defect in the form or substance of the  deprivation
         decision was not material.


     64. The RLR policy does not require a  formal  decision  excluding  the
         applicant from the Refugee Convention under Article 1F. The  policy
         applies to the applicant's situation because if he made a claim for
         asylum there are serious grounds for considering that he  has  been
         convicted  of  a  serious  crime.  On  the  material   before   the
         respondent, the applicant would be excluded if he made a protection
         claim.


     65. There was no misunderstanding of the decision of the Upper Tribunal
         in the applicant's deprivation  appeal.  The  Tribunal  upheld  the
         respondent's  decision  to  deprive  the   applicant   of   British
         citizenship. As such the applicant had no lawful status  to  remain
         in the UK. The grant of RLR prevented the applicant from  remaining
         in the UK unlawfully, given he could not be removed to Turkey.  The
         grant of RLR was in line with the Upper  Tribunal's  findings.  Any
         failure to refer to exclusion was not material.


     66. There was no requirement under the policy to make a decision,  that
         the applicant be excluded from the Refugee Convention, attracting a
         right of appeal. The DJ in the  extradition  proceedings  concluded
         that the applicant would be at  risk  of  treatment  in  breach  of
         Article 3. He had no jurisdiction to conclude  that  the  applicant
         was a refugee. Whilst the factual position may support a conclusion
         that the applicant was at risk of serious harm and/or  persecution,
         whether the applicant was entitled to be recognised  as  a  refugee
         was a matter for the respondent. The decision of  the  DJ  was  not
         capable of re-affirming the applicant's right to recognition  as  a
         refugee after disclosure of his previous convictions.


     67. There was no obligation on  the  respondent  to  give  reasons  for
         applying the applicable policy. A lack of reasoning did not  render
         the decision unlawful: R (on the application of MS) v Secretary  of
         State for the Home Department (excluded persons: Restrictive  Leave
         policy) IJR [2015] UKUT 00539 (IAC).






    Summary


     68. I am not persuaded  that  that  Deliallisi  or  Hysaj  are  wrongly
         decided or distinguishable on their facts. The applicant's  refugee
         status was extinguished when he became a British citizen. There can
         be no entitlement to a new grant of ILR on the basis  that  it  was
         granted in the  past  by  reference  to  a  decision  made  without
         consideration of the true position that the applicant had committed
         a serious crime. Past recognition cannot be relied  on  because  it
         did  not  take  into  account  the  applicant's  non-disclosure  of
         previous convictions.


     69. The RLR policy does not require  the  respondent  to  have  made  a
         formal decision that the  applicant  is  excluded  from  protection
         under the Refugee Convention.  On  the  facts  of  this  case,  the
         applicant would have been excluded had he made an application.  The
         respondent's  conclusion  that  the  RLR  policy  applied  was  not
         unlawful or irrational.


     70. The respondent was not required to take a procedural step after the
         deprivation citizenship and prior to invoking the RLR  policy.  The
         was no procedural unfairness in the decision making process because
         the applicant was aware of  the  consequences  of  the  deprivation
         decision  and  he  was  not  prevented  from   making   a   further
         application. The RLR policy enabled the applicant to remain in  the
         UK lawfully whilst he did so.


     71. The applicant has an extant  fear  of  persecution.  The  issue  is
         whether he is entitled to the protection of the Refugee  Convention
         given he has been  convicted  of  serious  crimes  in  Turkey.  The
         applicant has never made an application on this  basis  and  it  is
         open to him to do so.


     72. The applicant is not entitled to a grant  of  indefinite  leave  to
         remain as a refugee on deprivation of  citizenship.  A  declaration
         that the decision to apply the RLR policy was unlawful would  serve
         no purpose as the period of leave has now ended.


     73. Accordingly, I refuse this application. The  decision  of  23  July
         2019 was not unlawful, irrational or  unfair.  The  application  is
         dismissed.






    Permission to appeal


     74. Mr Jacobs  applied  for  permission  to  appeal  on  the  following
         grounds:


          i) The Upper Tribunal erred in  finding  that  the  applicant  is
             required to apply  for  asylum  in  order  to  bring  about  a
             consideration of exclusion from the Refugee  Convention  (upon
             which the respondent bears the  burden  of  proof)  so  as  to
             determine whether the applicant falls within the RLR policy.


         ii) The Upper Tribunal erred in finding that  the  respondent  did
             not act unlawfully/or procedurally unfairly  when  failing  to
             consider the question of exclusion from the Refugee Convention
             when applying the restricted leave policy to the applicant.


        iii) The Upper Tribunal erred when finding that the  applicant  was
             not entitled to rely on past recognition of refugee status  in
             circumstances where (i) findings had been made in  extradition
             proceedings (and which were not in dispute) to the effect that
             the Applicant's Article 3 rights  would  be  violated  in  the
             event of return to Turkey due  to  the  applicant's  political
             opinion and ethnicity and (ii) no findings had  been  made  on
             exclusion  either  in  the  deprivation  process  or  by   the
             respondent.


         iv) The Upper Tribunal erred in finding that paragraph 132 of  the
             UNHCR handbook does not enable  a  signatory  to  the  Refugee
             Convention to 'revive' refugee status upon loss of citizenship
             where circumstances show a continuing fear of persecution  and
             where no findings have been made in relation to exclusion.


          v) The Upper Tribunal erred in finding that the RLR  policy  does
             not require a formal decision excluding the applicant from the
             Refugee Convention under Article 1F.


         vi) The Upper Tribunal erred in holding that  the  respondent  did
             not act unlawfully in failing to provide reasons for  applying
             the RLR policy.


        vii) The Upper Tribunal erred when finding that a declaration  that
             the decision to apply the RLR policy was unlawful would  serve
             no purpose as the period of leave has now ended.


     75. It was accepted the applicant's naturalisation as a British citizen
         extinguished his indefinite leave  to  remain  as  a  refugee.  The
         applicant was deprived of British citizenship because he failed  to
         disclose his previous convictions for serious criminal offences. It
         is accepted his removal would breach Article 3. He was granted RLR,
         in accordance with the respondent's  policy,  and  this  period  of
         leave has now expired. The applicant does not have leave to  remain
         in the UK and has no outstanding applications. It is open to him to
         make an asylum claim disclosing all relevant  matters.  It  is  not
         appropriate for the respondent to  decide  the  applicant's  asylum
         claim in the absence of a valid application.


     76. For these reasons, I refuse permission to appeal to  the  Court  of
         Appeal. There is no arguable case that I have erred in law or there
         is some other reason that requires consideration by  the  Court  of
         Appeal.






    Costs


    77.  The applicant is to pay the respondent's reasonable  costs  to  be
         assessed if not agreed. The applicant  has  the  benefit  of  costs
         protection under Section  26  of  the  Legal  Aid,  Sentencing  and
         Punishment of Offenders Act 2012, the amount  that  he  is  to  pay
         shall be determined on application by respondent  under  Regulation
         16 of the Civil Legal Aid (Costs) Regulations 2013. There shall  be
         a detailed assessment of the applicant's publicly funded costs.





         J Frances


             Signed:   [pic]


                  Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


             Dated:   4 December 2020




    Applicant's solicitors:
    Respondent's solicitors:
    Home Office Ref:
    Decision(s) sent to above parties on: 04 December 2020
    ------------------------------------------------------------------------
    ---------------------------------------------------------------


    Notification of appeal rights


    A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial  review
    is a decision that disposes of proceedings.
    A party may appeal against such a decision to the Court of Appeal on  a
    question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to
    the Upper Tribunal for permission, at the hearing at which the decision
    is given. If no application is  made,  the  Tribunal  must  nonetheless
    consider at the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to  appeal
    (rule 44(4B) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008).




    If  the  Tribunal  refuses  permission,  either  in  response   to   an
    application or by virtue of rule 44(4B),  then  the  party  wishing  to
    appeal can apply for permission from the Court of Appeal  itself.  This
    must be done by filing an appellant's notice  with  the  Civil  Appeals
    Office of the Court of Appeal within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's
    decision on permission  to  appeal  was  sent  (Civil  Procedure  Rules
    Practice Direction 52D 3.3.












                                                            JR/4936/2019 (V)

                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice



                     The Queen on the application of S D
              Applicant
                                      v


               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


                     Before Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


                           ORDER


UPON hearing counsel for the applicant, Mr C Jacobs,  and  counsel  for  the
respondent, Ms J Anderson, at a remote hearing on 16  November  2020  which
has been consented to by the parties.

It is ORDERED that:

    1. The application for judicial review  is  dismissed  for  the  reasons
       given in the attached judgment.
    2. Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal is refused.
    3. The applicant  to  pay  the  respondent's  reasonable  costs,  to  be
       assessed if not agreed.
    4. The  Applicant's  legally  aided  costs  be  subject  to  a  detailed
       assessment.

                       J Frances


         Signed:  [pic]


                                Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


     Dated:       4 December 2020

Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on: 04 December 2020
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
-----------------------------------------------------------

Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

A party may appeal against such a decision to  the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3



