
                                                                JR/4801/2019


IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

BETWEEN:

                                  THE QUEEN
    (on the application of OVB, by her litigation friend Francesco Jeff)
                                                                   Applicant


                                     and


                             DERBY CITY COUNCIL
                                                                  Respondent
[pic]

                                    ORDER
[pic]

BEFORE Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan, sitting at Field House on 11  December
2020.

AND UPON the Tribunal hearing evidence on 3 and 4 November  2020,  receiving
further written submissions on 5, 10 and 25 November 2020, and handing  down
judgment determining the application on 11 December 2020 (attached).

IT IS ORDERED THAT:


   1. The applicant's date of birth is 23 August 1995.


   2. The order for interim relief, made on 13 March 2019, is discharged.


   3. The applicant shall pay the respondent's costs, with the  sum  payable
      to be determined upon any application under regulation 16 of the Civil
      Legal Aid (Costs) Regulations 2013.

Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal

No application was made for permission to appeal.  I  refuse  permission  to
appeal to the Court of Appeal in any  event  because  I  am  satisfied  that
there is no arguable error of law in the decision of Upper Tribunal.

D. Sheridan

Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan   11 December 2020

----------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------

Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on: 11 December 2020
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------
Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

A party may appeal against such a decision to  the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) [pic]Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3(2)).

                                                                JR/4801/2019
                                    [pic]
In the Upper Tribunal
Immigration and Asylum Chamber

IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

Heard at Field House
On 3rd and 4th November 2020
Written submissions received on 5th, 10th and 25th November 2020

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan

                                   Between

   The Queen on the application of OVB (by her litigation friend F. Jeff)

                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

                             Derby City Council
                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the applicant: Ms A. Benfied, Counsel instructed by Instalaw Solicitors
For the respondent: Mr L. Parkhill, Counsel instructed by Weightmans LLP

Anonymity

Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  applicant  is
granted anonymity. No  report  or  transcript  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify her. This  direction  applies  both  to  the
applicant and respondent.

            Application for judicial review: substantive decision

Preliminary Matters

 1. Prior to the hearing (on 26 October 2020) the applicant  applied,  with
    the agreement  of  the  respondent,  to  amend  the  timetable  in  the
    directions. I allowed the application as I was satisfied  that  neither
    party would be (or had been) prejudiced  and  it  was  an  interest  of
    justice to do so.

 2. Prior to the hearing (on 29 October 2020) the  respondent  applied  for
    permission to rely upon a witness statement of a social worker employed
    by the respondent, Ms Anaeka Fayaz. The application was opposed  by  Ms
    Benfield. Although  no  good  reason  was  given  for  why  Ms  Fayaz's
    statement was not filed and served earlier, I allowed  the  application
    on the basis that Ms Benfield would be able to respond  to  the  points
    raised in the statement, and  therefore  the  applicant  would  not  be
    prejudiced. In any  event,  as  explained  in  this  decision,  I  have
    attached no weight to Ms Fayaz's statement  as  I  did  not  find  that
    anything she said was (even  slightly)  relevant  to  ascertaining  the
    applicant's age.

 3. The interpreter attending on the first day of the hearing did not speak
    Congolese French. It had been envisaged that the applicant  would  give
    evidence on the first day of the hearing. The parties agreed  that  she
    would give evidence on the  second  day  instead.  A  Congolese  French
    speaking interpreter attended on the second day and the applicant  gave
    evidence without  any  concerns  about  interpretation  arising.  I  am
    satisfied that no prejudice arose from the absence of an interpreter on
    the first day or the changing of the order in which evidence was heard.

 4. The hearing was held at Field House with all participants attending  in
    person other than Ms Fayaz who gave evidence (and was  cross  examined)
    remotely, using Skype  for  Business.  The  technology  did  not  cause
    difficulties  and  I  am  satisfied  that  no  unfairness  arose  as  a
    consequence of Ms Fayaz not attending the hearing in person.

 5. At the end of the second day of the hearing both parties requested that
    submissions be in writing rather  than  given  orally.  I  agreed,  and
    submissions were received from the respondent on 5  November  2020  and
    the applicant on 10 November 2020.

 6. On 10 November 2020, at the same time as  submitting  her  submissions,
    the applicant  made  an  application  to  rely  on  publicly  available
    information taken from the internet relating to the  address  given  on
    the applicant's passport and voter's card which indicates that a church
    is located at the address. The respondent's response was received on 25
    November 2020. Although some prejudice to the  respondent  arises  from
    this evidence not being adduced  prior  to  the  hearing  so  that  the
    applicant could be questioned  on  it,  I  have  decided  that  in  the
    interests of justice it should be admitted.

Background

 7. The applicant is a national of the Democratic  Republic  of  the  Congo
    (DRC), who claims that her date of birth is 23 August 2002.

 8. On 26 September 2018, the applicant arrived at Heathrow  airport  on  a
    connecting flight from China to Switzerland. In her possession  were  a
    DRC passport, a DRC voter's card, a Swiss Residence Permit  and  an  EU
    health card. The passport and voter's card record her date of birth  as
    being 23 August 1995.

 9. At Heathrow, the applicant was told that the Swiss Residence Permit, as
    well as entry stamps into France and  Belgium  in  her  passport,  were
    counterfeit. She then claimed asylum, stating,  amongst  other  things,
    that she was a 16 year old born on 23 August 2002.

10. The respondent undertook an age assessment of the applicant, which  was
    completed on 8 February 2019. The assessment was  carried  out  by  two
    social workers: Emma Ditchburn and Emma Hollis.  Their  conclusion  was
    that the applicant was born on 23 August 1995.

11. The applicant applied for judicial review on 13 March 2019.  Permission
    was granted on 15 July 2019.

The Issue to be Determined and Legal Framework

12. The sole issue for me to determine is the applicant's age and  date  of
    birth.

13. It is extremely difficult to assess a young person's age. There are  no
    reliable medical or other scientific tests.

14. It is necessary  consider  carefully  the  evidence  produced  by  both
    parties. However, I am not confined to choosing between their positions
    and must decide for myself, having considered all the  material  before
    me, the applicant's age on the balance of probabilities (there being no
    legal burden).

15. I have kept in mind that whilst the applicant's age may  be  uncertain,
    what is certain is that she is an extremely vulnerable person who  does
    not speak English, is unfamiliar with the society and  culture  in  the
    UK, and the process she has gone through (including an  age  assessment
    that involved five interviews, as well as an initial visit that was not
    formally part of the age assessment) is a highly stressful one. I  have
    also kept in mind that a sympathetic assessment is  required  where  no
    margin of discretion is afforded to the view of the respondent:  see  R
    (A) v London Borough of Croydon (Rev 1) [2009] UKSC  8  and  R  (CJ)  v
    Cardiff CC [2011] EWCA Civ 1590.

The Evidence

16. I have considered all of the evidence submitted by  the  parties.  This
    includes:

      a. The applicant's account, as  set  out  in  two  witness  statements
         (dated 12 March 2019 and 4 February 2020) and her oral evidence  at
         the hearing, where she was cross examined by Mr Parkhill.

      b. The respondent's age assessment dated 9 February 2019,  along  with
         the witness statements of the two assessors and  their  manager  Mr
         Macauley.

      c. The witness statement (and oral evidence) of the applicant's former
         social worker Anaeka Fayaz.

      d. The passport  (and  other  documents)  in  the  possession  of  the
         applicant when she entered the UK.

      e. The expert report of Dr Muzong Kodi dated 28 October 2020  and  his
         response to supplemental questions dated 31 October 2020.

      f. Documents disclosed  by  the  Home  Office  including  The  Initial
         Contact and Asylum Registration Questionnaire  that  was  completed
         following a screening interview with the applicant on 27  September
         2018, a witness statement of a  specialist  document  examiner  who
         considered the applicant's passport, and correspondence between the
         respondent and the Home Office.

The applicant's account

17. The applicant claims that she was born in the DRC on 23 August 2002 and
    that she has known her date of birth for as long as she  can  remember.
    She claims that although birthday parties were not held in her  family,
    she would often be given presents and be informed of her age.

18. She claims that she has two older  half-siblings  (who  have  the  same
    father but different mother). She states that she does not know how old
    they are, but that they are adults.

19. She claims to have attended school until the end of  the  fourth  grade
    and that she left the DRC before the start of fifth grade, when she had
    just turned 16.

20. She claims that her father was a politician for the opposition  in  the
    DRC who died of natural causes in 2016 and that following his death her
    mother moved to her village of Lubumbashi, leaving her with her sister.
    The applicant states that she did not go with her  mother  because  she
    wanted to continue to study.

21. She claims that after her father's death she was threatened by men  who
    would often follow her, including when she went to school, and that she
    was always afraid; but that she never told anyone. She  states  that  �
    few weeks before she left the DRC she was attacked and raped by men who
    she believes did this because of her father's political career.

22. She claims that after the rape (which would have been in around July or
    August 2018, according to her chronology)  she  sought  (and  received)
    assistance from a friend of her late father, whom she refers to as Papa
    Roger. She states that Papa Roger obtained for her tickets to travel to
    Switzerland (via China and the UK)  and  a  false  passport  and  other
    documents; and also gave her $500. She states that she  does  not  know
    how Papa Roger obtained the passport and other documents, but that  she
    was told by him that she would need to have a passport showing that she
    was an adult to be able to travel abroad. The applicant stated in cross-
    examination that she did not  ask  either  her  mother  or  sister  for
    assistance following the rape, but only Papa Roger.

23. In her statement the  applicant  states  that  she  never  had  any  ID
    documents or a passport before these were obtained for her (with  false
    information, to show she was an adult) by Papa Roger. She  stated  that
    the signature on the passport and voter's card obtained by  Papa  Roger
    are not hers.

24. She claims that when she arrived in China she did not know where to  go
    or what to do, or when she would continue her journey  to  Switzerland.
    She claims that she was unable to understand the tickets for her onward
    travel from China because they were in  English.  Despite  not  knowing
    when her flight would leave, she took a taxi  to  a  hotel  (which  she
    describes as having lots of other African people in it) where she met a
    woman who spoke Portuguese Lingala who told her that her flight was  in
    two weeks' time. She claims that she stayed in the hotel and  was  then
    taken by the woman to the airport.

25. She claims that Papa Roger arranged for someone to meet and assist  her
    in Switzerland, but not in China or the UK.  She  claims  to  not  have
    contacted anyone in the DRC since she left.

26. In response to several questions asked  by  Mr  Parkhill  during  cross
    examination, the applicant's response was that  she  did  not  know  or
    remember. For example, she did not know whether there was a  school  in
    her mother's village where she could have continued her education,  she
    did not know the age of her siblings or her parents, she did  not  know
    why Papa Roger bought her a ticket to China and did not tell  her  that
    she would be staying there for 2 weeks, she did not  remember  worrying
    that she might miss a connecting flight, she did not remember when  men
    started following and threatening her (or why she formed the view  this
    was connected to her father), and she did not know  what  her  father's
    political role had been.

27. Mr Parkhill drew to the applicant's attention that the  date  of  issue
    recorded on her passport is 18 January 2016, which is  over  two  years
    prior to the date she claimed it had been obtained by Papa  Roger.  The
    applicant said she did not know why this was the case.

28. Mr Parkhill also drew to the applicant's attention paragraph 3.2 of the
    Initial  Contact  and  Asylum  Registration  Questionnaire   that   was
    completed following a screening interview on 27 September 2018, the day
    after she arrived in the  UK  (hereafter  "the  screening  interview"),
    where it is recorded that in response to a question about  whether  she
    had ever been fingerprinted in  any  country  including  her  own,  she
    stated: "in Congo - for passport purposes in 2016. In China  -  at  the
    airport". The applicant's response was  that  she  could  not  remember
    saying this and she had not applied for a passport in 2016.

29. The applicant stated in cross  examination  that  she  telephoned  Papa
    Roger to ask for his assistance, and spoke to him on the telephone  the
    day before she left the DRC, but has not telephoned, sent a text to, or
    written to, him since leaving. In response to Mr  Parkhill  asking  why
    she had not contacted Papa Roger, the applicant's response was that she
    did not have his telephone number as she had thrown away the SIM  card.
    When pressed for an explanation  by  Mr  Parkhill,  she  said  she  had
    discarded the SIM card because Papa Roger had said she did not need it.
    She was clear in her answers to Mr Parkhill that since coming to the UK
    she has not contacted any family or friends in the DRC.

The applicant's passport and voter's card (including expert  evidence  about
the documents)

30. The applicant's passport and voter's card record a date of birth of  23
    August 1995.

31. A witness statement by a specialist document  examiner  from  the  Home
    Office, Mr Watterson, states that the  passport  is  as  expected  (and
    appears  genuine)  but  contains   counterfeit   French   and   Belgian
    Immigration stamps. Mr Watterson was unable to comment on the  validity
    of the  issuing  process  or  whether  the  document  was  fraudulently
    obtained.

32. In a report dated 28 October 2020, Dr Kodi, an expert instructed by the
    applicant with recognised expertise, expressed  his  opinion  that  the
    applicant's  passport  and  voter's  card  appeared  to  be  authentic.
    However, he stated that false documents can easily be obtained and that
    it was likely that Papa Roger was able to  bribe  a  civil  servant  to
    acquire a national identity card with the false birth date in order  to
    obtain the  passport  for  the  applicant.  He  also  stated  that  the
    applicant would not have been able to leave the DRC as an unaccompanied
    child.

33. In response to supplemental questions, Dr Kodi stated  that  a  voter's
    card could be used to obtain a passport.

34. The issue date on the applicant's passport, as mentioned above,  is  18
    January 2016. Dr Kodi did not comment on the plausibility of the  issue
    date on an authentic passport obtained  with  false  information  being
    over two years earlier than the date it was in fact issued.

35. The applicant relies on screenshots taken from the Internet  which,  it
    is said, show that the address on her passport is of a church.

36. At paragraph 3.2 of the screening interview,  as  noted  above,  it  is
    recorded that in response to a question about whether she had ever been
    fingerprinted in any country including her own,  the  applicant  stated
    that in 2016 she had been fingerprinted "for passport purposes" in  the
    DRC.

The respondent's age assessment

37. The age assessment  involved  five  visits  to  the  applicant  by  two
    assessors, Emma Ditchburn and Emma  Hollis.  In  addition,  an  initial
    visit was undertaken by different social workers on  16  October  2018.
    The applicant's answers to questions during this visit are referred  to
    in the age assessment.

38. The age assessment report includes a detailed review of the applicant's
    account of  her  family  and  the  circumstances  leading  up  to,  and
    occurring during, her departure from the DRC, as well  as  observations
    on  her  self-care  skills,  demeanour,  appearance,  independence  and
    friendships.

39. It is stated in the report that the applicant was inconsistent in  what
    she said about her schooling, her family relationships, when  she  left
    the DRC, who supported her to leave, her journey to  the  UK,  and  her
    self-care skills. The report states:

         "When taking into account the information that [the applicant] has
         shared during this assessment, coupled with her physical appearance
         and development, I cannot conclude that [she] is the age that she
         is stating to be. Based on the inconsistencies in her story and her
         appearance, I am of the view that the date of birth that [she] is
         providing is incorrect. I am of the view that she is the age that
         is stated on her passport."

40. It is also stated that her demeanour, self-care and independence skills
    are  in  line  with  a  23-year-old.  The  report   also   takes   into
    consideration that the Home Office specialist reached the view that the
    applicant's passport is authentic.

Witness statements of Emma Ditchburn, Emma Hollis and Peter Macauley

41. Both Ms Ditchburn and Ms Hollis stated in their statements that the age
    assessment decision was made based on a range of factors, including the
    large  number  of  discrepancies  in  the  applicant's   account,   her
    demeanour, physical appearance and self-care skills,  as  well  as  the
    confirmation from the Home Office that the passport was genuine.

42. Mr Macauley submitted two statements. They both  seek  to  explain  why
    notes taken during the age assessment sessions were not  retained,  and
    therefore were not disclosed.

Evidence of Ms Fayaz's

43. Ms Fayaz was the applicant's social worker from 10 February 2020 to  23
    August 2020. In her witness statement, she states  that  the  applicant
    regularly  went  to  Derby  on  her  own  and  appeared  to  have  good
    independent living skills. At paragraph 14 of the statement she stated:

         I often found the applicant to be quite cold towards  me.  I  would
         say that I had poor engagement from her. I recall  that  she  could
         also have inappropriate  facial  expressions  during  conversations
         with her, for example rolling her eyes or not  making  eye  contact
         with me. In my opinion, she came across as older  than  she  stated
         she was. This was not just based on her appearance but  rather  her
         demeanour, attitude, the way she talked at times and her responses.
         In my dealings with her, I found that she could be very mature.

44. In response to Ms Benfield, Ms Fayaz acknowledged that several  factors
    she  identified  in  her  statement  (specifically,   the   applicant's
    demeanour, lack of eye contact and attitude) did not  necessarily  mean
    that she was  older  than  claimed,  and  could  be  a  result  of  her
    personality irrespective of age.



The Respondent's Submissions

45. Mr Parkhill argues that the applicant's  evidence  lacked  credibility,
    for several reasons.

      a. Firstly, he argues that the applicant's answers to  questions  were
         surprisingly vague. He gives several examples, including:  she  did
         not know how long she had held her voter ID card; she did not know,
         even approximately, how long before she left  the  DRC  Papa  Roger
         gave her the tickets; she could not remember  when  she  was  first
         followed by men who she thought  were  targeting  her  due  to  her
         father's politics or when she was first threatened; and she did not
         give a reason why she did not tell her sister about the threats and
         being followed.

      b. Secondly, Mr Parkhill argues that  it  is  not  credible  that  the
         applicant stated in examination in chief, when shown a copy of  the
         Swiss Residence Card in her name, that she did  not  know  what  it
         was, even though it is referred to in her witness statement and she
         acknowledged that she recognised the document when pressed in cross
         examination.

      c. Thirdly,  he  argues  that  the  applicant's  explanation  for  not
         remaining with her mother after her father died (which was that she
         wanted to continue with her education) was not plausible  when  her
         mother relocated to Lubumbashi, which is the second-largest city in
         the DRC.

      d. Fourthly, Mr Parkhill argues that it is difficult  to  accept  that
         the applicant did not keep a note of Papa Roger's telephone number,
         given he had arranged her journey and assisted her.

      e. Sixthly, he submits that it is difficult to accept the  applicant's
         account of not finding out when  her  flight  from  China  departed
         until some days after her  arrival  in  China,  and  only  because,
         purely by chance, a woman intervened and assisted her.

      f.  Seventhly,  he  argues  that  the  evidence  indicating  that  the
         applicant applied for a passport in 2016 is fatal to her case.

The Applicant's Submissions

46. Ms Benfield argues that the applicant provided a clear  and  consistent
    account of her age and date of birth, which is plausible and consistent
    with external evidence. She submits that given the applicant's age  and
    traumatic experiences she cannot properly be  expected  to  provide  an
    entirely consistent account; and given the passage of time, as well  as
    the trauma she suffered shortly before leaving the DRC,  any  vagueness
    in her account should not be viewed  as  an  indicator  of  dishonesty.
    Therefore, the inability to remember how long she held the voter's card
    and tickets, or when she  was  first  followed  by  associates  of  her
    father, does not indicate a lack of credibility.

47. Ms Benfield also argues  that  the  applicant's  education  history  is
    consistent with her claimed age and that her account of being a  victim
    of sexual violence, and threatened because of her father, is consistent
    with country evidence about the DRC.

48. Ms Benfield maintains that  it  is  plausible  the  applicant  did  not
    recognise the Swiss Residence Card at the hearing given she  could  not
    read the document.

49. She also argues that there  is  no  reason  to  doubt  the  applicant's
    explanation for not relocating with her  mother,  which  was  that  she
    wished to continue with her education. With respect to the respondent's
    contention that there would be schools  in  Lubumbashi  as  it  is  the
    second-largest city in the DRC, Ms Benfield argues that this point  had
    not been put to the applicant and is not supported by evidence.

50. A further point made by Ms Benfield is  that,  because  the  DRC  is  a
    patriarchal society, it is not incredible that the applicant turned  to
    Papa Roger rather than her sister for assistance.

51. Ms Benfield contends that it is credible that  the  applicant  did  not
    keep a note of Papa Roger's phone number, given that she had been  told
    by him that on arrival in Switzerland someone would help her  and  they
    would be able to speak to him.

52. Ms Benfield also submits that it is credible that because of the  trust
    the applicant had in Papa Roger she did not take  steps  to  understand
    her travel documents or onward travel arrangements.

53. Ms Benfield accepts that the applicant's passport and voter's card  are
    on balance likely to be accepted as genuine in the sense that they were
    issued by DRC authorities and bear standard features of such documents.
    However, she argues that it is unlikely these documents contain genuine
    information (including as to the applicant's age).

54. She argues that the applicant entered the UK with a range of documents,
    some of which were counterfeit (the Swiss residence and health  cards),
    and the passport contained counterfeit stamps. Ms Benfield argues  that
    the counterfeit documents and stamps are sophisticated, which indicates
    that they were obtained by experienced counterfeiters who had access to
    counterfeit stamps, understood EU processes in  issuing  residence  and
    health cards, and had access to a range of  counterfeit  templates  and
    materials.  She  states  that  the  tribunal  cannot  disaggregate  the
    passport and view it in isolation but rather must see it as part  of  a
    package of documents that were intended to mask the applicant's  travel
    history, background and identity. She submits that all of the documents
    must be viewed together and are "tainted by forgery"[pic]

55. Ms Benfield submits that the  applicant  has  been  consistent  in  her
    account of how the documents were obtained, and  that  her  account  is
    plausible and consistent with the evidence of Dr Kodi both about how  a
    falsified passport would be obtained and the applicant's need  for  one
    as an unaccompanied minor.

56. With respect to the date of issue (18 January  2016)  recorded  on  the
    passport, Ms Benfield submits that it  is  plausible  that  an  earlier
    issue date is a device to make a passport appear  to  be  genuine.  She
    argues that the applicant confirmed in evidence that the  signature  on
    the passport is not her signature and she submits that the signature on
    her witness statement is "significantly different" from  the  passport.
    Ms Benfield argues that further doubt about the  passport  arises  from
    the address given in it, which is  not  a  residential  address  but  a
    church.

57. With regard to the applicant saying at the screening interview that she
    was fingerprinted for passport purposes in the DRC in 2016, Ms Benfield
    submits that the applicant said in evidence that she did  not  remember
    saying this and confirmed that she was not fingerprinted in relation to
    the DRC passport. Ms Benfield states  that  answers  are  not  recorded
    verbatim in screening interviews and that it is possible that there was
    a misunderstanding or misinterpretation of what the applicant said.

Analysis

58. There is a significant inconsistency in the  applicant's  account.  She
    stated (both in her witness statement  and  in  response  to  questions
    asked by Mr Parkhill) that she had never had a passport prior  to  Papa
    Roger obtaining one for her (using false information) shortly prior  to
    her leaving the DRC. According to her account, the passport would  have
    been obtained by Papa Roger between July and September 2018.

59. However, during her screening interview on 27 September 2018  (the  day
    after she arrived in the UK) the applicant stated,  in  response  to  a
    question asking her whether she had ever been fingerprinted,  that  she
    had been fingerprinted in the DRC for passport purposes  in  2016.  The
    applicant claims not to  remember  saying  this.  Whether  or  not  she
    remembers saying it, given that it is recorded in the  Initial  Contact
    and Asylum Registration Questionnaire as her answer, that the interview
    was carried out by a French speaker, and that she signed a  declaration
    confirming that the details given were correct, I am satisfied that the
    applicant did in fact say to the interviewing officer at the  screening
    interview what it records her as saying.

60. There are aspects of the  applicant's  account  that  I  find  are  not
    plausible. These are:

      a. The applicant has not given a plausible explanation for why she has
         not contacted any of her family or Papa Roger since  she  left  the
         DRC. Her account was  that  she  contacted  Papa  Roger  by  mobile
         telephone shortly before leaving the DRC. In response to a question
         from Mr Parkhill asking why she had not contacted Papa Roger  since
         leaving the DRC, she stated that she threw away her SIM card in the
         DRC, as Papa Roger said she did  not  need  it  and  someone  would
         assist her in Switzerland. Whilst it  might  be  plausible  that  a
         person in the applicant's position would lose her phone (or a piece
         of paper where she had written down important telephone numbers) it
         is not plausible that shortly before embarking on a flight to China
         she would intentionally discard her only means of communication and
         the contact  details  for  her  family  and  Papa  Roger.  This  is
         particularly the case when  by  her  own  account  Papa  Roger  had
         arranged for a person to meet her in  Switzerland  and  plainly  it
         might have been necessary to contact Papa Roger (or for this person
         to contact her by telephone or internet) to arrange where  and  how
         to meet. It is also implausible that she would not have  wanted  to
         retain a telephone number  for  (or  a  means  of  contacting)  her
         sister, with whom she had lived for several years, or  any  friends
         or family in the DRC.

      b. The applicant has not given a plausible explanation as to  why  she
         would embark on a seemingly perilous  journey  to  Switzerland  via
         China and the UK  (with  a  two-week  stay  in  China  without  any
         accommodation or support arranged, or even knowledge  of  when  the
         onward flight to the UK was scheduled) when she could have  avoided
         the claimed threats and danger by moving to her mother's village to
         live with her mother. Her  explanation  for  not  moving  with  her
         mother when her father died was that she did not  want  to  disrupt
         her education, but plainly leaving the DRC in the way she did would
         have been  even  more  disruptive  to  her  education.  Equally,  a
         plausible explanation has not been given for why Papa  Roger  would
         spend a significant sum of  money  (purchasing  tickets,  obtaining
         several false documents and giving  the  applicant  $500)  when  he
         could have instead simply assisted the applicant in moving  to  her
         mother's village.

      c. The applicant's account  of  her  journey  to  China  is  also  not
         plausible. She claims to have arrived in China with no knowledge of
         when her onward flight to the UK was scheduled but despite this  to
         have taken a taxi to a hotel from the airport. She has not given  a
         plausible explanation as to why she would  have  left  the  airport
         without knowing when the onward flight would take place.

61. I recognise that even though something may appear  implausible  it  may
    still  have  occurred.  Therefore,  had  my  only  concern  about   the
    applicant's account been the apparent implausibility of some  parts  of
    it I would not necessarily have disbelieved her.  However,  considering
    the plausibility issues together with the glaring inconsistency between
    what she said at the screening interview and in  her  witness  evidence
    about obtaining a passport in the DRC in 2016, I have reached the  view
    that she has not been truthful in at least some material aspects of her
    account  (including  whether  she  obtained  a  passport  in  2016).  I
    therefore attach only little weight to her  evidence.  I  have  reached
    this conclusion even though I recognise - and make allowances for - the
    applicant's vulnerability; and have given her the benefit of the doubt.

62. I now turn to consider the applicant's voter's card and  passport.  The
    evidence of Dr Kodi suggests that both documents are authentic/genuine.
    However, his evidence indicates - and I accept as entirely plausible  -
    that a genuine/ authentic document in the DRC  can  be  obtained  using
    false information. Given that the applicant  would  be  prevented  from
    leaving the DRC if she were under 18, I find that it is plausible  that
    a person under 18 wishing to leave the DRC could  and  would  obtain  a
    genuine/authentic passport using false information about their date  of
    birth. However, there are two reasons why I do not accept that this  is
    what occurred in this case.

      a. Firstly, the date of issue written on the applicant's  passport  is
         18 January 2016. Dr Kodi has explained how a person  can  obtain  a
         passport using false information. He has  not,  however,  explained
         how a bribed official, issuing a passport  with  a  false  date  of
         birth, would be able to falsify the date of issue of the  document.
         This seems, on its face, to be a  much  harder  thing  to  falsify.
         There is no evidence before me that  suggests  that  the  applicant
         needed her passport to have an earlier issue date and  therefore  I
         consider it unlikely that  Papa  Roger  (or  the  counterfeiter  he
         engaged) would have sought this. I find  that  the  date  of  issue
         being 18 January 2016 on the passport is a strong  indication  that
         the passport was in fact issued on 18 January 2016 and not  in  mid
         2018.

      b. Secondly,  at  her  screening  interview  the  applicant  told  the
         interviewing officer that in 2016 she was fingerprinted in the  DRC
         for passport  purposes.  I  consider  this  to  be  a  very  strong
         indication that the passport was obtained in 2016 and not 2018.

63. Ms Benfield argued that the applicant's signature on  the  passport  is
    different to her signature on her witness statement. In the absence  of
    any expert evidence comparing the signatures I am unable to form a view
    one way or the other as to whether the signature has  been  written  by
    the same person.

64. Ms Benfield also argued that an internet search showing that  a  church
    is located at the address on the applicant's  passport  indicates  that
    the passport is not a genuine  document.  Mr  Parkhill  stated  in  his
    submissions that it cannot be discerned  from  the  evidence  submitted
    whether there are units of accommodation at the address in addition  to
    the church and how long the  church  has  been  at  this  location.  Mr
    Parkhill also commented that one  would  expect  that  false  documents
    would be obtained with details which are plausible,  rather  than  with
    details which can easily be seen to be false. I agree with Mr  Parkhill
    and for these reasons attach only little weight to the internet  search
    results.

65. Even though there are unanswered questions about  the  passport,  I  am
    satisfied that the evidence strongly supports the view  (and  certainly
    to the  balance  of  probabilities  standard)  that  the  passport  was
    obtained by the applicant in 2016 using  her  own  fingerprints.  Given
    that the applicant has not identified any reason  why  she  would  have
    used a false date of birth in 2016, I consider  it  (far)  more  likely
    than not that the passport was obtained in 2016 using her genuine  date
    of birth. I conclude, therefore, that the date of birth on the passport
    is the applicant's actual date of birth.

66. In reaching this conclusion, it has not been  necessary  to  place  any
    reliance on the evidence of the social workers or  the  age  assessment
    report. For completeness, however, I should state that I do not, in any
    event, place any weight on this evidence, for two reasons. Firstly, the
    observations  about  the  applicant's  self-care   skills,   demeanour,
    appearance and friendships could apply equally to a 16-yearold as to  a
    23-year-old. Secondly, the comments in the age assessment report  about
    the applicant's passport and the account of her family and  journey  to
    the UK were of no assistance to me in ascertaining her  age  as  I  was
    able to form my own view on these points based on the  evidence  before
    me (including oral evidence of the applicant and an expert report  that
    was not available to the social workers) and with the assistance of the
    submissions from Counsel.

Conclusion

67. I find that the applicant is (and was on arrival to the UK)  an  adult,
    and that she was born on 23 August 1995.

D. Sheridan
Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan   11 December 2020

