
                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                 EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT GIVEN FOLLOWING HEARING

                                                                JR/4830/2016

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                                                            22 February 2017


                                  The QUEEN
               (ON The application OF Annandakannan Srikannan)
                                                                   Applicant


                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE COLLINS
                               - - - - - - - -

Ms S Jagarajah, instructed by Sriharans Solicitors appeared on behalf of
the Applicant.

Mr Z Malik, instructed by the Government Legal Department appeared in a non-
representative capacity.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                    ON AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                                  JUDGMENT
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -



    Mr Justice collins:


1.   This application for judicial review seeks to attack a decision of  the
    Secretary of State refusing an application made by  the  applicant  for
    leave to remain based upon his having been in this country lawfully for
    a period of six years as the law then stood. It has now been amended so
    that the minimum is ten years rather than the  six  years.  He  asserts
    that the period of six years was wrongly assessed because the Secretary
    of State's view was that he had not in any event been here lawfully for
    the relevant period.


2.   This is also to an extent bedevilled by  the  fact  that  his  original
    leave was extended under Section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971 and the
    application that he made which was  dealt  with  and  rejected  by  the
    Secretary of State was made while he was still the beneficiary of  that
    3C leave. The straightforward argument from Mr Malik is that Section 3C
    itself does not permit an application for variation of leave to be made
    whilst it is in being and therefore the application that was  made  was
    one which was invalid.  It was treated as valid  by  the  Secretary  of
    State but that was an error and it is not  open  to  the  Secretary  of
    State to validate an application which is as a matter of  law  invalid.
    It follows that Mr Malik accepts that the decision is one which  should
    not  have  been  made  and  therefore  was  an  unlawful  decision  and
    accordingly ought to be quashed. There has been a fresh  decision  made
    in October 2016 and the submission is that that is not the  subject  of
    any challenge and it should prevail because it properly deals with  the
    issues which were normally dealt with in the initial decision.


3.   That, as may have been  clear,  produces  a  number  of  complications,
    largely stemming from a combination of  the  policy  arrangements  from
    time to  time  made  by  the  Secretary  of  State  and  the  appalling
    complexity of the Rules as they now stand and are  from  time  to  time
    amended.  It really is about time that someone got round to simplifying
    and codifying the existing Rules but that is a cri du  c?ur  which  has
    come from this Tribunal on many occasions.


4.   I should now go to the factual background.  The applicant,  it  is  now
    accepted,  was  born  in  May  1992.   He  arrived  in   this   country
    clandestinely on 7 March 2008.  He was then a minor.  On 2  April  2008
    he applied for asylum.  His application was refused on 8 August and  he
    lodged an appeal against that refusal.  On 25 March 2009 his appeal  on
    the asylum grounds was refused but his appeal was allowed under Article
    8.


5.   The relevant  paragraphs  that  deal  with  the  Article  8  claim  are
    relatively short.  There was satisfaction that he had a  family  and  a
    private life in this country.  There was no evidence that  he  had  any
    family to whom he would be able to return except for an  uncle  but  it
    was not known what had happened to him since the applicant had come  to
    the United Kingdom.   Accordingly  it  would  not  be  reasonable,  the
    Tribunal decided, to expect him as a minor to go to Sri Lanka  to  find
    his uncle and in any event if he did the uncle  would  not  necessarily
    wish to take on his care.  Accordingly they  were  satisfied  that  his
    removal would be an interference with his family and private  life  and
    it would not be  proportionate  because  there  was  no  evidence  that
    adequate reception facilities would be available to him in Sri Lanka as
    required by the decision of the Court of Appeal in CL (Vietnam).


6.   As Mr Malik submits,  and  as  is  obvious  from  the  reasoning,  what
    weighed with the Tribunal on that occasion was the fact that he  was  a
    minor.  Nonetheless the decision was based upon his Article  8  rights.
    For some reason which has not been explained albeit he was a minor  and
    an unaccompanied minor when he arrived in this country the Secretary of
    State did not follow what was in  those  days  the  usual  practice  of
    granting discretionary leave until he reached the age of 17� but it  is
    clear that that was not done and there was simply a refusal.


7.   On 19 October 2009 the Secretary of State granted  discretionary  leave
    until 25 March 2012.  That would have reflected  the  normal  provision
    that three years' discretionary leave in the  circumstances  should  be
    granted and the three years would of course run from 25 March  but  the
    actual grant, as I have said, did not take place for some nearly  seven
    months.


8.   On 9 September 2012 an application was made for  further  discretionary
    leave and that was refused but not until November 2014.  An appeal  was
    lodged but was dismissed and various applications to the  Tribunal  for
    permission to appeal were made but refused and the applicant  exhausted
    all his appeal rights on 3 August 2015.


9.   On 20 April 2015 he had made  the  application  for  further  leave  to
    remain and that application was based upon the assertion  that  he  had
    been lawfully in this country for six years and therefore was or should
    be entitled to or at least entitled to  be  considered  for  settlement
    here.  The decision letter, to which I should now refer, was made on  3
    February 2016.


10.  The history was set out and it was said that he did not qualify  for  a
    grant of leave to remain and it was said that if  he  wanted  to  raise
    protection issues that those  must  be  lodged  in  person.  Protection
    issues have not been raised specifically.  There is then a reference in
    the letter to Section 3C and for some reason to Section 3D,  which  no-
    one has ever suggested had any application.


11.  Then his Article 8 rights were considered and it was said that  he  did
    not qualify (as indeed clearly he does not so  far  as  the  Rules  are
    concerned) and so any claim  based  on  Article  8  would  depend  upon
    consideration outside the Rules.


12.  There was, as is now accepted, a wrongful assertion  that  he  had  not
    complied with the law at all times that  he  was  here.   That  is  now
    accepted to be wrong but then his length of residence is dealt with  as
    follows:


         "You arrived in the UK on 7 March 2008  and  claimed  asylum  on  2
         April.  You were served with [the relevant notice] as an overstayer
         on the same day.  Your application for  asylum  was  refused  on  8
         August 2008.  You appealed this decision on 22 August 2008  and  it
         was decided at a panel hearing that your claim  was  allowed  under
         Article 8 of the ECHR.  You submitted an  application  for  further
         leave to remain on 9 March 2012 which was refused  on  20  November
         2014.  You appealed this decision  on  10  December  2014  and  the
         Immigration Judge dismissed your appeal at a First-tier hearing  on
         26 February 2015, you then became  appeal  rights  exhausted  on  3
         August 2015.  When you became appeal rights  exhausted  you  should
         have made every effort to leave the UK which you didn't.  You  then
         submitted an application for further leave to remain  on  20  April
         2015.  As there have been no significant delays  since  your  claim
         for asylum contributed by  the  Home  Office.   Although  you  have
         resided in the UK for seven years and eleven months your length  of
         residence in the UK does not justify a grant of  leave  outside  of
         the Immigration Rules."


    The logic of that paragraph and the poor grammar is all too obvious but
    what effectively is being said is that "you  do  not  now  qualify  nor
    should you have leave outside the Rules".


13.  What that decision does not deal with is the point  that  was  made  in
    the application that he had served the relevant period of six years and
    thus should be entitled to consideration for settlement.


14.  It was said  that  since  the  leave  following  the  decision  of  the
    Tribunal was given in October 2009 he had not served the necessary  six
    year period by the time he made the application  in  April  2015.   His
    case is that the leave should be deemed, as it were, as a matter of the
    Secretary of State's then policy  to  run  from  the  moment  that  the
    Tribunal reached its decision, namely 25 March, and thus by April  2015
    he would have been in this country for the relevant period.


15.  My attention has been drawn to the policy which was  issued  in  August
    2015 which dealt with the situation in relation to discretionary  leave
    as from that date but it had a section, section 10,  which  dealt  with
    transitional arrangements and that provided  that  applicants  who  had
    been granted discretionary leave before  9  July  2012  would  normally
    continue to be dealt with under the policy that  was  in  place  before
    that date.  However, that perhaps does not necessarily take the  matter
    too far because of course the decision in question upon which he relies
    and indeed the  application  was  made  in  2015.   Nonetheless  it  is
    important to see the language.  I think I  should  refer  to  paragraph
    10.1. So far as material, this reads:


         "Those granted leave under the DL policy in  force  before  9  July
         2012 will normally continue to be  dealt  with  under  that  policy
         through to settlement if they continue to qualify for further leave
         on the same basis as their original discretionary leave was granted
         (normally they will be  eligible  to  apply  for  settlement  after
         accruing six years' continuous discretionary leave), unless at  the
         date of decision they fall within the restricted leave policy."


    There is no suggestion that he does fall within  the  restricted  leave
    policy.


16.  It goes on:


         "Caseworkers must consider whether the circumstances prevailing  at
         the time of the original grant of leave continue at the date of the
         decision.  If the circumstances remain  the  same,  the  individual
         does  not  fall  within  the  restricted  leave  policy   and   the
         criminality thresholds do not apply,  a  further  period  of  three
         years' discretionary leave should normally be granted.  Caseworkers
         must consider whether there are any circumstances that may  warrant
         departure from the standard period of leave.


         If there have been significant changes that mean the  applicant  no
         longer qualifies for leave under the discretionary leave policy  or
         the applicant falls for refusal on the basis  of  criminality,  the
         further leave application should be refused."


    That does not indicate the relevant date  for  considering  when  leave
    commenced, whether it be October 2009 or March 2009 and the distinction
    is obviously of critical importance in the circumstances of this case.


17.  There is a further guidance  to  which  my  attention  has  been  drawn
    which, again, is dated in August 2015 and deals with family  migration,
    family members and so on but it has  a  more  general  provision  under
    heading 6. That is headed "Appeals on or after 9 July  2012",  and  6.3
    deals with applications  submitted  before  9  July  2012  and  appeals
    determined before that date but a decision implemented on or after that
    date.  6.3.1. provides:


         "Where a person submitted an application before 9 July  2012  which
         was refused and their appeal against the  refusal  was  allowed  on
         Article 8 grounds before 9 July 2012, and the Secretary of State is
         not contesting the determination and  this  is  implemented  on  or
         after 9 July 2012, leave should be granted under the  Discretionary
         Leave policy in force on 8 July 2012",


    and then this:


         "6.3.2.  The relevant date is the date the  appeal  was  determined
                  and  allowed  by  the  judge,  rather  than  the  date  of
                  promulgation or the date of the actual appeal, where these
                  dates differ."


18.  As we know, the leave granted in October was  granted  until  25  March
    2012, that is to say, the period which would  normally  be  granted  of
    three years less the time between 29 March 2012 and 29 October.


19.  Mr Malik has told me that he has endeavoured to discover whether  there
    was any specific  policy  in  existence  at  the  material  time  which
    indicated when leave should be regarded as having commenced.  It  seems
    to me that the reference which I have already cited in 6.3. is entirely
    consistent with it having been the practice to assume  that  lawfulness
    and therefore the effect of the grant of leave ran from the date of the
    decision of the Tribunal.  When one thinks of  it  that  is  only  fair
    because in a case such as this the applicant had no leave  to  be  here
    when he made his original asylum claim.  Accordingly, unless leave  ran
    in effect from the date of the decision he  would  have  remained  here
    unlawfully until the date in October when the decision was made, and of
    course it is also entirely consistent with that  view  that  the  leave
    when granted in October ran for what would have been three years had it
    been effective from 25 March.


20.  It seems to me that, even without there being any  specific  policy  to
    that effect, that is the way the system was worked and that is the only
    fair way in which it could have worked so far  as  those  such  as  the
    applicant  are  concerned  who  otherwise  would  have  remained   here
    unlawfully despite the finding of the Tribunal in  their  favour  until
    the Secretary of State got round to making the formal decision to grant
    the necessary leave.


21.  It follows that, in my view, by the time he  made  his  application  in
    April 2015 the applicant had achieved the necessary six  years  and  in
    addition they had been on the same basis.  It seems that at  one  stage
    the Secretary of State or those making  the  decision  wrongly  assumed
    that he had been granted leave as an unaccompanied minor but, as I have
    made clear and the history shows, that was not the true position.


22.  The application made was on the basis not  of  Article  8  specifically
    but on the basis that he was qualified for consideration of  settlement
    under the six year Rule if I may call it that.  The  policy  of  August
    2015, and I have no reason to doubt that it varied from  what  was  the
    existing policy, was, as I have already cited, that those granted leave
    before 9 July 2012 would normally continue to be dealt with under  that
    policy through to settlement if they continued to qualify  for  further
    leave on the same basis as their original discretionary leave.  So  far
    as the applicant is concerned he meets that subject to  the  submission
    made that the continuation into settlement has to be on the same basis,
    that is to say that he must therefore continue to have the same Article
    8 basis for remaining in this country.  That he does not  have  because
    his Article 8 claim was rejected by the Tribunal as his appeals  failed
    between 2014 and 2015.


23.  Mr Malik goes on to draw attention  to  the  provision  which  provides
    that caseworkers must consider whether the circumstances prevailing  at
    the time of the original grant of leave continue at  the  date  of  the
    decision and if they remain the  same.  The  individual  did  not  fall
    within the restricted leave policy and the criminality  thresholds  did
    not apply a further three years should normally be  granted,  depending
    obviously on how long but that does not cover the six year  point.   It
    deals with further three years which may add up to  the  necessary  six
    years, as it then was, ten years, as it now is, and it seems to me when
    one thinks of it to be somewhat absurd to suggest that  the  settlement
    must be on the same  basis  as  the  six  year  period  leading  up  to
    settlement.


24.  One only has to think  of  a  number  of  examples.   One  might  be  a
    student, a student who had been here for six years as a student.  It is
    obviously absurd to think that he  could  only  get  settlement  if  he
    continued to be  settled  as  a  student.   The  reality  is  that  the
    continuing on the same basis relates to the  period  before  settlement
    and it must be that that continues through to  settlement,  not  during
    settlement and the obvious and natural meaning  of  the  provisions  is
    that providing an applicant can show that he has been here on the  same
    basis for the qualifying period of six years then he is entitled to  be
    considered for settlement.  Accordingly I reject that submission by  Mr
    Malik.


25.  I turn now to Section 3C.  It is headed "Continuation of leave  pending
    variation decision".  So far as material it provides:


         "(1) This Section applies if -


                (a)    a person who has limited leave to enter or remain  in
                    the United Kingdom applies to the Secretary of State for
                    variation of the leave,


                (b)    the application for  variation  is  made  before  the
                    leave expires, and


                (c)     the  leave  expires  without  the  application   for
                    variation having been decided.


         (2)  The leave is extended by virtue of  this  Section  during  any
                period when -


                (a)    the application for variation is neither decided  nor
                    withdrawn,


                (b)    an appeal under Section 82(1) of the 2002  Act  could
                    be brought while the appellant is in the United  Kingdom
                    against the decision on the  application  for  variation
                    (ignoring any possibility of an appeal out of time  with
                    permission), or


                (c)    an appeal under that Section  against  that  decision
                    brought while the appellant is in the United Kingdom  is
                    pending (within the meaning of Section 104 of  the  2002
                    Act) or an administrative review of the decision on  the
                    application  for  variation  could  be  sought   or   is
                    pending",


    Subsection (4) is important.  It provides: "A person may  not  make  an
    application for variation of his leave to enter or remain in the United
    Kingdom while that leave is extended by virtue of this Section."


26.  The purpose behind Section 3C is obvious.  It is to give protection  to
    those who make an application but whose application is refused and they
    have appealed and it avoids any suggestion that they are remaining here
    unlawfully, which would otherwise be the case, while the appeal process
    continues.


27.  The application that was made by the applicant was dealt with in  2009.
     He was granted leave until March 2012 and any subsequent  continuation
    of leave depended upon Section 3C.  Accordingly, when  the  application
    was made in April 2015 it was made at a time when he was lawfully  here
    by virtue of Section 3C, and the submission  made  by  Mr  Malik  is  a
    straightforward one, that by virtue of  3C(4)  he  was  precluded  from
    making an application for variation of that leave.


28.  The argument raised against him is that this  was  not  an  application
    for variation but was an application for fresh leave.  I regret to  say
    that that is a submission that simply cannot prevail.  Any  application
    for an extension of leave made when the existing limited leave  is  due
    to expire is for, on one view, fresh leave but in fact  it  clearly  is
    and is regarded by the Act  and  has  always  been  considered  in  any
    authorities under the Act to be a  variation  of  the  existing  leave.
    Accordingly I have no doubt whatever that  the  application  could  not
    properly be made by virtue of Section 3C(4).


29.  It follows that the application was one  which  should  not  have  been
    accepted by the Secretary of State but should  have  been  regarded  as
    invalid.  Of course once the 3C leave came to an end, which would  have
    been in August 2015 when he was appeal rights  exhausted,  there  would
    have been nothing to prevent him making a valid application for further
    leave to remain.  That is inevitably and properly accepted by Mr  Malik
    but it is not, in my judgment, possible to regard this  application  as
    one which can be notionally deferred until then to  make  it  a  lawful
    application.  That is not, in my view, an appropriate  way  of  dealing
    with it.


30.  I have been referred to a decision  of  Clare  Moulder,  sitting  as  a
    Deputy High Court Judge, in the case of R (on the application of Bhgat)
    v Secretary of State for the Home  Department,  which  is  reported  at
    [2014] 1 WLR 3710.  In that case Mr Malik, as it happens,  appeared  on
    behalf of the claimant but the circumstances so far as Section 3C  were
    concerned were somewhat similar in that case and the Deputy  Judge,  in
    my view, correctly decided that there could not be a proper  view  that
    there was a distinction between variation and fresh.


31.  Mr Malik argued there that there was a  statutory  distinction  between
    "giving leave to remain" and "varying leave to remain" and that Section
    3C(4) was limited to variation only. That was rejected. Mr Malik in his
    detailed grounds in this case refers to observations  of  Lord  Justice
    Richards in JH (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2009] EWCA Civ 78, in which the effect of 3C was considered, and  what
    materially  the  Lord  Justice  said  was  this.   Having  referred  to
    subSection (4) he went on:


         "Thus, there can be only  one  application  for  variation  of  the
         original leave, and there can be  only  one  decision  (and,  where
         applicable, one appeal).  The possibility of a  series  of  further
         applications leading to an indefinite  extension  of  the  original
         leave is excluded."


32.  Accordingly, as a matter of law, I am afraid Mr  Malik  is  correct  in
    submitting that the application made in April 2015 was  one  which  was
    prohibited by virtue of Section 3C(4) and should not have been  treated
    as a proper application by the Secretary of State.


33.  However, since this application was made the  Secretary  of  State  has
    made a fresh decision.  That was made on 10 October 2016.  That adds, I
    am bound to say, little to the original impugned decision.  It  rejects
    the Article 8 claim, which is understandable since it had already  been
    fairly recently before then rejected on appeal, but what it does not do
    is to deal, in my view, correctly with the six year point.  Indeed,  it
    does not really deal with the six year point at all.


34.  What it does, in relation to length of residence, state is as follows:


         "You arrived in the UK on 7 March 2008.  You then claimed asylum on
         2 April and you were served with an IS.151A as you were  deemed  to
         be an overstayer.  Your application for asylum  was  refused  on  8
         August.  You appealed and  it  was  decided  that  your  claim  was
         allowed under Article 8.  You submitted an application for  further
         leave to remain on 9 March 2012 which was refused in November 2014.
          This was appealed and your  appeal  was  dismissed  and  you  then
         became appeal rights exhausted on  3  August  2015.   Your  overall
         residence in the UK is eight years and seven months,  however  your
         length of residence does not justify a grant of leave  outside  the
         Immigration Rules as there have been no significant delays  by  the
         Home Office in deciding your applications."


    As I say, that letter does not anywhere deal specifically with the  six
    year point which is relied on.


35.  It seems to me in the circumstances that there has not  been  a  proper
    approach to the claim albeit a claim which was when made invalid  based
    upon the six year residence which had occurred in the circumstances and
    which, it is  said,  should  have  been  covered  by  the  transitional
    arrangements because it resulted from a leave which  had  been  granted
    before the change in the approach.


36.  There has been no application to amend  the  application  in  order  to
    deal with the fresh decision made in October but it seems to me that it
    would be contrary to any justice simply to incur unnecessary expense if
    I did not deal with a claim which covered that as well.  It is,  as  is
    accepted, an entirely fresh decision.  It is one which could have  been
    challenged by means of a separate claim for judicial review when it was
    made but that would have been an unnecessary expense.


37.  No doubt the applicant's advisers took the view that they had a  strong
    case in relation to the decision as it stood but of course  I  have  to
    consider because relief is discretionary whether any benefit  would  be
    obtained from the grant of relief and  that  decision  inevitably  will
    have to consider the fresh decision to see whether that in effect means
    that the applicant could not, even if  he  succeeded  in  quashing  the
    decision which was unlawfully made, have any real prospect of  success.
    That, in my judgment, is not the situation here as, as I have said, the
    fresh decision does not specifically deal with or grapple with the  six
    year point, if I may call it that.


38.  It seems to me to be clearly arguable that the  applicant  should  have
    been able to make an application which necessarily would  have  had  to
    have awaited the coming to an end of his 3C extension and he would then
    have been able to stay and to establish that consideration should  have
    been given to the grant of further leave based upon the  fact  that  he
    had had the necessary six year continuous leave by then and it had been
    on the same basis, namely under Article 8, because the effect of 3C  is
    to extend an existing leave on the same basis that it had been granted.


39.  The fact that he would have technically been an overstayer for  a  very
    short period before the application could  be  made  is  not  something
    which, in my view, should conceivably be held against him,  nor  should
    it be held against him if he now makes a claim based upon that and upon
    any updating of an Article 8 claim because we are now some two years on
    and it may well be that his  circumstances  have  changed  so  that  an
    Article 8 claim which was rejected two years ago has some validity.


40.  I have no knowledge of any updated material and I make no  observations
    as to whether that could or could not succeed.  What I do say  is  that
    if he makes an immediate application, by immediate I mean within a very
    few days of this decision, it should not be held against him that  that
    has been delayed because the delay has been occasioned by the existence
    of the previous decisions and  both  of  which,  in  my  judgment,  are
    flawed.  By the previous decisions I mean the one under attack and  the
    fresh decision of October of last year.


41.  It follows that this application is allowed.  Both the  decisions  will
    be quashed.  Insofar  as  it  is  necessary  I  give  formal  leave  to
    challenge the subsequent decision.   There  is  no  disbenefit  to  the
    Secretary of State because she has been enabled to deal with the issues
    covering both the decisions which are before me.


42.  As I say, I have no doubt that following consideration of what  I  have
    said it may well be that a fresh application is made which can be based
    not only if considered appropriate on the six year point  but  also  on
    Article 8, and, as I say, the applicant must not be prejudiced  in  any
    way by a suggestion that he is either out of time or was  not  lawfully
    here during the whole material time.


43.  I do not know whether this is an appropriate judgment to consider  this
    but I would only add that it seems to me that there is a serious lacuna
    in the protection that is provided to individuals who are subjected  to
    adverse decisions against which there  is  no  right  of  appeal.   The
    effect of that is that their only remedy is judicial  review  but  that
    does not give rise to a Section 3C extension  of  leave.   I  can  well
    understand that it would be undesirable to allow a three month  period,
    as it were, which is the normal  maximum  period  for  judicial  review
    although it is of course promptly or within three months.


44.  It seems to me that  serious  consideration  should  be  given  by  the
    Secretary of State to whether some primary  legislation  is  needed  to
    provide the protection, perhaps by  reducing  for  judicial  review  of
    decisions which are unappealable the period allowed before they can  be
    lodged.  It may well be perfectly reasonable to equate  the  period  to
    that permitted for lodging an appeal  and  if  within  that  period  an
    application for judicial review is lodged then an equivalent of Section
    3C protection can be granted until  the  judicial  review  decision  is
    reached.  That, as I say, will be a perfectly fair  means  of  equating
    the necessary protection to that which is provided for appeals and that
    is particularly important where Parliament  has  reduced  significantly
    the decisions against which there can be rights of appeal.


45.  It also would  have  the  other  advantage  of  avoiding  what  is  now
    happening to some extent that those who want  to  gain  time  can  wait
    until virtually the end of the three  month  period  before  making  an
    application and then expect a further delay until refusal if refusal is
    appropriate and a further time if there is  an  oral  renewal  and  yet
    further time if there is an application to the Court of Appeal and  the
    position of the Court of Appeal is at the moment  pretty  appalling  so
    far as delays are concerned.


46.  As I say, if a short time limit, and it does not seem to me  to  be  in
    the least unreasonable to equate it to the time allowed for bringing an
    appeal, is allowed then that misuse of  judicial  review  which,  I  am
    afraid, I have no doubt occurs, we see it regularly in  this  Tribunal,
    can also be avoided.


47.  That is not strictly material to this judgment  although  there  is  an
    element of it involved but I do seriously suggest that it is  something
    that should be actively considered by the Secretary of State.


Costs


MS JAGARAJAH:


48.  We have very carefully considered the question of amended  grounds  and
    at page 24 of our core bundle the  point  that  we  have  made,  having
    studied the Court of Appeal judgment in Caroopen, you know,  the  whole
    point about the Secretary of State not being able to  have  their  cake
    and eat it, first of all he said -


MR JUSTICE COLLINS:


49.  Well, yes but I mean seriously, I'm not sure that it  really  helps  to
    go to that.  I've given you effectively the advantage of  dealing  with
    it without the need to amend.


MS JAGARAJAH:


50.  Thank you.


MR JUSTICE COLLINS:


51.  And I've given you formal leave but you don't have to pay for it.


MS JAGARAJAH:


52.  Thank you.  Thank you very much.  So -


MR JUSTICE COLLINS:


53.  And I don't think Mr Malik is objecting to that in principle.  I  mean,
    he's objecting to the decision but that's a different matter.


MS JAGARAJAH:


54.  Yes, thank you.  So the only issue is -


MR JUSTICE COLLINS:


55.  Yes.  So you want some costs?


MS JAGARAJAH:


56.  Costs, yes.  We've given you -


MR JUSTICE COLLINS:


57.  Are you Legal Aided?


MS JAGARAJAH:


58.  No.


MR JUSTICE COLLINS:


59.  Mr Malik, you've had the costs schedule?


MR MALIK:


60.  No - may I make a couple of short points in principle -


MR JUSTICE COLLINS:


61.  Yes.


MR MALIK:


62.  And they're not major.  This is an issue, allowing the submission of  a
    new claim, is not one that was pleaded at any point.  If  you  look  at
    the original grounds of judicial review, it wasn't the applicant's case
    that he completed the six years in March 2015.  His case  was  that  it
    was an application, was and is, for a Section 3C leave, that he further
    extended his leave when he completed his six  years  in  October  2015.
    You have ruled against the applicant on that point.


MR JUSTICE COLLINS:


63.  But is it a sensible thing not to - if you're effectively saying, as  I
    think you were maybe going to say, that they shouldn't have  all  their
    costs?


MR MALIK:


64.  Yes, there is -


MR JUSTICE COLLINS:


65.  But I don't think it could be sensible and appropriate for me  to  deal
    with that ad hoc.  It seems to me  that  surely  you  should  put  your
    various submissions in writing.  You've made the claim - I mean, as far
    as quantum is concerned, assuming that you were liable to pay all their
    costs, do you object to the amount?


MR MALIK:


66.  Absolutely, yes but -


MR JUSTICE COLLINS:


67.  You do object to the amount as well?


MR MALIK:


68.  I do, yes but - I mean -


MR JUSTICE COLLINS:


69.  I'm saying on the assumption that you had to pay all.


MR MALIK:


70.  Yes, I mean, the claim that is made is for �20,900.


MR JUSTICE COLLINS:


71.  Yes.  All right.  Well, look, what I suggest you do is  I'll  give  you
    within x days, you may put in writing your objection on, if I  may  put
    it this way, liability and quantum.


MR MALIK:


72.  Yes.


MR JUSTICE COLLINS:


73.  There can then be a response within x days to that and the matter  will
    then be - you have the right to respond to the response and there  will
    then be consideration on paper.


MR MALIK:


74.  Yes.


MR JUSTICE COLLINS:


75.  If I say fourteen, fourteen, fourteen,  would  that  be  sufficient  or
    would you prefer -


MS JAGARAJAH:


76.  Yes.


MR JUSTICE COLLINS:


77.  All right.  Fourteen days, fourteen days, fourteen days -


MS JAGARAJAH:


78.  Thank you.


MR JUSTICE COLLINS:


79.  And then the matter can be considered on the papers.   I  think  that's
    the fairest way of dealing with that.


MS JAGARAJAH:


80.  Yes.  Yes.  We're grateful, My Lord.


MR JUSTICE COLLINS:


81.  All right.


Application for Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal


MR MALIK:


82.  My Lord, I guess you  also  have  to  deal  with  the  application  for
    permission to appeal.  I'm not making an application.


MR JUSTICE COLLINS:


83.  No, I shall refuse leave to appeal.  You would have to, if you want  to
    take it further, have to ......... the Court of Appeal. ~~~~0~~~~






                                                                      UTIJR6


                                                                JR/4830/2016


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice







                       The Queen on the application of
                           Annandakannan Srikannan
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent



  Before the Honourable Mr Justice Collins sitting as a Judge of the Upper
                                  Tribunal


            Application for judicial review: substantive decision

Having considered all documents lodged and  having  heard  Ms  Jagarajah  of
Counsel, on behalf of the Applicant, instructed by Sriharans Solicitors  and
Mr Malik of  Counsel,  on  behalf  of  the  Respondent,  instructed  by  the
Government Legal Department at a hearing at  Field  House,  London  on  22nd
February 2017.

     Decision and Order: the application for judicial review is allowed

(1)  The application, which is  extended  to  include  the  decision  of  10
October 2016, is allowed and both decisions are quashed.

(2)  Leave to appeal is refused.

(3)  Any costs order will depend on  submissions  in  writing  which  should
have been made within 28 days of the decision in February 2017.

Reasons

The reasons are contained in the annexed judgment delivered in the  presence
of both parties.
                                    [pic]



         Signed:


                                The Honourable Mr Justice Collins




        Dated:    25 May 2017









Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

 A party may appeal against such a decision to the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3).






