
|[pic]         |In the Upper Tribunal                        |JR/5698/2019  |
|              |(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             |              |
|              |Judicial Review                              |              |
|                                                                           |
|In the matter of an application for Judicial Review                        |
|                                                                           |
|              |The Queen on the application of              |              |
|              |Gjon Matusha                                 |              |
|              |                                             |Applicant     |
|              |versus                                       |              |
|              |                                             |              |
|              |Secretary of State for the Home Department   |              |
|              |                                             |Respondent    |
|                                                                           |
|ORDER                                                                      |
|              |                                             |              |


BEFORE The Hon. Mr Justice Lane, President and Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan

UPON considering all documents lodged and having heard Ms S. Naik and Ms  H.
Foot of counsel, instructed by Alexander Shaw Solicitors, for the  applicant
and Mr B. Seifert of counsel, instructed by GLD, for  the  respondent  at  a
hearing on 27 April 2021.

AND UPON handing down the judgment at a hearing on 17 June 2021.

AND having considered the applicant's written submissions in support  of  an
application for permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal.


IT IS ORDERED THAT:

Substantive decision

    1) The application for judicial  review  of  the  respondent's  decision
       dated 15 August 2019 is refused for the reasons given in the attached
       judgment.

Costs

    2) The applicant shall pay the  respondent's  reasonable  costs,  to  be
       assessed if not agreed.

Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal

    3) Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal is refused because  there
       are no arguable errors of law in the Upper Tribunal decision.


   Ground 1


    4) The applicant  seeks  to  appeal  the  Upper  Tribunal's  refusal  of
       permission in relation to the technical point pleaded in the first of
       the original grounds. It is not necessary to apply for  an  extension
       of time for permission to appeal because the applicant can only apply
       for permission when a decision that disposes of immigration  judicial
       review proceedings is handed down at a hearing: see rule  44(4A)  The
       Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008. Consistent  with  the
       shifting sands of argument in this case the  applicant  relies  on  a
       different point that was not pleaded in the original grounds.  It  is
       difficult to see how the Upper Tribunal could have erred in  refusing
       permission when the point relating to a potential break in continuity
       of leave was never argued at permission stage. In any event, it would
       be open to the applicant to argue in any future application  for  ILR
       that there was no break in leave in view of the agreed terms  of  the
       original consent order and the concession made by the  respondent  to
       UTJ Pitt, that the first revocation decision  'no  longer  has  legal
       force'.


   Ground 2


    5) It is not arguable that the Upper Tribunal erred in law in  assessing
       whether the deception was directly material to  the  grant  of  leave
       under the Legacy Programme. The ongoing  deception  repeated  in  the
       correspondence accompanying the Legacy Questionnaire could  not  have
       been anything other than directly material when Chapter  53  required
       caseworkers to consider 'any evidence of deception practiced  at  any
       stage in the process'. The Upper Tribunal explained in detail how and
       why  the  ongoing  deception  plainly  would  have  made  a  material
       difference to the outcome of the decision had it been known. At  [60]
       the Upper Tribunal concluded that there was a 'direct  link'  between
       the applicant's continued deception about his nationality and age and
       the grant of leave to remain under the Legacy Programme.


    6) It is not arguable that 'failure to  disclose  a  material  fact'  is
       insufficient to meet the condition precedent in section 76(2)(a) NIAA
       2002. To characterise the applicant's actions merely as a failure  to
       disclose a material fact is  misleading  in  circumstances  where  he
       accepts that he lied about his age and nationality i.e. it was not an
       innocent omission nor a mere failure to disclose a material fact. The
       applicant actively and dishonesty claimed to be a  Kosovan  child  to
       deceive the respondent and repeated the lie on several occasions. The
       fact that this lie included a failure to disclose his  true  identity
       did not make it any less of a deception  that  would  engage  section
       76(2)(a).


   Ground 3


    7) The last ground  fails  to  refer  to  the  correspondence  with  the
       respondent  prior  to  the  hearing  nor  provides  a  copy  of  that
       correspondence if it is not in the bundle.  The  Upper  Tribunal  was
       entitled to rely on the position stated by Mr Seifert in his skeleton
       argument, that the respondent did not consider  that  permission  was
       granted to argue this further point. Mr  Seifert  did  not  expressly
       withdraw this argument at the hearing. Even  if  there  had  been  an
       agreement between the parties that the point should be argued, it  is
       a matter for the Upper Tribunal to decide whether it is distinct, and
       whether permission had been granted to argue it. In  any  event,  the
       Upper Tribunal went on to make findings on the submissions that  were
       made. The last ground fails to identity any material errors of law in
       those findings.

Anonymity

    8) The applicant began judicial  review  proceedings  to  challenge  the
       first revocation decision  in  February  2019.  It  appears  that  no
       application was made for anonymity in those proceedings.  This  claim
       was filed in November 2019 yet no application for anonymity has  been
       made until the eve of the hand down. This is not  a  case  where  the
       question of the applicant's dishonesty is in dispute.  The  applicant
       accepts that he lied about his nationality  and  age  and  must  have
       understood that  the  issue  would  be  discussed  in  any  published
       judgment. Had anonymity been of sufficient importance to the  welfare
       of his child it is reasonable to assume that an application could and
       should have been made at a much earlier  stage.  The  fact  that  the
       application is  made  at  the  eleventh  hour  does  not  necessarily
       preclude an order being made if there are  good  reasons  to  do  so.
       However, the application makes nothing more than a general  assertion
       that public exposure of the applicant's dishonest  actions  would  be
       contrary to the best interests of the child  without  particularising
       how or why it might affect  the  child  when  he  is  only  mentioned
       obliquely and is not named in the decision. Open justice is the  norm
       unless there are good reasons to  make  an  order,  but  insufficient
       reasons have been given to justify an order in this case.


    9) The application for an anonymity order is refused.


Signed:     M.Canavan
           Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan

Dated:           17 June 2021











The date on which this order was sent is given below


For completion by the Upper Tribunal Immigration and Asylum Chamber

Sent / Handed to the applicant, respondent and any interested  party  /  the
applicant's, respondent's and any interested party's solicitors on (date):

Solicitors:
Ref  No.
Home Office Ref:


Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

A party may appeal against such a decision to  the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
point of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal should apply to the  Upper
Tribunal for permission, at the hearing at which the decision is  given.  If
no application is made,  the  Tribunal  must  nonetheless  consider  at  the
hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule 44(4B)  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3).
                                    [pic]
                                                   Case No: JR/5698/2019 (V)
IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
(IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER)
                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                            London, EC4A 1WR

                                                                17 June 2021
                                   Before:

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN

                            _____________________
                                  Between:

                                  THE QUEEN
                            on the application of
                                GJON MATUSHA
                                                                   Applicant
                                   - and -

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
                           ______________________

                        Ms S. Naik QC and Ms H. Foot
        (instructed by Alexander Shaw Solicitors), for the applicant

                                Mr B. Seifert
     (instructed by the Government Legal Department) for the respondent

      Hearing date (remote hearing by video conference): 27 April 2021

                        ____________________________

                               J U D G M E N T
                        ____________________________
Judge Canavan:

 1. This judgment considers the respondent's  power  to  revoke  Indefinite
    Leave to Remain  (ILR)  under  section  76(2)(a)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  (as  amended)  (NIAA  2002)  and  the
    associated policy guidance, Revocation  of  Indefinite  Leave  (Version
    4.0) (19 October 2015), in the case of a person  who  was  granted  ILR
    under the Legacy Programme i.e. under an operational programme.


 2. The applicant seeks to challenge the  respondent's  decision  dated  15
    August 2019 to revoke ILR granted on 12 August 2010.


 3. Due to the continued need to take precautions to prevent the spread  of
    Covid 19 the hearing took place in a court room  at  Field  House  with
    counsel appearing by video conference and with the facility for  others
    to attend remotely. We were satisfied that this was consistent with the
    open justice principle, that the parties could make  their  submissions
    clearly, and that the case could  be  heard  fairly  by  this  mode  of
    hearing.

Background

 4. It is necessary to set out the background to the case  in  some  detail
    because it  is  important  to  understand  the  context  in  which  the
    decisions to grant ILR and then to revoke it were made.

Asylum application

 5. The applicant is a citizen of Albania who was born on 04 May  1980.  He
    entered the UK illegally on 14 September 1999 with the assistance of an
    agent. He was 19 years old on arrival in the UK.


 6. The applicant applied for asylum the following day,  claiming  that  he
    was born in Kosovo on 04 May 1982. He accepts that he made false claims
    about his nationality and date of birth.


 7. The policy framework  in  place  at  the  time  is  not  disputed.  The
    widespread persecution of Kosovar Albanians in the years running up  to
    and during the conflict that took place in 1998 and 1999 led to a  rare
    situation whereby  the  respondent  recognised  ethnic  Albanians  from
    Kosovo as refugees or  granted  them  temporary  protection  solely  on
    account of their ethnicity. By the time the Immigration Appeal Tribunal
    considered the position in Dyli (Protection - UNMIK  -  Arif  -  IFA  -
    Art.1D) Kosovo CG* [2000] UKIAT  00001  the  situation  in  Kosovo  had
    changed, as had the respondent's policy. Hostilities ceased on 10  June
    1999 on the same day that the United Nations  Security  Council  passed
    resolution S/RES/1244. The NATO led Kosovo Force (KFOR) entered  Kosovo
    and the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
    was created. In light of these developments  the  respondent  suspended
    consideration of asylum claims from the Republic of Yugoslavia  (as  it
    then was) but continued to grant Exceptional Leave to Remain  (ELR)  to
    asylum seekers who applied before 24 March 1999. On 13  September  1999
    the Home Secretary announced a return to  the  usual  position  whereby
    claims would be considered on their individual merits.

 8. The policy relating to  claims  by  Kosovar  Albanians  had  only  just
    changed when the applicant entered the UK. It seems  unlikely  that  he
    would have been aware of the change when he claimed asylum, and even if
    he was, there was still a far better chance of being granted  leave  on
    humanitarian grounds than if he  had  claimed  asylum  as  an  Albanian
    national. The most  likely  motive  for  the  first  deception  was  to
    increase his chance of being granted leave to remain  at  a  time  when
    many genuine Kosovar Albanians had been recognised as refugees or  were
    being granted ELR. The most likely motive for the second deception  was
    to take advantage of the respondent's policy to grant limited leave  to
    remain to unaccompanied asylum seeking children (UASC).


 9. The asylum application was  not  considered  promptly.  The  claim  was
    refused on 27 March 2001, by which time the  situation  in  Kosovo  had
    stabilised. Even according to the false age given by the  applicant  he
    did not benefit from the UASC policy. It is said  that  an  appeal  was
    dismissed on 24 July  2001  and  his  appeal  rights  became  exhausted
    thereafter.


10. The applicant failed to report to  the  respondent  when  required.  It
    appears that he was listed as an absconder. The respondent's GCID notes
    from August 2010  record  that  no  absconder  action  was  taken.  The
    decision letter claims  that  an  enforcement  visit  did  take  place.
    Whether absconder action was taken or not, the  applicant  remained  in
    the UK in the knowledge that he had no leave to remain and  was  liable
    to removal.

Legacy Programme

11. In July 2006 the respondent instigated the Case  Resolution  Programme,
    more commonly known as the Legacy Programme. We  will  not  repeat  the
    history here because details of the  programme  were  outlined  in  the
    Administrative Court decisions of Hakemi & Others v  SSHD  [2012]  EWGC
    1967 (Admin) and Geraldo & Others v SSHD [2013] EWHC 2763  (Admin).  In
    Geraldo, the broad purpose of the programme was summarised as follows:


         '39.     The Case Resolution Programme or the Legacy Programme, was
             instigated by the government in July 2006 to deal with a  vast
             backlog of unresolved asylum claims, that is to  say  for  the
             most part failed asylum claims, some going back many years  in
             which the unsuccessful claimant had neither been removed nor a
             decision made to grant him or her leave to remain in the UK on
             some basis other than the claimed refugee status either within
             the Immigration Rules or outside the Rules, and with  many  of
             whom the Home Office had lost contact. One of the problems was
             that as at July 2006 there were in the region  of  400-450,000
             electronic and paper records concerning such claims within the
             Home Office which had not been opened or reviewed (and  indeed
             once the programme was under way further records  came  to  be
             included, ultimately reaching a total caseload of some 500,000
             - see the report of  the  Parliamentary  Home  Affairs  Select
             Committee for April - July 2011) but which were recognised  to
             be  'riddled  with  duplication  and  errors  and   cases   of
             individuals who have since died or left the country or  become
             EU citizens',  (to  quote  the  statement  of  the  then  Home
             Secretary Dr John Reid MP to Parliament in July 2006).  As  Mr
             Neil Forshaw told me, until the exercise of going through  the
             vast archive of assorted records was  undertaken  to  identify
             how many cases remained to be dealt with, the true  nature  of
             the task undertaken under the programme could not be known.


         40.     The programme was an operational programme only. That is to
             say it was a programme designed to deal with the backlog, with
             its own internal priorities and procedures, but it was  always
             made clear that the programme did  not  involve  any  kind  of
             amnesty and that cases handled within the programme would have
             applied to them the same generally prevailing law  and  policy
             which applied to all other immigration and asylum cases, being
             handled within other units elsewhere within the UKBA. I say at
             once  that  none  of  the  evidence  before  me  supports  the
             proposition  that  there  was  a  discrete   'legacy   policy'
             different from that applied  to  other,  for  example,  failed
             asylum cases not within the programme, where consideration was
             being given to the grant of leave outside the Rules  (on  this
             aspect see further the decision of  Burton  J  in  Hakemi  and
             Others [2012] EWHC 1967 (Admin). In other words the  programme
             did not purport to create any new substantive  rights  or  new
             basis for the grant of leave.'


12. A report prepared by the Independent Chief  Inspector  of  Borders  and
    Immigration, John  Vine,  in  2012[1]  was  'highly  critical'  of  the
    programme. Some of the findings were summarised in Geraldo as follows:


         '64.     I should record that the Vine  report  referred  to,  does
             contain material understandably relied upon by  the  claimants
             as evidence of maladministration and administrative  delay  on
             the part of the defendant in dealing  with  cases  which  fell
             within the legacy programme and as  explaining  why  in  their
             particular cases the defendant  never  got  round  to  opening
             their files before she did. Thus for example Mr Vine  referred
             as at September 2011 (report  para  5.124)  to  a  backlog  of
             100,000 pieces of correspondence with some  28,000  pieces  of
             post remaining unopened, and to the likelihood that many cases
             placed into the Controlled Archive at the end of the  CRD  had
             been done so incorrectly 'on the  basis  that  the  applicants
             and/or  legal  representatives  had  not  replied  to   Agency
             correspondence when in fact they had'. I  should  add  however
             that Miss Anderson does not accept that this material has  any
             relevance to these individual cases,  the  boxes  of  unopened
             correspondence being peculiar to the short period of  time  in
             2011, not relevant to these cases, when the work  of  the  CRD
             was being transferred to the CAAU.


         65.      Further the report criticises the inadequacy  of  'tracing
             steps' undertaken by the  UKBA  to  trace  'absconders'  (para
             5.29), the failure of the Agency to follow up employer contact
             details held on applicants  in  order  to  trace  'applicants'
             (paras 5.54/5.55) and the further failure  by  the  Agency  to
             undertake 'any proactive work within CRD to locate  and  trace
             any of the individuals in our sample prior  to  placing  these
             cases into the asylum controlled  archive'  (5.21).  This  was
             said to be a serious failing. The Agency was also said not  to
             be 'meeting the commitments it had made to carry out extensive
             checks in these cases' with the  point  being  made  that  the
             Agency should have been much  more  proactive  in  undertaking
             data  matching  exercises  to  identify  whether  any  of  the
             individuals were known to other  government  departments  (for
             example the Department of Work and Pensions (DWP) or the HMRC)
             or financial institutions (e.g. credit reference agencies). Mr
             Forshaw  was  cross-examined  on  these  particular  'tracing'
             failures in the context of Mr Aroun who had  been  working  up
             until 2008, with the suggestion he had been capable  of  being
             traced between 1998 -  2008  through  the  DWP.  Mr  Forshaw's
             evidence was however that the  tracing  requirements  referred
             to, were linked to  the  controlled  archive  and  were  steps
             undertaken to confirm that  a  person  could  be  put  in  the
             archive as an untraced person whereas none of  the  claimant's
             cases were placed in the  controlled  archive.  Moreover  Miss
             Anderson made the further point that  none  of  this  material
             could have any relevance to Mr  Aroun  who,  on  the  evidence
             referred to by Mr Bray, was never in the CRD cohort  of  cases
             until he got in touch again after some  10  years,  his  entry
             into the UK predating the  CRD  database  (and  possibly  also
             because he had been treated as a  marriage  case  and  not  an
             asylum case at his own request).'


13. Ms Naik referred to other aspects of the  Vine  report.  She  submitted
    that the nature of the programme meant that the  respondent  could  not
    use the mere fact that the applicant was an absconder or that there was
    a long period of non-compliance due to Home Office delay to say that he
    should not have been granted ILR. The purpose of the programme  was  to
    resolve  a  large  number  of  cases  of  failed  asylum  seekers.  The
    respondent  was  prepared  to   'overlook   adverse   behaviour'   when
    considering  cases  under  the  programme.  The  evidence  pointed   to
    'flexible consideration' of the character and conduct assessment  under
    paragraph 395C of the immigration rules. She said that the Vine  report
    showed that there was  no  coherent  policy  on  how  to  approach  the
    assessment, but the report indicated that a delay of  about  6-8  years
    was likely to be sufficient to consider granting  leave.  At  5.88  the
    report set out  some  of  the  criteria  used  in  the  decision-making
    process. They are consistent with the guidance outlined in Chapter  53,
    which was the guidance caseworkers followed  when  considering  a  case
    under paragraph 395C. Figure 13 of the Vine report listed some  of  the
    assessment indicators as follows:


         1. Criminal convictions over threshold?
         2. Any activities meriting exclusion from the UK?
         3. Agency delay has contributed to a period  of  residence  over  4
            years?
         4. If evidence of previous non-compliance, is  this  outweighed  by
            length of residence and recent compliance?
         5. Any evidence of connections to the UK?
         6. Limited prospect of enforcing removal?


14. Although the Vine report indicates that in a  large  numbers  of  cases
    considered under the Legacy Programme people were  granted  leave,  and
    that on some occasions serious non-compliance was either missed or  not
    given sufficient weight, it is clear from some of the figures  outlined
    in the report that the programme was not  an  amnesty.  The  number  of
    refusals was not insignificant. We were not referred  to  any  evidence
    giving the overall statistics for grants and refusals, but Figure 12 of
    the Vine report took a sample of cases  from  April  2011  to  February
    2012. At the beginning of that period refusals amounted to 21%  of  the
    total although the figure dropped to 9% by the end of that  period.  In
    Geraldo, the court noted the following figures:


         'By the time the CRD was wound up in 2011, HASC in  its  report  of
         April-July 2011 (published November 2011) noted a final position of
         '500,500'  records  of  which  479,000  cases  were  said   to   be
         'concluded' of which 172,000 had been granted  'leave  to  remain',
         37,500 had been removed, and 268,000 were 'others'  which  included
         duplicate records, errors or  cases  in  the  'controlled  archive'
         which then then stood at 98,000 to which 500 would be added if  not
         traced within 6 months.  3,000  stood  to  be  granted  subject  to
         security checks.'


15. The Legacy Programme did not operate as an  application  for  leave  to
    remain. Those who were eligible for consideration under  the  programme
    were supposed to be invited to complete a questionnaire for Home Office
    caseworkers to consider. In this case the GCID notes recorded that  the
    file was sent 'to Layby' on 01 October 2005.  They  record  no  further
    action until 16 June 2009 when the note stated:


         'Received letter from  subject  dated  (20/03/09)  Progress  update
         requested and complained we  have  not  acknowledged  his  previous
         correspondence dated (29/12/08) which enclosed a  completed  legacy
         questionnaire.'


16. The hearing bundle contains a  copy  of  an  undated  letter  from  the
    applicant. It is reasonable to infer  from  the  content  that  it  was
    likely to be the letter dated 29 December 2008 referred to in the  GCID
    notes. The applicant outlined the false nationality and date  of  birth
    given in his original asylum claim. The opening paragraph of the letter
    suggests that the applicant instigated the approach to the Home  Office
    although  it  is  likely  that  he  would  have   been   eligible   for
    consideration under the Legacy Programme in any event.


         'As you are aware, the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
         announced Legacy in July 2006. I wish to  apply  for  my  leave  to
         remain in the United Kingdom in line with the Legacy  announced  by
         the Secretary of State for the Home Department.'


17. The applicant enclosed a completed questionnaire and  other  supporting
    documents. The fact that the letter  repeated  the  false  identity  in
    itself might not be that controversial had he then gone on to admit the
    deception, because those were the details under which he was  known  to
    the respondent. However, the applicant went on actively to maintain the
    deception by making a false representation  that  he  still  feared  to
    return to Kosovo. The letter said:


         'I also submit that the situation in Kosovo is still very unsettled
         and uncertain. In such a grave situation, my return from the United
         Kingdom to Kosovo will result in breach of my rights as  guaranteed
         by the European Convention on Human Rights.'


18. There is no copy of the questionnaire to assess what  other  statements
    the applicant might have made, but it is clear from  the  cover  letter
    that he continued the deception  in,  what  he  considered  to  be,  an
    application for leave to remain under the Legacy Programme.


19. The Legacy Programme did not purport to set  out  any  new  substantive
    rights or a new basis for  leave  to  remain.  It  was  an  operational
    exercise carried out within the existing framework of  the  immigration
    rules albeit with the  broad  objective  of  reducing  the  backlog  of
    unresolved cases. The applicant was granted ILR on 12 August  2010.  At
    that date, decisions were made within the framework of  paragraph  395C
    of the immigration rules, which stated:


         395C.     Before  a  decision  to  remove  under  section  10  (the
             Immigration Act 1971) is given, regard  will  be  had  to  all
             relevant factors known to the Secretary of State including:
             (i)       age;
             (ii)      length of residence in the United Kingdom;
             (iii)     strength of connections with the United Kingdom;
             (iv)      personal history, including character,  conduct  and
         employment record;
             (v)       domestic circumstances;
             (vi)      previous criminal  record  and  the  nature  of  any
                  offence of which the person has been convicted;
             (vii)     compassionate circumstances;
             (viii)    any representations received on the person's behalf.

20. The policy guidance in place at the relevant time  was  'Chapter  53  -
    Extenuating Circumstances', which was last  updated  on  26  July  2010
    (archived  on  09  August  2010).  The  policy  provided  guidance   to
    caseworkers on how to assess a case under paragraph 395C. At 53.1.1 the
    guidance began with general instructions  on  how  to  apply  paragraph
    395C.


         'Before a decision  to  remove  is  taken  on  a  case,  the  case-
         owner/operational staff must consider all  known  relevant  factors
         (both  positive  and  negative).  .....  Removal  should   not   be
         considered  in  any  case  which  qualifies  for  leave  under  the
         Immigration  Rules,  existing  policies  or  where  it   would   be
         inappropriate to do so under this policy.


         Relevant factors are set out in paragraph 395C of  the  immigration
         rules and in the guidance below, but this list is  not  exhaustive.
         Additional  factors  to  consider  in  relation  to  deportation  /
         administrative removal of an individual as well as  family  members
         and civil partners  are  set  out  in  paragraphs  365-367  of  the
         immigration rules.'

21. At 53.1.2 the next section set out guidance about  the  factors  to  be
    considered under paragraph 395C. It began by making clear that it was a
    holistic assessment.

         'The consideration of relevant factors needs to be taken as a whole
         rather than individually, for example, the length of residence  may
         not of itself be a factor, but it might be when combined  with  age
         and strength of connections with the UK.'

22. A person's age would be considered as well as their length of residence
    in the UK. The guidance recognised  that,  in  general,  the  longer  a
    person had lived in the UK, the stronger  their  ties  would  be.  More
    weight would be attached to the length of time a child spent in the  UK
    compared to an adult. The guidance stated that residence accrued  as  a
    result of non-compliance with the requirements of  immigration  control
    would weigh against an individual. There  was  also  guidance  on  what
    weight should be given to a delay in decision-making when it led to the
    strengthening of private and family life ties to the UK. The assessment
    of non-compliance and delay in decision-making was focussed through the
    lens of the operational objectives of the  Legacy  Programme.  However,
    the programme was not an amnesty and  not  all  negative  factors  were
    waived. It  is  clear  that  the  personal  history  of  an  applicant,
    including evidence of deception, still formed part of  the  assessment.
    The guidance went on to state:


         'Personal history  (including  character,  conduct  and  employment
    record):
         When considering an individual's character and conduct, regard must
         be given to whether;


         . There  is  evidence  of  criminality  that  meets  the  Criminal
           Casework Directorate (CCD) threshold; or
         . The individual has been  convicted  of  a  particularly  serious
           crime (below the CCD threshold)  involving  violence,  a  sexual
           offence, offences against children or a serious drug offence; or


         . There are serious reasons for considering  that  the  individual
           falls within the asylum exclusion clauses; or
         . It is considered undesirable to permit the individual to  remain
           in the UK in light of exceptional circumstances, or in light  of
           their character, conduct or associations, or the fact that  they
           represent a threat to national security.

        Caseowners must also take account  of  any  evidence  of  deception
        practiced at any stage in the process, attempts  to  frustrate  the
        process (for example, failure to attend interviews, supply required
        documentation), whether the individual has maintained contact  with
        the UK Border Agency, as  required,  and  whether  they  have  been
        actively pressing for resolution of their immigration  status.  The
        caseowner must assess all evidence of compliance and non compliance
        in the round. The weight placed on periods of absconding should  be
        proportionate to the length of compliant residence in the  UK.  For
        example, additional weight should be placed on lengthy  periods  of
        absconding which form a significant proportion of the  individual's
        residence in the UK.'

23. It is clear  that  even  if  the  assessment  was  viewed  through  the
    operational objective of the Legacy Programme, the nature and extent of
    any negative factors still formed part of an evaluative  assessment  of
    whether it was appropriate to grant leave to remain.


24. Negative factors relating to a person's immigration history might range
    in scale and seriousness. At the lower end of the scale a person  might
    enter the UK with leave to enter, overstay their visa,  but  not  carry
    out any other unlawful activities. Further up the scale a person  might
    enter illegally and work  without  permission  using  false  documents.
    Others  may  deliberately  abscond.   Others   may   actively   falsify
    information and documents  to  support  an  application  for  leave  to
    remain. Even more serious are those who become involved  in  fraud  and
    serious criminality relating to  the  immigration  system  or  who  are
    convicted of other criminal offences.


25. Similarly, a range of circumstances might occur  when  considering  the
    case of a failed asylum seeker. At the lower end of the scale might  be
    a genuine claim which fails because the evidence shows that the  person
    does not have a well-founded fear of persecution. Another person  might
    come from a refugee producing country with the core of a genuine  claim
    but embellish certain aspects of their account in a  misguided  attempt
    to improve their chances of  protection.  Others  may  gloss  over  the
    manner in which they  travelled  to  and  entered  the  UK  because  it
    involved a journey through a safe  third  country  or  assistance  from
    organised criminal networks.


26. At the more serious end of the scale are  those  who  deliberately  put
    forward what they know to be a false protection claim in  a  fraudulent
    attempt to obtain leave to remain in  the  UK.  This  might  include  a
    fabricated account, but could include lies about a person's nationality
    or age. The reason why this type of behaviour is so serious is  because
    it exploits provisions designed to  protect  the  most  vulnerable  and
    those in need of protection. A knowingly false claim to be  a  national
    from a refugee  producing  country  undermines  the  integrity  of  the
    Refugee Convention and other international  protection  mechanisms.  If
    false nationality claims are made in large numbers it might  give  rise
    to suspicion of genuine applicants from that country,  making  it  more
    difficult for them to obtain protection. Policies and  public  services
    designed to support UASC are undermined by those who  lie  about  their
    age to gain a greater level of support or a period of limited leave  to
    remain to which they are not  entitled.  Public  resources  are  wasted
    investigating and processing fraudulent claims.


27. In light of the above we find that Ms Naik's suggestion that the Legacy
    Programme was a 'concessionary scheme' is inaccurate.  The  operational
    objective  was  to  resolve  the  large  backlog  of  cases   involving
    outstanding asylum claims and failed asylum seekers. When an assessment
    under paragraph 395C was focussed through that objective, in many cases
    less weight was given to certain acts of non-compliance and more weight
    may have been given to the length of time a person had been in  the  UK
    than usual. However, the character and conduct of a person was still  a
    relevant factor in assessing a case under  the  Legacy  Programme.  The
    programme did not operate as a general amnesty regardless of a person's
    behaviour. The nature and extent of any negative factors were  relevant
    to the exercise of discretion. Although many people who were liable  to
    removal  were  granted  leave  to  remain,  the   respondent   retained
    discretion to refuse to grant leave under paragraph 395C in appropriate
    cases.

Legacy decision


28. As is the usual format for such letters,  the  decision  to  grant  ILR
    under the Legacy Programme dated 12 August 2010 did not give reasons.


29. The GCID notes for the relevant period provide  an  indication  of  the
    reasons given by the caseworker for deciding to grant ILR. A note dated
    12  August  2010  included  a  series   of   standard   questions   for
    consideration  under  paragraph  395C.  The  caseworker  then  inserted
    relevant information relating to the case.  The  notes  summarised  the
    application history. In a section relating to delay, the caseworker was
    asked to note whether in the case of a  single  applicant  a  delay  in
    decision making may have contributed to  residence  of  more  than  6-8
    years. The notes record that the applicant had resided in  the  UK  for
    over 10 years. In relation to his character and conduct the notes said:


         'Is the applicant of good character?
         YES
         Details (Include details of any exclusion  decision,  any  concerns
         about their character, conduct or associations  or  any  threat  to
         national security)
         There is no evidence to suggest that Mr Matusha has  been  involved
         in activities that engage the refugee convention exclusion clauses,
         and has no criminal records. PNC returned clear.


         Has the applicant complied with UKBA?
         YES
         Details (Please detail evidence e.g. not  attending  an  interview,
         failure  to  report,  failure  to  co  operate   (sic)   with   re-
         documentation and periods of absconding)
         The applicant's reporting was set up for 18/08/03, applicant failed
         to show. However, the UKBA failed to initiate any absconder  action
         against the applicant during or after that period.'

30. The notes went on to record that there was no barrier to his removal to
    'Serbia'. When assessing the strength of the applicant's connections to
    the UK the notes indicate that  the  decision-maker  proceeded  on  the
    assumption that he was a 'Serbian male' who 'arrived in the UK over  10
    years ago'. The notes summarised the decision as follows:


         'Decision:
         (After assessing all the evidence in the round briefly explain your
         decision)


         Mr Matusha has accumulated over a  10  year  residence  in  the  UK
         (sic). The UKBA has delayed enforcing  removal  of  the  applicant,
         since his ARE date of 24/07/01, adding to his length  of  residence
         in the UK. Although the applicant absconded, and failed  to  attend
         his reporting events, the UKBA failed  to  initiate  any  absconder
         action against the applicant during, or after that period.


         The applicants (sic) length of residence, is the compelling  factor
         regarding this case, in justifying Mr Matusha remaining in the UK.'


31. The notes make clear that the caseworker made the decision based on the
    false information given to them by the applicant when he first  claimed
    asylum. The decision was made in ignorance of a relevant fact, that the
    applicant lied about his nationality and age when he claimed asylum  in
    1999, and continued to  maintain  the  deception  in  relation  to  his
    application for consideration under the Legacy Programme.

Naturalisation application

32. On 17 July 2013 the  applicant  applied  to  naturalise  as  a  British
    citizen maintaining his false identity. The respondent  made  enquiries
    in Albania. Checks disclosed that he  was  likely  to  be  an  Albanian
    national born in Shkoder on 04 May 1980. The respondent  wrote  to  the
    applicant on 10 September 2013 providing the outcome of  the  enquiries
    and gave him an opportunity to submit proof of his claimed identity.


33. The decision letter dated 15 August 2019, which is the subject of  this
    challenge, stated that the  applicant  responded  to  the  Home  Office
    request for information on 24 September 2013 with  a  letter  from  the
    Embassy of the Republic of  Kosovo  Consular  Mission  in  London.  The
    letter stated that he could only obtain a birth certificate  and  other
    registry documentation in Kosovo. This letter does not appear to be  in
    the bundle, but it does not  seem  to  be  disputed  that  he  provided
    evidence from the Kosovan Consulate in London. Even when presented with
    evidence of his true identity the applicant continued to maintain  that
    he was Kosovan and tried to  explain  away  his  inability  to  produce
    evidence of the fact.


34. The respondent refused the application for naturalisation on 03 October
    2013 with reference to the good character requirement:

         'As you are unable to provide any such documentary evidence of your
         birth  in  Kosovo,  we  remain  of  the   opinion   (despite   your
         correspondence of the 24 September 2013) that  you  have  not  been
         open and honest in your dealings with the  Home  Office  and  as  a
         result your application has been refused as we do not consider that
         you meet the good character requirement for naturalisation.'

NTL application

35. The applicant met his partner in 2014. On 08 September 2015 he  applied
    for a 'No Time Limit' (NTL) stamp to be placed in an Albanian  passport
    issued in his true identity on 17  April  2015.  He  also  submitted  a
    current Albanian ID document, his Albanian  birth  certificate,  and  a
    copy of the UK travel document  issued  in  his  false  identity  which
    showed a number of visits to Albania.


36.  The  applicant  prepared  a  witness  statement  in  support  of   the
    application. Although the statement was presented as a  declaration  of
    his past 'mistakes' and stated that he wanted to  'take  responsibility
    for my actions', in reality, the lies that the applicant  told  in  his
    original asylum claim had already been exposed  by  the  respondent  in
    2013. The motivation for the applicant  to  apply  for  an  NTL  to  be
    endorsed in his Albanian passport was his desire to marry and  start  a
    family.


37. The applicant explained that he was young and  impressionable  when  he
    arrived in the UK. He asserted that he had escaped a country  that  was
    coming out of a period of instability and 'in many respects  was  worse
    than Kosovo at the time'. He and many others sought  to  leave  Albania
    for 'a more stable future and a safer way of life'. He travelled with a
    group of Albanians with the assistance of smugglers. His statement went
    on to give the following explanation:

         '6.      Upon arrival to the UK the smuggling gangs referred us  to
            a law firm where the  Albanian  translator  for  that  law  firm
            registered us as Kosovan nationals. The group and  I  were  told
            that if we disclosed to anyone that we were Albanians then  they
            would immediately get us deported. I was in  constant  fear  and
            under immense pressure from the smugglers.


         7. It was then on the 15th September 1999 that I  went  to  Croydon
            and claimed    Asylum as a Kosovan National. This was a decision
            that I have lived with for the next 16 years and it has not been
            easy to bear this burden and  deny  my  own  nationality.  There
            hasn't been a day that I haven't regretted my decision but as  a
            young man it became more and more difficult to  tell  the  truth
            and almost felt like I have to keep the pretence up for fear  of
            repercussions.


         8. I cannot continue living my life like this and want to  start  a
            family and settle down. I want to start a new chapter of my life
            with the right set of values and morals which I want to teach my
            children. I want to tell them the difference about right,  wrong
            and building a platform for them to find their own identity  and
            follow their path in life. Therefore in order for me to teach my
            children, first I must make amends  for  my  mistakes  and  take
            responsibility for my actions.'

38. The respondent refused the application in  a  decision  dated  13  July
    2016. She outlined the applicant's immigration history and his repeated
    use of deception relating to his  identity.  The  respondent  concluded
    that the applicant knowingly practised deception to  obtain  ILR  under
    the Legacy Programme. She refused to endorse the  passport  because  it
    was in a different identity to the  one  in  which  the  applicant  was
    granted leave. The respondent retained his Albanian  passport  'pending
    further investigations  into  his  immigration  status  in  the  United
    Kingdom'.

Revocation decisions

39.  Having  known  about  the  deception  since  2013,  and  retained  the
    applicant's  passport  pending  further  investigation  in  2016,   the
    respondent took no  further  action  until  08  November  2018  when  a
    decision was made to revoke ILR under section 76 NIAA 2002 ('the  first
    revocation decision').


40. Section 76 was amended by the Immigration Act 2014 (IA 2014) to  remove
    the requirement that a person  could  not  be  removed  'for  legal  or
    practical reasons'. The parties agreed that at the date of the relevant
    decision the applicable wording was as follows:


         76.      Revocation of leave to enter or remain
                  .....
             (2)  The Secretary of State may revoke  a  person's  indefinite
                  leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom if -
             (a)  the leave was obtained by deception.


41. The respondent's policy, Revocation of Indefinite Leave  (Version  4.0)
    (19 October 2015) states at 1.3  that  one  of  the  policy  intentions
    behind revocation is to 'instil public confidence  in  the  immigration
    system by ensuring any abuse is tackled and  dealt  with  accordingly'.
    Paragraph 3.2 says the following:


         '3.2     Deception Cases
             Section 76(2) gives the Secretary of State the power to revoke
             a person's indefinite leave to enter or remain in the UK where
             a person has obtained indefinite leave to enter or  remain  in
             the UK by deception.
                 .....
             Deception has the same  meaning  as  in  paragraph  6  of  the
             Immigration Rules. This means making false representations  or
             submitting false documents (whether or  not  material  to  the
             application), or failing to disclose material facts.'


42. Section 4 of the guidance sets  out  four  'Reasons  for  not  Revoking
    Indefinite Leave to Remain'.


         '4.1     Passage of time
             Length of time spent in the UK may constitute a reason for not
             revoking indefinite leave. It would only be relevant to  cases
             under section 76(2) and 76(3). For cases under  section  76(1)
             length of time spent in the UK will not constitute  a  bar  to
             revocation of indefinite  leave  because  it,  and  any  other
             Article 8 considerations, will have been taken into account in
             deciding whether the person should be deported.


             What is of more relevance is  the  length  of  time  that  has
             passed since the incident(s) which is/are causing  the  review
             of a person's continuing entitlement to indefinite leave.


             For example, indefinite leave would not  normally  be  revoked
             where the deception in question or where the  person's  travel
             to their home country occurred more than five years ago.  Each
             case must be considered on its merits. The longer  the  person
             has been in the UK or, more crucially, the more  time  it  has
             been  since  the  incident,  the  less  likely  it   will   be
             appropriate to revoke ILR.

            4.2  Genuine Mistakes/Errors
             In deception cases, indefinite leave should  not  normally  be
             revoked just because of minor errors in the  application.  For
             example,  indefinite  leave  would  not  normally  be  revoked
             because the  person  has  supplied  an  incorrect  address  or
             misspelt  a  name  on   their   application   form.   However,
             deliberately providing false information because it is  likely
             to result in a 'hit' or 'match'  when  checked  against  other
             Government  departments  or   Agencies   would   normally   be
             considered an attempt to deceive, as would providing a date of
             birth or nationality which is incorrect, in order  to  make  a
             grant of leave more likely.
             ....


             The  decision  maker  must  assess  the  nature,  extent   and
             significance of the information which was  either  incorrectly
             supplied or omitted. There should  be  clear  and  justifiable
             evidence of deception and the deception was  material  to  the
             grant of leave.


            4.3  Previously Overlooked or Considered
             Indefinite leave should not  normally  be  revoked  where  the
             decision  maker  had  the  information  available  and  either
             previously overlooked it, could reasonably be expected to  act
             on it or considered it and granted anyway.


             Where the decision maker  had  the  power/authority  to  grant
             leave and did so in error and if there was no deception by the
             applicant, it will not normally be appropriate to  revoke  the
             indefinite leave to remain or enter.

            4.4  Compelling and Compassionate Circumstances
             There may be exceptional circumstances in an  individual  case
             where it  would  not  be  appropriate  to  revoke  a  person's
             indefinite leave, notwithstanding the fact that they appear to
             fall within the remit of this policy.

             Examples might include, but are not limited to,  persons  with
             serious mental health issues, victims of human trafficking  or
             victims of domestic violence. Each case must be considered  on
             its individual merits.'

43. Section 6 of the policy provides guidance on the 'Process for Referring
    and  Considering  Cases',  including  the  following   guidance   about
    deception cases:


         '6.2.2   Deception Cases
             A person whose leave was obtained by deception will have  this
             revoked under Section 76(2) and will, unless any  other  leave
             is granted, be liable to removal under Section 10(1). In  such
             cases a person should normally be removed from the UK.


             Examples where removal may not be appropriate, but  revocation
             should still be pursued include - but are  not  limited  to  -
             where a person has:


                i. been granted leave as a refugee and  it  is  subsequently
                   established  that  they  are  not  the  nationality  they
                   claimed to be;
               ii. been granted leave on the basis of  marriage  and  it  is
                   subsequently established that the marriage was a sham  or
                   that the letter of support was forged or  the  spouse  is
                   not a British citizen/settled in the UK or the person had
                   not disclosed that the  marriage  had  already  ended  in
                   divorce;
              iii. used different or multiple identities;
               iv. submitted  forged  documents  such  as  bank  statements,
                   employment references;
                v. failed to declare that they  have  criminal  convictions,
                   including those outside  of  the  UK  particularly  where
                   these would have arguably led to a different  outcome  on
                   the application;
               vi. failed to declare that they have  been  involved  in  war
                   crimes, crimes against humanity or genocide; or
              vii. failed to declare that they are a member or supporter  of
                   a proscribed organisation.'


44. Soon after the first revocation decision  the  applicant  made  further
    representations in response to a section 120 notice. By this  time,  he
    had a partner and a child who was a British  citizen.  On  05  February
    2019 the respondent granted 30 months leave to remain  on  the  10-year
    route to settlement. Dissatisfied with  this  response,  the  applicant
    sought to challenge the decision to revoke ILR by way of an application
    for judicial review filed on 06 February 2018.  The  claim  settled  by
    consent on 24 June 2019. The respondent undertook  to  make  a  further
    decision.


45. The respondent maintained the decision  to  revoke  ILR  in  a  further
    decision dated 15 August 2019 ('the second revocation  decision').  The
    decision set out what was now known about the  applicant's  immigration
    history including the details of his prolonged and  repeated  deception
    regarding his identity. She considered the further representations made
    on behalf of the  applicant  in  a  letter  dated  19  July  2019.  The
    applicant argued that the main  reason  why  he  was  granted  ILR  was
    because he had lived in the UK for 10 years at the date of the decision
    and because no absconder action was taken.


46. The decision letter noted the  submissions,  but  considered  that  the
    deception outweighed the accrual of 10 years' residence. He was granted
    ILR on the assumption that he was a Kosovan national  who  had  entered
    the UK as a minor. If the facts of the deception about his identity had
    been known 'the decision maker's consideration would not have  been  so
    lenient in your favour'.  Further  enquiries  revealed  that  absconder
    action was taken against him on 26  October  2001  following  a  failed
    attempt by the Eaton House Starring Team to  locate  him  at  his  last
    known address. In light of this information, it was considered that the
    applicant only accrued the 10 years' residence  which  underpinned  the
    decision to grant ILR because of his failure to report and his decision
    to abscond. Even if he had been located at the time, the fact  that  he
    had given a false nationality and date of birth would  have  frustrated
    efforts to remove him.


47. The respondent considered the submissions  made  about  the  revocation
    policy. Although she accepted that the  deception  occurred  more  than
    five years before the decision to revoke ILR, it  was  considered  that
    the 'deception exercised was sufficient enough  for  revocation  to  be
    appropriate, your deception outweighed this policy'. Having  considered
    the case six years after the deception came to light it was  considered
    that the nature of the deception still weighed in favour of revocation.
    Despite the prolonged and repeated nature of the  deception  she  noted
    that there was little evidence  of  regret.   She  concluded  that  the
    applicant's conducted was 'so serious that it warrants  the  revocation
    of your status'.


48. The respondent went on to consider the representations made  about  the
    impact that it  would  have  on  the  applicant  and  his  family.  The
    respondent noted that the applicant was only able to obtain status  for
    his partner and child because of the  initial  deception.  It  was  not
    necessary to give further consideration to this issue  because  he  had
    been  granted  limited  leave  to  remain  because  of   his   personal
    circumstances in the UK.


49. Permission to bring judicial review proceedings was  granted  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Pitt at a hearing on 22 October 2020 except in  relation
    to a technical point relating to the status  of  the  first  revocation
    decision.

The issues

50. The applicant identified the following issues for determination:


       i) Whether the applicant's deception as to nationality and age would
          have been directly material to the grant of ILR,  such  that  the
          condition precedent in section 76(2)(a) of the NIAA 2002 was made
          out.


      ii) Whether the  decision  was  in  accordance  with  the  revocation
          policy.


     iii) Whether the revocation policy is unlawful.


      iv)  Whether  the  decision  to  revoke  ILR   was   reasonable   and
          proportionate.

Decision and reasons

Issue 1: materiality

51. Ms Naik argued that the respondent failed to place  the  grant  of  ILR
    within the proper context of the Legacy Programme. The Vine report made
    clear that the there was no consistency in decision  making.  The  main
    factors were length  of  residence  and  a  flexible  approach  to  the
    character and conduct requirements, which overlooked  negative  factors
    such as absconding. Although she accepted that  character  and  conduct
    were material to an assessment under  the  Legacy  Programme,  Ms  Naik
    argued that  only  more  serious  matters  such  as  criminal  conduct,
    activities that engaged the exclusion clauses or  threats  to  national
    security were  sufficient  to  justify  refusal.  In  support  of  this
    submission she relied on the decision making criteria identified in the
    Vine report (see [13] above) and referred to the  factors  relating  to
    character and conduct in Chapter 53 (see [22] above).


52. She went on to argue that this case was far removed from the  situation
    in R (Abbas) v SSHD [2017] WLR(D) 61, which the respondent relied upon.
    In that case it was alleged that  the  applicant  used  a  false  TOEIC
    certificate to obtain an initial grant of leave to remain as  a  spouse
    and was subsequently granted ILR. The  deception  formed  part  of  the
    'necessary building blocks' leading to the application for ILR. It  was
    implicit that he was asserting that he had two  years  previous  lawful
    residence.  There was a causal  link  between  the  deception  and  the
    application for  ILR.  Ms  Naik  submitted  that  the  way  the  Legacy
    Programme  operated  was  quite  different.  The  applicant's  skeleton
    argument went so far as to say that the fact that  the  applicant  lied
    about his nationality and age was 'wholly irrelevant' to  the  criteria
    for granting ILR under the Legacy Programme. The main  reason  for  the
    decision was the applicant's length of residence. At the time, the fact
    that he had absconded was not deemed  sufficiently  serious  to  refuse
    leave to remain.


53. We  do  not  agree  that  the  applicant's  repeated  and  longstanding
    deception relating to his nationality  and  age  would  not  have  been
    material  to  the  assessment  under  the  Legacy  Programme  had   the
    respondent been aware of it at the time. The Legacy Programme  did  not
    operate as an amnesty. Nor was there  any  clear  policy  for  granting
    leave save for the usual criteria considered under paragraph  395C  and
    Chapter 53 albeit those criteria were assessed through the  operational
    objective of reducing the large backlog of cases.


54. The guidance made clear that  a  caseworker  must  consider  all  known
    relevant factors (both positive and negative) and emphasised  that  the
    list of factors set out in paragraph 395C was not exhaustive (see  [20]
    above). It also made clear  to  caseworkers  that  the  assessment  was
    holistic (see [21] above). Although  the  guidance  identified  serious
    criminality, activities justifying exclusion, and threats  to  national
    security as negative factors that should  be  given  weight,  the  same
    section also made clear that caseworkers must also  take  into  account
    'any evidence of deception practiced at any stage of the process'  (see
    [22] above).


55. The Vine report suggests that there were no clear criteria for a  grant
    of leave  under  the  Legacy  Programme.  We  accept  that  the  report
    indicates that when paragraph 395C was viewed through  the  operational
    objective of the programme length of  residence  was  likely  to  be  a
    relevant factor. In practice, non-compliance at the lower  end  of  the
    scale, such as overstaying or even absconding (as in this case),  might
    have been given slightly less weight than usual. After all, the purpose
    of the programme was to resolve  a  large  number  of  cases  involving
    people who were remaining in the UK without leave.


56. We accept that there may be some distinction between the nature  of  an
    application for ILR under the immigration  rules,  where  an  applicant
    would have to satisfy a series of specific requirements, and the  broad
    evaluative assessment that was undertaken under paragraph 395C for  the
    purpose of the Legacy Programme. It  might  be  easier  to  identify  a
    material connection between the deception and a specific element of the
    immigration  rules.  However,  that  is  not  to  say  that  no  causal
    connection could be identified from a deception that the guidance  made
    clear should form part of the evaluation under paragraph 395C. The more
    serious the negative factor the more  likely  it  would  have  been  to
    affect the assessment.


57. The applicant's case is premised on the reasons  that  were  given  for
    granting leave to remain under  the  Legacy  Programme,  but  does  not
    properly acknowledge that  the  decision  was  made  on  the  basis  of
    incorrect and incomplete information. When the applicant submitted  the
    questionnaire he actively deceived the respondent by asserting that his
    removal to Kosovo would breach his human rights. But for this continued
    deception the decision maker would have had the full picture and  could
    have taken into account the original deception as part of  the  overall
    assessment.


58. We have already noted that negative  factors  relating  to  a  person's
    immigration history are likely to range in scale  and  seriousness.  In
    our assessment the knowingly false claim to be from Kosovo was  at  the
    more serious end of the scale (see  [26]  above).  The  respondent  was
    prepared to overlook the period of absconding, but if that  factor  was
    combined with the fraudulent assertions made in his asylum claim it  is
    likely that greater weight would have been  given  to  public  interest
    considerations. The ongoing deception relating to his  nationality  and
    age clearly would have been a relevant consideration.


59. We note that the  fourth  claimant  in  Hakemi,  Mr  Mustafaj,  was  an
    Albanian national who falsely claimed to be  from  Kosovo.  Similar  to
    this applicant, Mr Mustafaj remained in the UK after his appeal  rights
    became exhausted and had been living in the UK for 12 years at the date
    the decision was  made  under  the  Legacy  Programme.  The  difference
    between Mr Mustafaj and this applicant is that  Mr  Mustafaj  disclosed
    the previous deception to the respondent before the decision was  made.
    The deception was sufficiently serious to justify refusal of  leave  to
    remain. This is further evidence to indicate that the serious nature of
    a deception of this kind was likely to have a material  impact  on  the
    exercise of discretion under the Legacy Programme.


60. Given that deception can include a failure to disclose a material fact,
    we conclude that there  was  a  direct  link  between  the  applicant's
    failure to disclose the lies he told about his nationality and age when
    he sent the questionnaire and the grant of leave to  remain  under  the
    Legacy Programme. But for the continued deception the case  would  have
    been assessed with reference to negative factors  that  may  have  been
    properly regarded as sufficiently serious to justify refusal. In  light
    of what is now known about the applicant's immigration history, it  was
    within a  range  of  reasonable  responses  to  the  evidence  for  the
    respondent to conclude that, had his true identity been  known  at  the
    time, 'the decision  maker's  consideration  would  not  have  been  so
    lenient in your favour'. For these reasons we conclude that it was open
    to the respondent to invoke section 76(2)(a) NIAA 2002  on  the  ground
    that leave was obtained by deception.


Issue 2: whether the decision was in accordance with the revocation policy

61. The respondent  uncovered  the  deception  during  the  course  of  the
    application for naturalisation  in  2013.  In  2016  she  retained  the
    applicant's Albanian passport pending further  investigation,  but  did
    not take steps to revoke ILR until 08 November  2018,  just  over  five
    years after the applicant last sought to maintain  the  deception.  Six
    years had passed by the time she reviewed the situation and issued  the
    second revocation decision in 2019.


62. The  arguments  relating  to  the  second  issue  were  imprecise.  The
    applicant's  skeleton  argument  took  a  rather  scattergun  approach,
    asserting that the respondent 'did not exercise her  discretion  fairly
    or lawfully or in accordance with her policy or give proper reasons for
    her decision'. In submissions, Ms Naik did not appear to  dispute  that
    the wording of Section 4.1  was  sufficiently  flexible  to  allow  for
    discretion to be exercised (see [42] above).

63. The wording of Section 4.1 emphasises that the length of time spent  in
    the UK 'may' constitute a reason for not revoking indefinite leave. The
    example given at the bottom of that section is  also  phrased  in  non-
    mandatory terms. It says that ILR 'would not normally be revoked' where
    the deception in question occurred more than five years  ago.  Ms  Naik
    argued that the wording gives rise to a presumption that ILR would  not
    be revoked in such circumstances.


64. We agree that the wording of the policy gives  rise  to  a  presumption
    that ILR will not normally be revoked after five years, but  it  allows
    sufficient flexibility for the respondent  to  exercise  discretion  to
    revoke ILR in appropriate cases. We bear in  mind  that  in  each  case
    considered under section 76(2)(a) it  is  a  condition  precedent  that
    leave to remain was obtained by deception. In light of this,  the  mere
    fact of a deception is not likely to be  sufficient,  taken  alone,  to
    depart from the presumption. The nature, extent and significance  of  a
    deception and other negative factors are likely to inform whether it is
    appropriate to depart from the usual practice outlined in  the  policy.
    If the respondent decides to depart from the usual practice she  should
    take  into  account  relevant  considerations  and  give  adequate  and
    rational reasons for doing so.


65. The applicant's argument on this point appears to be either  a  reasons
    challenge or a challenge to the rationality of the decision  to  depart
    from the usual practice contained in the policy.  The  decision  letter
    outlined his immigration history in some detail. It  was  open  to  the
    respondent to take into account  the  serious  nature  of  the  initial
    deception as well  as  its  repeated  and  long  standing  nature.  She
    considered the applicant's further submissions. On page 4 it  is  clear
    that the respondent took into account the fact that the  applicant  was
    granted ILR under the Legacy Programme. The letter quotes  the  reasons
    for granting leave contained in the GCID notes (see  [30]  above).  The
    respondent found that 'your deception outweighs your  actions  to  have
    accrued over 10 years residency in the UK'. She went on to explain that
    ILR was only granted under the Legacy Programme because the  respondent
    was not aware of all the facts. Having considered the  full  extent  of
    his immigration history the respondent concluded 'your  conduct  is  so
    serious that it warrants the revocation of your status'.  She  outlined
    the requirements of section 76(2) and considered  section  4.1  of  the
    revocation policy. Whilst recognising that the deception occurred  more
    than five years ago, she concluded that the deception was  sufficiently
    serious to depart from the policy.


66. The applicant disagrees with the decision, but  in  our  assessment  it
    contains no public law error. The respondent took into account relevant
    considerations, including the context in which he was granted  ILR.  We
    have already explained why the serious nature of  the  deception  could
    plainly have made a material difference to  the  assessment  under  the
    Legacy Programme. The respondent  referred  to  the  relevant  law  and
    policy. Her finding that the nature and extent  of  his  deception  was
    sufficiently serious to depart from the usual  practice  was  within  a
    range of reasonable responses to the evidence.  We  conclude  that  the
    respondent  gave  adequate  and  rational  reasons  with  reference  to
    relevant evidence and the correct legal framework.


Issue 3: lawfulness of the policy


67. The applicant's skeleton argument indicated that the  third  issue  was
    encompassed by amended grounds 4  and  5.  Ground  4  argued  that  the
    respondent failed to consider the exercise of discretion  properly  and
    failed to take into account the fact that the applicant was granted ILR
    under a 'concessionary policy'. We have  already  found  that  (i)  the
    Legacy Programme was not a concessionary policy; and (ii) the  decision
    letter considered the fact that the applicant was granted  ILR  in  the
    context of the Legacy Programme. It is difficult to see  how  ground  4
    made any wider point about the  lawfulness  of  the  policy.  Ground  5
    posited a wider argument relating to the policy, asserting  that  there
    was no provision to determine whether the deception was material to the
    grant of ILR or to take into account the nature of  a  grant  of  leave
    under a 'concessionary policy'.

68. Section 2.1 of the policy sets out the provisions of  section  76  NIAA
    2002. Section 3.1  also  makes  clear  that  section  76(2)  gives  the
    respondent the power to revoke ILR when  a  person  obtained  leave  by
    deception. Section 4.2 states that the decision maker must  assess  the
    nature, extent and significance of the  information  which  was  either
    incorrectly supplied or omitted and emphasises that  'there  should  be
    clear and justifiable evidence  of  deception  and  the  deception  was
    material to the grant of leave'. Section 4.3 recognises that ILR should
    not normally be revoked  when  the  decision  maker  had  the  relevant
    information but overlooked it or considered it and granted leave in any
    event.


69. Rightly,  the  point  was  reformulated  in  the  applicant's  skeleton
    argument at least to acknowledge the wording of Section  4.2.  By  then
    the applicant sought to argue that the wording of Section  4.2  of  the
    policy was insufficient to guide decision makers to the need to find  a
    direct causal link between the deception and the grant of leave. By the
    time the matter came to hearing Ms Naik made clear  that  she  was  not
    launching a full frontal challenge to the lawfulness of the policy  nor
    was attempting to argue a point that might have wider  application.  In
    light of this, it is unclear whether she was still pursuing  the  third
    issue, and if she was, what argument she relied on.


70. When the wording of Section 4.2 is considered in  the  context  of  the
    whole policy it is clear that  caseworkers are directed to the relevant
    legal framework. The need to find a causal link between  the  deception
    and grant of leave is also sufficiently clear. The Legacy Programme was
    not  a  'concessionary  policy'.  The  programme  operated  within  the
    confines of the existing  legal  framework.  Any  grant  of  leave  was
    considered on a discretionary  basis  having  conducted  an  evaluative
    assessment of the facts of each case. The policy makes clear that there
    needs to be an individual assessment of the circumstances of each case,
    which should include consideration of the context in  which  leave  was
    granted.

71. We recognise that it might be easier to establish a causal link between
    deception in an application for ILR made  with  reference  to  specific
    criteria contained in the immigration rules than in a  case  where  ILR
    was granted following an exercise of discretion. However,  the  wording
    of the policy is sufficiently flexible to cover discretionary grants of
    leave. Decision makers are directed to ensure that there is  clear  and
    justifiable evidence of deception and that the deception  was  material
    to the grant of leave. Whether it is appropriate to exercise the  power
    to revoke ILR will depend on the facts and evidence in  each  case  and
    should be justified with adequate and rational reasons. In  so  far  as
    the third issue still seemed  to  be  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  for
    determination, we conclude that there is no merit in the argument  that
    the revocation policy is unlawful.




Issue 4: proportionality


72. The applicant's skeleton argument suggested that the fourth  issue  was
    encompassed by the amended ground 4, but aside from a general assertion
    that the decision not to  exercise  discretion  under  the  policy  was
    irrational,  that  ground  did  not  particularise  any  argument  with
    reference to proportionality as a public law issue, nor did it  contain
    any of the arguments now put forward on the applicant's  behalf,  which
    appeared for the first time in the skeleton argument. The  respondent's
    skeleton argument stated that permission was not granted to argue  this
    point, and in any event, the decision was not disproportionate.


73. We agree that this issue, as now formulated in the  skeleton  argument,
    is quite distinct from the point made in the  grounds.  Permission  has
    not been granted to argue it. The fourth issue was not pleaded  in  the
    original grounds, and as explained below, raises issues that  were  not
    put forward in the further representations made to the respondent.  The
    courts have repeatedly emphasised the need  for  procedural  rigour  in
    judicial review claims: see R (Talpada) v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 841  and
    R (Spahiu) v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 2604; [2019] Imm AR 524. However,  in
    so far the issue of proportionality might touch on  the  reasonableness
    of the decision to depart from  the  presumption  that  ILR  would  not
    normally be revoked if more than  five  years  have  passed  since  the
    deception, and in light of the fact that both parties made  submissions
    on the point at the hearing, we will make findings.

74. Section 76 NIAA 2002 sets out the respondent's power to revoke  ILR  if
    leave was obtained by deception. Section 1.3 of the  revocation  policy
    sets out a rational objective, which is to instil public confidence  in
    the immigration system by ensuring any abuse is tackled and dealt  with
    accordingly.  The  objective  is  sufficiently  important  to   justify
    limitation of fundamental rights  in  appropriate  cases.  Whether  the
    power is exercised in a rational and proportionate way will  depend  on
    the context and the  facts  in  each  case.  A  decision  maker  should
    consider whether, having regard to the severity of the consequences,  a
    fair balance has been struck between the rights of the  individual  and
    the interests of the community: see discussion in cases  such  as  Bank
    Mellat v Her Majesty's Treasury (No.2) [2013] UKSC 39, [2013]  HRLR  30
    and Pham v SSHD [2015] UKSC 19, [2015] Imm AR 950.


75. Ms Naik argued that maintaining the decision to revoke ILR, and instead
    granting  discretionary  leave  to  remain  on  a  ten  year  route  to
    settlement, was disproportionate. The applicant has lived in the UK for
    20 years. By the time he is eligible to reapply for ILR  he  will  have
    spent 30 years in the UK. The applicant's child is  a  British  citizen
    because he was born at a time when the applicant had  ILR.  Any  future
    children he might have would not enjoy this  benefit.  Aside  from  the
    applicant's length of  residence  and  the  potential  effect  on  non-
    existent  children  the  applicant  identifies  no   other   meaningful
    disadvantages to having limited leave to remain rather than ILR.


76. Given that the applicant was granted limited  leave  to  remain  on  05
    February 2019 it would have been open to counsel to make  these  points
    in the further representations made to the respondent on 19 July  2019.
    They were not. The representations explained the  applicant's  personal
    circumstances, argued that ILR was not obtained by deception (Issue 1),
    and that revocation would be contrary to the policy  (Issue  2).  Under
    the    heading     'Compelling/compassionate     circumstances'     the
    representations referred to the explanation given for his behaviour  in
    the witness statement  submitted  with  the  NTL  application  (without
    further comment) and asked the respondent to note  that  the  applicant
    has significant ties to the UK. No submissions were  made  relating  to
    the proportionality of granting limited leave of the  kind  raised  for
    the first time in the  skeleton  argument  in  these  proceedings.  The
    second revocation  decision  could  hardly  be  criticised  when  these
    arguments were not even put to the respondent to consider.

77. The applicant's skeleton argument asserts that,  had  he  been  granted
    limited leave to remain rather than ILR under the Legacy  Programme  in
    2010 he would have qualified  for  ILR  by  2017  in  any  event.  This
    argument has no merit. First, the argument was not  developed  in  oral
    submissions. Second, it is based on the assumption that  the  applicant
    would have been granted some form of leave when it is possible that had
    the facts been known he might have been refused.  Third,  there  is  no
    evidential basis for this theoretical scenario. The history outlined in
    Geraldo indicates that until the change in policy in July  2011  people
    were granted ILR under the Legacy  Programme  and  not  limited  leave.
    Indeed, the effect of the change in policy from granting ILR to limited
    leave was at the heart of the challenge in Geraldo.

78. No copy of the 2013 decision  refusing  naturalisation  appears  to  be
    included in the bundle. It is unclear whether the  respondent  proposed
    to take any action in relation to the deception at that stage. However,
    the applicant was put on notice that his immigration  status  would  be
    reviewed when he was refused an NTL in 2016.  Although  no  explanation
    has been provided for the further delay  before  the  first  revocation
    decision was made, during that time, and since, the applicant can  have
    been under no illusion that his status was under review. Delay has  not
    be put forward as an argument, but we conclude that any delay in taking
    action to revoke ILR is  not  sufficiently  serious  or  prolonged,  in
    itself or  taken  with  the  other  factors,  to  render  the  decision
    disproportionate.

79. We have already found that the respondent's decision to depart from the
    practice normally followed in cases where the deception took place more
    than five years ago was within a range of reasonable responses  to  the
    evidence given the serious and prolonged nature of the deception.


80. When the deception was exposed, the applicant continued to assert  that
    he was from Kosovo. It was only when it was in his  interest  to  admit
    the lie because he wanted to start a  family  that  he  decided  to  be
    candid. He  said:  'I  must  make  amends  for  my  mistakes  and  take
    responsibility for my actions'. Until now, he has faced  no  meaningful
    consequence for his actions.


81. The applicant benefited from a serious and prolonged deception. But for
    the deception he would not have accrued a long period of residence, his
    partner would not have been granted leave to enter, and his child would
    not have been registered as a British citizen. The  evidence  indicates
    that the applicant has made good use of the opportunities  afforded  to
    him in the UK. He works as a photographer and runs several  businesses.
    The respondent took into account the strength of his ties to the UK and
    recognised that removal would interfere with his right to  private  and
    family life in a sufficiently grave way to amount to a disproportionate
    breach of Article 8 of the European Convention. The applicant's ILR was
    revoked because of the  public  interest  in  ensuring  that  abuse  is
    tackled, but he was granted limited leave  to  remain  because  it  was
    disproportionate to remove him.


82. The applicant can continue to live in the UK with his partner and child
    and is on a ten year route to settlement. The  fact  that  it  will  be
    inconvenient to apply for further leave to remain and that he will have
    to pay fees to do so is clearly proportionate in the  circumstances  of
    this case. The argument about perceived disadvantage to future children
    is even weaker. But for the deception his child would never  have  been
    entitled to British citizenship. As a matter of policy  the  respondent
    does not deprive children of British citizenship because of the actions
    of their parents, but that does not oblige  the  respondent  to  confer
    similar advantage on any future children that the applicant might have.




83. Accordingly, in so far as the  arguments  relating  to  proportionality
    touch either on the rationality of the decision to revoke ILR or  might
    engage an  argument  with  reference  to  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention, the challenge fails.

Conclusion

84. The respondent gave adequate and rational reasons to explain  why,  had
    the deception been known, it would have made a material  difference  to
    the outcome of the decision to exercise  discretion  under  the  Legacy
    Programme. As such, the condition precedent for  exercising  her  power
    under section 76 NIAA 2002 was satisfied.


85. The respondent's revocation policy is sufficiently  flexible  to  allow
    her to consider whether  ILR  granted  on  a  discretionary  basis  was
    obtained by deception.  The policy emphasises that there must be  clear
    and justifiable evidence  of  deception  and  that  the  deception  was
    material to the grant of leave. The nature, extent and significance  of
    the deception will form  part  of  the  assessment  of  whether  it  is
    appropriate to revoke ILR.


86. The respondent gave adequate and rational reasons to  explain  why  she
    had decided to depart from the usual practice not to  revoke  ILR  when
    the deception occurred more than  five  years  ago.  The  decision  was
    within a range of  reasonable  responses  to  the  evidence  given  the
    serious and prolonged nature of the deception.

87. In view of the serious nature of the deception, and the fact  that  the
    applicant has been granted limited leave to remain, it is not  arguable
    that the decision to revoke ILR is disproportionate.


                                    ~~~~~



-----------------------
[1] An inspection of the UK Border Agency's handling of legacy asylum and
migration cases (March-July 2012)


