
                                                                JR/6603/2018


                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                                                Heard on: 10th December 2019


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber



                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH

                                   Between


     The Queen (on the application of Leontino Mendes Da Pino Da Silva)
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


The applicant did not attend and was not represented.
Mrs J Gray, instructed by the Government Legal Department appeared on
    behalf of the Respondent.

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                       APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW
                                  JUDGMENT

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

      The application


        1) This is the approved written record of the judgment which was
           given orally at the end of the hearing on 10 December 2019.


        2) The applicant is a citizen of Portugal.  He applied on 5 October
           2018 for judicial  review  of,  and  interim  relief  from,  the
           respondent's decision of 14 August 2018,  (the   'Decision')  to
           certify pursuant to  regulation  33  of  the  Immigration  (EEA)
           Regulations  2016  (the  'Regulations')  that  his  removal   to
           Portugal,  pending  the  outcome  of  his   appeal   under   the
           Regulations, would not be unlawful under section 6 of the  Human
           Rights Act 1998.  To put matters in context, he had submitted an
           out-of-time appeal against his deportation on 3 October 2018  to
           the First-tier Tribunal (the 'FtT'), in response to a notice  of
           deportation arrangements having been issued,  in  which  he  was
           notified of his intended removal on 8 October 2018.


        3) The applicant claimed that  the  Decision  breached  his  rights
           under articles 6 and 8  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
           Rights ('ECHR') and was 'Wednesbury' unreasonable, on the  basis
           that while he had not made any representations  in  response  to
           the respondent's letter of 13 July 2018  that  she  intended  to
           make  a  deportation  order,   he   had   been   without   legal
           representation  at   the   time   of   certification   and   his
           circumstances had changed since then, including  his  appeal  to
           the FtT. Referring to the authority of R (Kiarie and Byndloss) v
           SSHD [2017] UKSC 42, certification would significantly adversely
           affect the procedural protection of his rights under  article  8
           of the ECHR, as one of his main challenges  in  his  FtT  appeal
           would be on the basis of the lack of his propensity to  reoffend
           and whether he represented a genuine, present  and  sufficiently
           serious threat. The applicant  wished  to  instruct  a  forensic
           psychologist or psychiatrist to produce an expert report on  the
           risk of his reoffending.

        4) The applicant also argued that he would have limited ability  to
           maintain contact with, and instruct, his legal  representatives,
           as he had  no  accommodation  or  employment  to  return  to  in
           Portugal and was currently without funds. He had  not  lived  in
           Portugal for 19 years, since he was 22 years old.  He  would  be
           unable to secure further  documentary  evidence  supporting  his
           claimed continuous residence in the UK. His solicitor provided a
           witness statement outlining these difficulties.  The  respondent
           had yet to take into account his representations as  to  why  he
           should not be removed prior to the final  determination  of  his
           appeal in the FtT, when he had now raised specific concerns  and
           had provided evidence as to why he should not be removed.

        5)  Finally,  the  respondent  had  not  considered   whether   the
           applicant's removal was justified as proportionate,  as  it  was
           bound to do so.

        6) In response  to  the  applicant's  application,  the  respondent
           issued a supplementary letter on 11  October  2018,  maintaining
           her decision. In the letter, the respondent noted, but  did  not
           accept, the applicant's assertions of continuous  residence  and
           having been issued with a permanent residence card; and regarded
           certification of the applicant's removal as  proportionate.  The
           respondent did so, noting that the applicant was 41  years  old;
           was in good health and whilst he claimed to  have  two  children
           and a sister-in-law living in  the  UK,  had  not  provided  any
           details to substantiate any family life. His social and cultural
           integration was impaired by  his  prolific  criminal  offending,
           which demonstrated a failure to integrate into  UK  society.  He
           was a Portuguese national, who was able to speak Portuguese  and
           it was reasonable to expect that he would have  family,  friends
           or acquaintances who remained in Portugal who could  assist  him
           on his return. In addition, Portugal had a  welfare  system,  if
           the applicant required financial support to prevent  destitution
           and there was no reason to suppose  that  he  could  not  obtain
           work.  There  was  also   no   evidence   of   the   applicant's
           rehabilitation.  Indeed,  as   a   postscript,   following   the
           applicant's application and his release  from  detention  on  14
           February 2019, on 15 February 2019 he was arrested for a  sexual
           offence (exposure) and a public order offence after police  were
           called to a South London primary school. He was convicted of the
           threatening  behaviour  charge  and  sentenced  to  a   12-month
           community order but was  not  charged  for  the  alleged  sexual
           offence.


       Previous Orders and Judgments


        7)  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Keki?  refused   permission   for   the
           application to proceed to judicial review on the  papers,  in  a
           decision dated 19 November 2018. She concluded that  Kiarie  and
           Byndloss did not assist the applicant, as he had the opportunity
           to apply to enter the UK for the hearing of his FtT  appeal  and
           had not shown any insurmountable obstacles to the preparation of
           his appeal from Portugal. On 28  November  2018,  the  applicant
           renewed his application to an oral hearing which was listed  for
           8 February 2019. In the meantime, removal directions  which  had
           been re-set for 12 January  2019  were  cancelled  following  an
           interim application by the applicant, which  resulted  in  Upper
           Tribunal Judge Bruce granting a stay of  removal  on  7  January
           2019.


        8) Whilst the applicant sought to amend the grounds of challenge in
           the same application for a stay of removal on 7 January 2019, on
           8  February  2019,  at  the  renewed  permission  hearing,   the
           respondent  conceded that  permission  to  proceed  to  judicial
           review should be granted on the basis of consistency  under  the
           respondent's policy, although the respondent subsequently formed
           the view that the concession was wrongly extended as  it  failed
           to take into account  the  fact  that  the  applicant's  further
           submissions had  been  fully  considered  in  the  supplementary
           letter of 11 October 2019, so that any challenge on the basis of
           consistency with her policy was academic.

        9) As a result of the respondent's concession, Upper Tribunal Judge
           McGeachy granted permission for the application  to  proceed  to
           full judicial review on 8  February  2019  and  issued  standard
           directions.  The  applicant  was  subsequently   released   from
           immigration detention on 14 February 2019. His  application  was
           initially struck out for non-payment of the continuation fee  on
           11 March 2019 but reinstated successfully and the respondent was
           granted an extension to file a detailed defence, which  she  did
           so on 7 May 2019.

       Further  developments  -  legal  representation  and  the  First-tier
       Tribunal proceedings

       10) The applicant had focused in his grounds on the  adverse  impact
           to procedural protection or, put more  simply,  his  ability  to
           prepare his appeal before the  FtT,  if  he  were  removed.   In
           relation to that, the FtT had granted an extension of  time  for
           him to present his appeal and  the  FtT  had  conducted  a  case
           management hearing on 14 March 2019, which was adjourned so  the
           applicant could obtain a psychological report and HMRC  evidence
           of the exercise of treaty rights. A subsequent  case  management
           review hearing, scheduled to take  place  on  4  July  2019  was
           adjourned, as neither the applicant nor anyone representing  him
           appeared at that hearing. The applicant's former representatives
           informed the respondent the day prior to the hearing, on 3  July
           2019, they were no longer acting for the appellant  in  the  FtT
           hearing but provided no clarification in respect of the judicial
           review application.


       11) The respondent then wrote to the applicant's solicitors in their
           judicial review capacity on 4 October 2019, also noting that the
           applicant appeared to have  been  in  breach  of  his  reporting
           requirements, asking  whether  they  were  still  instructed  in
           relation to the judicial review proceedings. On 7 October  2019,
           the  applicant's  solicitors  wrote  to   the   Upper   Tribunal
           indicating  that  they  were  without  instructions   from   the
           applicant  and  had  therefore  applied  for   the   legal   aid
           certificate  to  be  discharged;  would  not  be  attending  the
           judicial review hearing; and asked to be taken off the record.

       12)  The  respondent's  legal  representatives  then  wrote  to  the
           applicant's address directly on 1 November 2019, and as  he  was
           now legally unrepresented, prepared a trial bundle for  him,  in
           order to assist the Tribunal. Their correspondence was  sent  by
           ordinary first-class and recorded delivery  post.  The  recorded
           delivery package was not accepted at the applicant's address and
           a delivery card was left there but was then not  collected  from
           the local Post Office.  As a consequence, the  respondent  wrote
           to the applicant on 14 November 2019, notifying him of the  need
           to collect the trial bundle and asking him to  contact  them  to
           confirm receipt of correspondence; and to  indicate  whether  he
           would be preparing a written  argument.  There  was  no  further
           response from the applicant and the trial  bundle,  prepared  by
           the respondent's  representatives,  was  returned  by  the  Post
           Office. The  applicant  remained  in  breach  of  his  reporting
           requirements on which he had been granted bail.

       The applicant's failure  to  attend  this  hearing  and  decision  to
       proceed in his absence

       13)  The  applicant  failed  to   attend   this   hearing,   without
           explanation. I  was  satisfied  that  the  respondent  had  made
           significant steps to attempt to contact the applicant and inform
           him of this hearing, and that his former solicitors would,  when
           informing him that they no longer acted for him,  have  notified
           him of the date and time of this hearing.  It appears  that  the
           applicant has ceased to  engage  in  this  application  process.
           While he has provided no explanation for doing so,  I  was  also
           conscious of the need to consider whether he had  been  deprived
           of a fair  hearing.   I  concluded  that  he  had  not  been  so
           deprived.  He was aware of the date and time of this hearing and
           the respondent had taken significant steps to assist him, beyond
           her own professional duties to this Tribunal. I  concluded  that
           in the circumstances, it was in accordance with  the  overriding
           objective that I proceed with this hearing  in  the  applicant's
           absence.

       The basis of the respondent's resistance to the orders sought

       14) On a preliminary point, the  respondent  noted  that  the  Upper
           Tribunal had not granted permission to amend the grounds and the
           respondent took issue with the amendment in light of  the  risks
           of a rolling review, as cautioned against by the Court of Appeal
           (see: R (Tesfay) & Ors v SSHD [2016]  EWCA  Civ  415).   In  the
           alternative,  the  respondent's  defence  addressed   both   the
           respondent's Decision and the supplementary  letter  which  fell
           into the third category of responses to 'new materials, '  (see:
           Caroopen & Ors v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 1307).


       15) In terms of procedural protection, the High Court in  Wandzel  v
           SSHD [2018] EWHC 1371 (Admin)  had  considered  how  Kiarie  and
           Byndloss applied to regulation 33 certifications and  identified
           very  significant  differences  between  those  two  cases.   In
           particular, the applicant could apply under  regulation  41  for
           permission to return. The claimant's  asserted  difficulties  in
           returning to Poland in the case of  Wandzel  contrasted  starkly
           with those in Kiarie and Byndloss; there was no reason  why  the
           claimant in Wandzel could not  make  practical  arrangements  to
           correspond or communicate with his legal representatives. It  is
           not clear why expert evidence  was  required  on  the  issue  of
           reoffending and in any event, there  were  no  very  significant
           obstacles to his  effective  participation  in  his  appeal.  In
           contrast, the appellants in  Kiarie  and  Byndloss  had  had  no
           notice of deportation and certification and  no  time  to  state
           their case. The claimant in Wandzel had four  weeks  to  prepare
           his case, which the High Court considered an adequate time.

       16) In the applicant's case, by the time of  the  Decision,  he  had
           failed to provide any reasons why he should not be deported  but
           the respondent had nevertheless proactively considered the issue
           of procedural protection in the decision. Key to  this  was  his
           ability to apply for temporary readmission to give evidence.

       17) The applicant's  representatives'  letter  of  3  October  2018,
           including a witness statement from  the  applicant's  solicitor,
           asserted the  need  to  gather  a  detailed  witness  statement;
           evidence relating to his exercise treaty rights since 1999;  and
           expert evidence of the  risk  of  reoffending  from  a  forensic
           psychologist or psychiatrist.   The  gist  of  the  respondent's
           response, in the Decision, read together with the  supplementary
           letter was that the applicant had had ample time to prepare  his
           case and could return to the UK to give evidence,  a  conclusion
           that the respondent was entitled to reach. Both the Decision and
           supplementary letter had included a thorough evaluation  of  the
           applicant's ability to readjust  to  life  in  Portugal;  obtain
           employment and to seek support, if not from family and  friends,
           then from the Portuguese state. The  applicant  could  apply  to
           return to the UK under regulation  41  of  the  Regulations.  He
           would be returning to Portugal where he lived the first 22 years
           of  his  life,  in  contrast  to  the   practical   difficulties
           identified in Kiarie and  Byndloss;  he  had  not  provided  any
           evidence of formidable obstacles  in  terms  of  matters  to  be
           decided by the FtT, beyond those considered and rejected by  the
           High Court in Wandzel. There was no reason  that  he  could  not
           correspond or maintain contact with his instructing  solicitors.
           The factual matrix in Wandzel was almost identical.

       18) The  respondent  had  considered  the  public  interest  in  the
           applicant having an effective appeal process and his removal was
           proportionate,  noting  his  persistent   offending,   with   12
           convictions, for 20 criminal offences  between  April  1999  and
           July  2018,  including  after  his  release   from   immigration
           detention in 2019. In his witness statement  explaining  why  he
           wished to stay in the  UK  which  had  been  prepared  with  his
           grounds, he claimed that he would not reoffend, but he then  did
           so at the first opportunity on release, in  February  2019.  The
           respondent considered the applicant's assertion to have obtained
           a permanent residence card, of which she had no record and  gave
           a detailed consideration of the threat posed by  the  applicant.
           Considering the proportionality of certification and weighing in
           the balance  the  applicant's  prolific  offending  history  and
           reasons why he could return to  Portugal,  against  any  limited
           family and longer-term private life in the  UK,  the  respondent
           was unarguably  entitled  to  conclude  that  certification  was
           proportionate and did not breach the  applicant's  rights  under
           the Human Rights Act 1998.

       The Law

       19)  Regulation  33  of  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations   2016
           provides:


           "33.-(1) This regulation applies where the Secretary  of  State
           intends to give directions for the removal of a person ("P")  to
           whom regulation 32(3) applies, in circumstances where-
           (a)P  has  not  appealed  against  the  EEA  decision  to  which
           regulation 32(3) applies, but would  be  entitled,  and  remains
           within time, to do so from within the United  Kingdom  (ignoring
           any possibility of an appeal out of time with permission); or
           (b)P has so  appealed  but  the  appeal  has  not  been  finally
           determined.
           (2) The Secretary of State may only  give  directions  for  P's
           removal if the Secretary of State certifies  that,  despite  the
           appeals process not having been begun or not having been finally
           determined, removal of P to the country or territory to which  P
           is proposed to be removed, pending the outcome  of  P's  appeal,
           would not be unlawful under section 6 of the  Human  Rights  Act
           1998(25) (public authority not to act contrary to  Human  Rights
           Convention).
           (3) The grounds upon which the Secretary of State may certify a
           removal under paragraph (2) include (in particular) that P would
           not, before the appeal is finally determined, face a  real  risk
           of serious irreversible  harm  if  removed  to  the  country  or
           territory to which P is proposed to be removed.
           (4) If P applies to the appropriate court or tribunal  (whether
           by means of judicial review or otherwise) for an  interim  order
           to suspend enforcement of the removal decision,  P  may  not  be
           removed from the United Kingdom until such time as the  decision
           on the interim order has been taken, except-
           (a)where the removal decision is based on  a  previous  judicial
           decision;
           (b)where P has had previous access to judicial review; or
           (c)where the removal decision is based on imperative grounds  of
           public security.
           (5) In this  regulation,  "finally  determined"  has  the  same
           meaning as in Part 6."


       20) Regulation 41 also provides the applicant the ability  to  apply
           for temporary admission, to submit his case in person.   Neither
           party has ever contended  that  he  would  be  denied  temporary
           admission to submit his First-tier Tribunal case in person,  the
           appeal of which is scheduled to be heard on 16 January 2020.


       Discussion and conclusions


       Procedural protection


       21) I have considered Mrs Gray's detailed skeleton argument and oral
           submissions, which I do not recite in full in these reasons.  On
           the primary challenge about the procedural  protection  for  the
           applicant  to  prepare  for  his  FtT  hearing,  I  accept   her
           submission that this is now entirely academic, for the following
           reasons.  He has had since 3 October 2018, over 14 months,  with
           legal representation until 3 July 2019, some 9 months, to obtain
           relevant HMRC records in relation to permanent residence and any
           expert report in relation to re-offending.  The quality of  that
           evidence is a matter for the FtT hearing the appeal, as to which
           I make no finding. The point is that having initially brought  a
           challenge, months after the Decision and prior to  his  imminent
           removal, on the basis of the need to prepare for his FtT appeal,
           he has, on any view, been given ample opportunity, both in  time
           and at public expense via legal aid,  to  do  so.   He  has  not
           identified what, if any, remaining preparation for  his  hearing
           has not been carried out,  which  he  could  not  complete  from
           Portugal, and I conclude that the ground of challenge  based  on
           protection of his procedural  rights  must,  given  the  lengthy
           passage of time during  which  he  has  had  legal  support,  be
           academic.


       Proportionality and consideration of relevant circumstances


       22) The applicant had referred, in general terms, to  a  failure  to
           consider his personal circumstances.  To the  extent  that  this
           relates to his ability to prepare for his FtT  appeal,  this  is
           academic, for the reasons set out above.


       23) To the extent that  it  relates  to  the  consideration  of  the
           proportionality of the applicant's interim removal, I accept Mrs
           Gray's  submission  that  in  her  supplementary   letter,   the
           respondent carried out a careful analysis of the proportionality
           of the applicant's circumstances.  In doing so,  she  noted,  on
           the one hand, the absence of any evidence of the nature  of  the
           relationships between the applicant and  his  children  (one  of
           whom was an adult, having been born in 1999, at the date of  the
           Decision; and the second was aged 17 at the  same  date,  having
           been born in June 2017). The respondent considered the  prolific
           nature of the applicant's repeat offending, which has  escalated
           in seriousness and which the respondent concluded  had  impaired
           any social and cultural  integration  in  the  UK,  which  might
           otherwise have counted in the applicant's favour.   Against  the
           applicant, and in favour of his interim removal, was the fact of
           his long-standing, persistent, and recent criminal offending, on
           which  the  respondent  had  based  her  view   that   applicant
           represented a genuine, present and sufficiently serious  threat;
           and his circumstances in Portugal would be such that there would
           be nothing to prevent him from applying to enter the UK for  his
           hearing, under regulation 41 of the Regulations: he was in  good
           health; was relatively young (41); spoke Portuguese;  had  lived
           in Portugal until 22 years' old and had returned on visits;  and
           could work, or seek the assistance of family (even if  they  did
           not have space for him to live with them) in  Portugal,  or  the
           Portuguese state.


       24)  In  the  circumstances,  the  respondent's  analysis   of   the
           proportionality of certification was detailed and the conclusion
           she reached was one which she was unarguably entitled to  do  so
           on the evidence before her.  She appropriately considered all of
           the evidence, and the Decision and supplementary letter disclose
           no arguable error which can be impugned on public law grounds.


       Summary of conclusions


       18) For the reasons set out above, I conclude that:

           a) the challenge on the basis of procedural protection  for  the
              applicant is academic;

           b) the Decision and supplementary letter of 11 October 2018 were
              reached   following   appropriate   consideration   of    the
              applicant's  circumstances;   and   were   not   'Wednesbury'
              unreasonable or disproportionate.

       Decision


       19) The application for judicial review is refused on all grounds.




                       J Keith
                  Signed:


                             Upper Tribunal Judge Keith




             Dated:    10 December 2019





                                                                      UTIJR6


                                                                JR/6603/2018


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice








     The Queen (on the application of Leontino Mendes Da Pino Da Silva)


                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent




                      Before Upper Tribunal Judge Keith


Having considered  all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  Mrs  J  Gray,
instructed by the Government Legal Department on behalf  of  the  respondent
at a hearing  at  Field  House,  London  on  10  December  2019,  which  the
applicant did not attend and at which he was not represented



It is ordered that


     1) The judicial review application is dismissed in accordance with the
        judgment attached.


     2) I  order,  therefore,  that  the  judicial  review  application  be
        dismissed.

     3) The order of Upper Tribunal  Judge  Bruce  dated  7  January  2019,
        granting a stay on the applicant's removal from the United  Kingdom
        until his application for judicial review is finally determined, is
        now discharged and ceases to have effect.

Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal

     4) The applicant has not sought permission to appeal to the  Court  of
        Appeal, but in any event, I considered, and refuse,  permission  to
        appeal to the Court of Appeal for the  same  reasons  that  I  have
        refused the orders sought for judicial review.


Costs


     5) The applicant shall pay the respondent's reasonable  costs,  to  be
        assessed if not agreed.


     6) The applicant having had  the  benefit  of  cost  protection  under
        section 26 of the Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders
        Act 2012, the amount that he is to pay shall be  determined  on  an
        application by the respondent under  regulation  16  of  the  Civil
        Legal Aid (Costs) Regulations 2013.


     7) There shall be a detailed assessment of the  applicant's  costs  in
        accordance with the Civil Legal Aid (Costs)  Regulations  2013  and
        CPR 47.18.




                       J Keith
                  Signed:


                             Upper Tribunal Judge Keith




             Dated:    10 December 2019






      Applicant's solicitors:
      Respondent's solicitors:
      Home Office Ref:
      Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
      -----------------------------------------------------------------------
      -----------------------------------------------------------------------
      -------
       Notification of appeal rights


      A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review
      is a decision that disposes of proceedings.


       A party may appeal against such a decision to the Court of Appeal  on
      a question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal should apply to
      the Upper Tribunal  for  permission,  at  the  hearing  at  which  the
      decision is given. If  no  application  is  made,  the  Tribunal  must
      nonetheless  consider  at  the  hearing  whether  to  give  or  refuse
      permission to appeal (rule 44(4B) of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
      Tribunal) Rules 2008).


      If  the  Tribunal  refuses  permission,  either  in  response  to   an
      application or by virtue of rule 44(4B), then  the  party  wishing  to
      appeal can apply for permission from the Court of Appeal itself.  This
      must be done by filing an applicant's notice with  the  Civil  Appeals
      Office of the  Court  of  Appeal  within  28  days  of  the  date  the
      Tribunal's decision on permission to appeal was sent (Civil  Procedure
      Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3).
