
IAC-FH-LW-V4

                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                 EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT GIVEN FOLLOWING HEARING

                                                                JR/6869/2016

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                                                                  2 May 2017


                                  The QUEEN
                           (ON The application OF)
                                  Aghil [B]
                                                                   Applicant


                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE allen


                               - - - - - - - -

Ms M Thirumaney, instructed by Shervins Solicitors appeared on behalf of
the Applicant.

Mrs J Gray, instructed by the Government Legal Department appeared on
behalf of the Respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                    ON AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                              APPROVED JUDGMENT
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -



    JUDGE Allen: This application for a judicial review is brought with the
    permission of Judge McGeachy following an oral permission hearing on 16
    November 2016.  In his application the applicant Mr [B] challenges  the
    Secretary of State's decision of 21 March 2016 refusing to accept  that
    his  further  submissions  together  with  the  previously   considered
    material amount to a fresh claim for asylum and human rights.


1.   The applicant came to the United Kingdom in 2006.   He  remained  on  a
    student visa which was renewed periodically  but  had  no  leave  after
    expiry of the visa on 30 September 2011.  Subsequent  applications  for
    leave to remain as a student were refused.

2.   He claimed asylum on 20 March 2013 and this  was  refused  on  9  April
    2013 and a subsequent appeal  was  dismissed.   He  was  appeal  rights
    exhausted on 27 June 2013.

3.   His asylum claim made at that time was based on his father  being  part
    of a political group and having expressed his views on the treatment of
    the Ahwazi Arabs by the Iranian authorities.  This caused the applicant
    to become interested.  He said his father was arrested and  he  himself
    had started a Facebook page in 2007 in his own name but changed  it  to
    Ahwaz Ahwazi in February or March 2013.  He claimed to have posted from
    2010 onwards about the Ahwazi people.

4.   The judge  found  that  the  appellant  had  not  produced  documentary
    evidence of his Facebook activity from 2010 and that this was  relevant
    to his credibility.  He had no documentary evidence to show on Facebook
    that ideas had been exchanged between him  and  his  Facebook  friends.
    The judge did not accept that the  appellant  had  exchanged  ideas  in
    relation  to  the  treatment  of  the  Ahwazi  people  by  the  Iranian
    authorities.  Sur place  activities  such  as  they  were  amounted  to
    activity on his Facebook page only.  He had attended no  demonstrations
    in London and had exhibited no genuine political interest in the Ahwazi
    or indeed any other political interest and his Facebook  page  activity
    was mostly recent i.e. during 2013 and a lot of it related to a  period
    after the date of decision.  His Facebook activity had not resulted  in
    him being contacted by the Iranian authorities.  The judge was far from
    satisfied that the appellant's father  had  ever  been  arrested.   The
    judge found that he had left Iran legally and returned there  on  three
    occasions and on no occasion had he even been questioned by the Iranian
    authorities let alone mistreated and he had no political profile so far
    as the Iranian authorities were  concerned.   The  information  on  his
    Facebook page even if located by the  authorities  was  so  superficial
    that the judge  was  far  from  satisfied  that  they  would  have  any
    particular interest in him whether as claimed by him or at all.

5.   The applicant put forward various further  pieces  of  information  and
    evidence which fell to be considered as part of the fresh claim.

6.   There was a letter from Kamil Alboshoka a  human  rights  activist  who
    said that the applicant had attended many protests and meetings in  the
    United Kingdom.  Kamil Alboshoka had only  known  the  applicant  since
    January 2014 so he could not confirm his activities prior to then.  The
    respondent noted that there was no further supporting evidence that the
    applicant had attended "many protests" or any evidence of his roles  in
    any protests he had attended.  The letter was considered  to  be  self-
    serving and therefore little weight was attached to it.

7.   With regard to photographs purporting to show the applicant is a  well-
    known Ahwazi activist, it was noted that four of the photographs showed
    him on a street alone next to a flag and the  other  three  showed  him
    with various people but he had given no details of their identity.   It
    was noted that the photographs appeared to have been  uploaded  to  his
    Facebook account.

8.   As regards his Facebook page and translation  it  was  noted  that  the
    translations referred to protests and  supporting  the  plight  of  the
    Ahwazi people.  It was noted that he had submitted screenshots  of  his
    Facebook profile including his e-mail address in his own name.  It  was
    noted that he blogged about demonstrations and Ahwazi  prisoners.   The
    respondent  considered  the  Iran  Country  Information  and   Guidance
    relating to journalists and bloggers, dated 9  October  2014.   It  was
    accepted  that  perceived  government  critics  including  journalists,
    social media users and bloggers  might  be  subjected  by  the  Iranian
    authorities  to  harassment,  intimidation,  arbitrary  arrest,  severe
    custodial sentences, incommunicado detention, unfair trial and torture.
     However it was considered that  merely  entering  into  journalism  or
    blogging activities did not automatically entitle an  individual  to  a
    grant of international protection.  The Iran  Country  Information  and
    Guidance said that people who claimed to have taken part in  journalism
    or blogging should be able to demonstrate  that  their  activities  had
    brought or would bring them to the adverse  attention  of  the  Iranian
    authorities.

9.   The respondent referred to the decision in AB and  Others  [2015]  UKUT
    0257 (IAC).  It was noted that  the  applicant  had  returned  to  Iran
    several times and the authorities had not stopped him  or  interrogated
    him.  There was no evidence that the authorities would be aware of  his
    Facebook account and online blogs.  There was no  evidence  as  to  how
    many views his blogs had had or by whom and when entering his name into
    a search engine online nothing adverse was brought up.

10.  Reference was also made to the country guidance case of SA [2011]  UKUT
    41 (IAC).  It was noted that in that case the appellant  was  an  Arab,
    who had been  previously  arrested  and  detained  for  anti-government
    leafleting and had left Iran illegally  and  had  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom for six years.  Although it was accepted that the applicant was
    an ethnic Arab it was not accepted that he had been of any interest  to
    the authorities prior to leaving Iran or  since  being  in  the  United
    Kingdom and he had left Iran on his own passport with a visa for  study
    in the United Kingdom.  It was not considered  that  his  circumstances
    were such as to justify a grant of leave.

11.  As regards a witness statement from the applicant's uncle who said  the
    applicant was a regular blogger and expressed antigovernment  views  in
    his blog, the respondent commented that the applicant had  provided  no
    evidence that he blogged on any sites which were viewed by the  Iranian
    authorities and the letter was considered to be self-serving and little
    weight was placed on it.

12.  The respondent also referred to the country guidance case  of  BA  Iran
    [2011] UKUT 36 (IAC).  It was commented that the applicant  had  failed
    to provide tangible evidence that he had been active in  demonstrations
    or events that  would  bring  him  to  the  attention  of  the  Iranian
    authorities, and when  identifying  the  risk  factors  that  might  be
    involved on his return it was  considered  that  he  would  not  be  of
    adverse interest to anyone and that there was no risk of persecution on
    return to Iran on account of his sur place  activities  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

13.  Thereafter the respondent  also  considered  various  articles  on  the
    deteriorating situation for the Ahwazis in Iran noting that  they  were
    marginalised and subject to  discrimination  in  access  to  education,
    employment, inadequate housing and political participation and cultural
    rights.  His history of not having experienced problems on that account
    was noted, and also it was  commented  that  although  he  claimed  his
    father was arrested he had failed to provide any evidence at his appeal
    to substantiate that claim.

14.  Thereafter the respondent went on to consider the claim  under  Article
    8.  I will say no more about that as it was  not  the  subject  of  any
    challenge in the grounds or in Ms Thirumaney's submissions.

15.  Ms Thirumaney concentrated her argument  on  the  applicant's  Facebook
    activities, his attendance at demonstrations and his  web  blogs.   She
    argued that the respondent had not attached appropriate weight  to  the
    country guidance case of SA concerning risk to the applicant on account
    of his ethnicity as an Ahwazi Arab.  She emphasised the nature  of  his
    activities including Facebook  posts  against  the  Iranian  regime  in
    support of the Ahwazis, and also his attendance at demonstrations.  His
    web blog was critical of the Iranian government  and  had  subsequently
    been blocked.  The country guidance noted the fact that the authorities
    were suspicious of Iranian  Arabs,  they  might  be  interrogated  more
    vigorously or generally attract more attention than Iranians  who  were
    not Arabs and in that sense being an Ahwazi Arab might enhance risks on
    return, though a person who was not otherwise at risk would not  be  at
    risk just because of his Arab ethnicity.

16.  As regards his Facebook and web blogs, it  was  argued  that  he  could
    easily be identified or attributed from his Facebook page, noting  that
    on his Facebook page his details including his e-mail address and  date
    of birth were  recorded  there,  his  photographs  were  all  over  his
    Facebook account and his web log mainly consisted of articles that were
    very critical of the Iranian regime and had subsequently  been  blocked
    by the Iranian Cyber  Police.   Background  evidence  which  she  cited
    referred to the monitoring by the Iranian state of 8  million  Facebook
    accounts and of continuing crackdown on any expression  of  dissent  or
    activities the authorities disapproved of online,  examples  of  people
    who had been arrested, detained and ill-treated  as  a  consequence  of
    criticising the government in posts made online and an increase in  the
    arrests of internet users.  The examples given included the case  of  a
    dual Iranian/UK citizen who was arrested when travelling to see  family
    in Iran because of comments he posted on Facebook and who was sentenced
    in May 2014 to twenty years' imprisonment.

17.  As  regards  the  applicant's  attendance  at  demonstrations  and  his
    association with the Ahwazi Democratic Front, Ms Thirumaney referred to
    the photographs and the applicant's  leafleting  activities.   Reliance
    was placed on the decision of the Upper Tribunal in AB [2015] UKUT 0257
    (IAC), which referred to risk to persons returning to Iran who would be
    likely to be asked about their internet activity and that it  would  be
    likely if they had any internet activity for that to be exposed and  if
    it was less than flattering of the government to lead  at  least  to  a
    real risk of persecution.  It also said that the capability to  monitor
    outside Iran was not very different  from  the  capability  to  monitor
    inside Iran.  There would be enhanced interest in a person whose  leave
    to remain had lapsed and who might be travelling on a special  passport
    and the more active they had been  the  more  likely  the  authorities'
    interest could lead to persecution.  A discreet person who had  blogged
    in the United Kingdom might not necessarily come to  the  attention  of
    the authorities but any lack of discretion  could  lead  to  a  hostile
    interrogation on return.

18.  In the detailed grounds and in her oral  submissions  Mrs  Gray  argued
    that it was clearly open to the respondent to conclude as she did.  She
    had taken into account the authorities such  as  SA  and  AB.   It  was
    necessary to  consider  the  level  of  political  involvement  and  to
    consider that issue before the question of  whether  the  person  would
    come to the attention of the authorities and the  priority  the  regime
    would give to training him.  It was that point that real risk was to be
    assessed.  A person's profile was important to the question of  whether
    they would be of interest.  All factors were to be considered.  It  was
    clear from BA [2011] UKUT 36 (IAC)  that  it  was  not  enough  for  an
    applicant simply to show that they were involved  in  activities  of  a
    relatively  limited  duration  and  importance  without  producing  any
    evidence that the authorities would be concerned  about  them  or  even
    that they were or would be aware of them.   The  central  question  was
    whether the applicant had shown  there  was  a  realistic  prospect  of
    success before a First-tier Judge in showing that he was of interest to
    the authorities.  It was said at paragraph 66 of BA that the infrequent
    demonstrator who played no particular role in demonstrations and  whose
    participation was not highlighted in the media did not face a real risk
    of identification and therefore not a  real  risk  of  consequent  ill-
    treatment on return.

19.  As regards SA, the appellant there had been found to  be  a  person  of
    interest to the authorities previously and he had left  illegally.   He
    had been detained and tortured.  There were clear points of  difference
    between his case and that of the applicant.

20.  AB was not country guidance as there was not  a  sufficient  evidential
    basis to provide guidance on the issues considered there so it  was  of
    use but was limited.  It did not supplant the requirement  in  BA  that
    the internet activities had  to  be  such  as  to  engage  the  adverse
    interest of the Iranian authorities.  The fact of  activities  was  not
    enough but the key question was whether the activities had  given  rise
    to adverse interest.  It was then necessary  to  consider  whether  the
    person would be identified and whether they would be of interest.

21.  If one looked at  the  decision  letter  it  could  be  seen  that  the
    relevant issues were all given appropriate consideration in the context
    of the correct legal test as set out in WM (DRC) [2006] EWCA Civ  1495.
    The test was whether the Secretary of State  had  rationally  concluded
    that there was not a realistic prospect of success in an appeal  before
    a First-tier Judge.

22.  With regard to AB and in particular paragraph 467, there had  to  be  a
    threshold and a profile for there to be adverse interest  and,  as  had
    been held in BA, simply establishing that a person had been active  was
    not enough to show a real risk.  It seemed  that  the  applicant  could
    return on his passport and there was nothing to support the  contention
    that the level of his activity was such as to put  him  at  real  risk.
    There was no evidence as to how he would be returning, it could  be  on
    his normal passport which he could renew so  that  the  type  of  pinch
    point referred to in AB would not exist.  He had been  back  previously
    and had not been stopped.

Discussion

23.  I think that Ms Thirumaney was right to concentrate on  the  issues  on
    which she did in her skeleton argument and in submissions.   I  see  no
    error of law in the respondent's  addressing  of  the  letter  from  Mr
    Alboshoka and the witness statement from the applicant's uncle.  Nor do
    I consider that there is any arguable risk purely  on  account  of  his
    Ahwazi ethnicity.  The photographs  provided  in  that  regard  are  of
    minimal materiality.

24.  My main concerns are with regard to the Facebook page  and  translation
    and the web blogs.  It is of course right, as  Mrs  Gray  pointed  out,
    that BA makes it clear that one has to consider  the  relevant  factors
    such as the nature of the  sur  place  activity,  identification  risk,
    factors  triggering   enquiry/action   on   return,   consequences   of
    identification and identification risk on return in assessing  risk  on
    return with regard to sur place activities.  It is  necessary  also  of
    course to bear in mind the issue is  that  of  whether  the  respondent
    rationally concluded that the previously considered material and  fresh
    material taken together are not such as to create a realistic  prospect
    of success before a First-tier Judge.  That in no sense  means  that  a
    favourable decision to the applicant on a fresh claim  judicial  review
    entails that an appeal would  succeed  but  no  more  than  that  on  a
    rational view there is a realistic prospect of such success.

25.  The particular  concerns  I  have  are  with  regard  to  the  enhanced
    activity since the decision of the judge.  That  decision  was  clearly
    right based on the evidence of activities at that time.   Matters  have
    progressed however in terms of the kind of matters which the  applicant
    has placed on the internet together with details that  are  capable  of
    identifying him, and in relation to which his ethnicity  as  an  Ahwazi
    Arab enhances the risk.  I am conscious of the fact that of course I am
    not deciding an appeal but simply determining the  rationality  of  the
    respondent's decision in this case.  In this context it is relevant  to
    bear in mind the points made such as the previous returns  to  Iran  by
    the applicant but the latest of those was in 2010 before  his  internet
    activity had developed to the point  that  it  has  now.   These  posts
    clearly include support for the Ahwazi  Democratic  Popular  Front  and
    also criticisms of  the  regime  in  Iran.   He  is  capable  of  being
    identified by the information he has provided,  and  the  grounds  note
    examples of cases including people based outside Iran, whose activities
    have been identified and who have been arrested and detained  and  ill-
    treated as a consequence.  The main tenor of  the  refusal  is  on  the
    basis that there is no evidence that the authorities would be aware  of
    the applicant's accounts.  It is difficult to see however how  evidence
    of that sort could be provided.  There is the risk, adverted to in  AB,
    of the likelihood of the applicant on  return  being  asked  about  his
    internet activity, a risk enhanced by his ethnicity.  There is evidence
    as I say of other people's online  activities  being  monitored  and  I
    consider that bringing these matters together it has  been  shown  that
    the decision of the respondent  is  irrational  in  not  taking  proper
    account of risk to the applicant on return in  light  of  the  evidence
    provided of his online activities and as  a  consequence  the  decision
    that the matter does not give rise to a  fresh  claim  is  in  my  view
    irrational and is accordingly quashed.

26.  I will hear the parties on costs and any  other  ancillary  matters  at
    the handing down of the judgment.~~~~0~~~~
