


                                                                JR/7692/2018


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber

                       Judicial Review Decision Notice




               The Queen on the application of Ali Muawia Musa
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Covid-19 Protocol: This judgment was handed  down  remotely.  The  date  and
time for hand-down is deemed to be at 10:00 am  on  Wednesday,  16  December
2020.

                     Before Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

            Application for judicial review: substantive decision

Having considered  all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  the  parties'
respective representatives, Ms Alison  Harvey,  of  Counsel,  instructed  by
Duncan Lewis Solicitors,  on  behalf  of  the  Applicant  and  Mr  Christian
Jowett, of Counsel,  instructed  by  the  Government  Legal  Department,  on
behalf of the Respondent, at a hearing  at  Birmingham  CJC  on  5  November
2020.

Decision: the application for judicial review is refused

Background

   1. The Applicant is a national of Sudan who challenges the decision of 19
      July 2018 which refused and certified as clearly unfounded  his  claim
      brought to prevent his removal to Italy, the impugned decision,  which
      is supported by a supplementary reasons  letter  of  the  14  November
      2019.
   2. Two matters are before the Tribunal today being an application by  the
      applicant for permission to rely on further medical evidence  and  the
      substantive hearing of the applicant's claim.
   3. There is common ground in relation to the applicable authorities which
      are set out in full in the applicant's documents and  referred  to  in
      the skeleton arguments. As such there is no need to quote  extensively
      from the same. The fact they are not mentioned does not mean they have
      not been considered with the required degree of  anxious  scrutiny  in
      arriving at this decision

Decision on application to rely on fresh medical evidence

   4. On 19 October  2020,  the  applicant  filed  a  skeleton  argument  in
      preparation for the substantive hearing listed for 5 November 2020.
   5. The skeleton argument refers to post decision material  for  which  no
      leave  had  been  given.  That  material,  which   was   obtained   to
      specifically address the Article 3 ECHR issue, is in the form of:

          i. A report by Dr Sahota,  a  Consultant  Forensic  Psychologist,
             dated 28 December 2019.


         ii. A report by Dr Ramzi Freij, a  Consultant,  dated  6  December
             2019.


        iii. A report by Dr A Griffiths, a GP  and  Primary  Care  Director
             with Assist Inclusion Healthcare, dated 6 December 2019.


         iv. The applicant's medical records dated 13 November 2019.

   6. The first question is why, as none of the material has  been  obtained
      recently and was no doubt in the possession of the  applicant's  legal
      advisers for some time, was no application made for permission to rely
      upon the same before? Whilst the applicant's solicitors have  admitted
      this was due to an 'oversight' that is not a satisfactory explanation.


   7. The fact the material was clearly not before  the  decision  maker  is
      shown  by  the  chronology.  The  respondent  initially  refused   the
      applicant's submissions on 7  February  2018.  The  impugned  decision
      which certified the claim is  dated  18  July  2018.  A  supplementary
      reasons letter, post SM and Others, is dated  14  November  2019.  The
      evidence could not have been before the decision maker as it  did  not
      exist at the time and most post-dated the respondents Detailed Grounds
      of Defence served on 19 November 2019.
   8. This is not a case in which the new material is of no relevance to the
      merits of the applicant's case, per se, for as Mr Jowett confirmed  in
      both his skeleton argument and oral submissions the respondent intends
      to give the new  material  proper  consideration  together  with  that
      previously filed, as it could not now be simply  ignored,  which  will
      lead to a fresh decision being made.
   9. I refuse permission to rely on the new material as it was  not  before
      the decision maker.  The  challenge  is  to  the  rationality  of  the
      certification not to the merits  of  the  applicant's  case.  The  new
      material introduces a wider consideration of the question  of  whether
      the applicant is a vulnerable person based upon material which was not
      before the  decision  maker  when  the  impugned  decision  was  being
      considered. That which was available is discussed  below.  I  find  to
      give the applicant permission to rely upon the new  material  at  this
      very late stage, on the day, is not in accordance with the  overriding
      objectives.  To be permitted to do so is contrary to the principle  of
      fair and open justice with parties setting out  the  nature  of  their
      case and evidence relied upon  in  advance  to  enable  issues  to  be
      understood and relevant arguments prepared. Only receiving  notice  of
      such new material when the applicant's skeleton argument was filed put
      the respondent in a difficult position. There is also no  satisfactory
      explanation  for  why  the  material  was  not  disclosed  when  first
      available, nearly a year ago, and why no application  was  made  then.
      The material will be considered in any event and  a  further  decision
      made.
  10. The sections of the applicant's skeleton argument which seek  to  rely
      on the new material are inadmissible although I accept Ms  Harvey  may
      have been unaware when drafting the same that permission to rely  upon
      the new material had not been sought or granted.
  11. Mr Jowett refers in his skeleton argument to the respondent's  primary
      position being that  the  claim  is  now  academic  for  even  if  the
      applicant succeeded  the  only  remedy  available  is  for  the  Upper
      Tribunal  to  quash  the  impugned  decision  which  will  lead  to  a
      reconsideration of the application in any event, precisely  what  will
      occur as a result of the new material having  now  been  provided.  An
      email to the applicant's representative inviting them to withdraw  the
      claim on that basis was rejected.
  12. For the applicant Ms  Harvey  submitted  the  claim  is  not  academic
      despite the new material not being admitted. The remedy sought in  the
      original claim is for an order quashing the decision  to  certify  the
      claim as  clearly  unfounded  and  for  a  mandatory  order  that  the
      applicant be granted an in country right of appeal in relation to  his
      human rights claim,  which  she  submits  are  remedies  that  can  be
      achieved on the material before the decision maker in any event.
  13. The case  therefore  proceeded  but  with  no  reference  to  the  new
      material.


The Chronology

  14. The applicant left Sudan and travelled to Italy where he claims he was
      fingerprinted and released onto the streets.
  15. The applicant travelled to France after a very  short  stay  in  Italy
      where he remained for three months before entering the UK illegally on
      17 December 2014.
  16. The applicant was removed to Italy on 10 February 2015.
  17. The applicant claims he remained in Rome for one month living  on  the
      streets before travelling to Calais where he stayed for two  years  in
      the camps.
  18. The applicant was encountered by the police in Birmingham  on  the  25
      May 2017 having, again, entered the UK illegally.
  19. On 23 June 2017, the respondent became aware the  applicant  had  been
      granted  refugee  status  in  Italy  and  so  was  a  beneficiary   of
      international protection and not an asylum seeker.
  20.  Notwithstanding  the  initial  correspondence  from  the  applicant's
      solicitors making extensive reference to the  Dublin  III  Convention,
      that is not applicable as the purpose of the Dublin Regulations is  to
      establishes the criteria and mechanisms for determining  which  Member
      State is responsible for examining an asylum claim made in the EU.
  21. On 22 January 2018, the respondent served the applicant with a  notice
      of removal to Italy pursuant to section 10 Immigration and Asylum  Act
      1999.
  22. On 26 January 2018, the applicant  lodged  submissions  assertion  his
      removal will be unlawful as there will be a breach of  his  Article  3
      ECHR rights.
  23. On 7 February 2018, the respondent refused leave on this basis.
  24. On 21 March 2018  and  27  June  2018,  the  applicant  filed  further
      submissions relying upon Article 3 ECHR.
  25. On 19 July 2018 the respondent refused the Article  3  representations
      and certified the same as 'clearly unfounded'  on  the  basis  it  was
      considered to be a claim that was bound to fail on the evidence before
      the decision maker.
  26. The applicant issued proceeding challenging the  certification  on  18
      October 2018 in the High Court (Administrative Division).
  27. On 23 November 2018, the proceedings were  transferred  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal (UTIAC).
  28. On 27 November 2018, the proceedings were stayed pending the  decision
      in R (on the application of SM & Others) v Secretary of State for  the
      Home Department (Dublin Regulation - Italy) [2018] UKUT 00429 (IAC).
  29. On 8 January 2019 Upper Tribunal  Judge  Canavan  made  directions  in
      relation to the filing of amended grounds consequent to  the  decision
      in SM & Others.
  30. On 31 July 2019 permission to bring judicial  review  was  refused  on
      papers by HHJ Stacey.
  31. On 9 October 2019 HHJ Worster granted permission at an oral hearing on
      the basis the claim predated SM and Others and needs to be  considered
      in light of it, which therefore warrants further consideration.

The irrationality challenge.

  32. The test for assessing whether a  decision  is  irrational  originates
      from the case of Associated Provincial  Picture  Houses  v  Wednesbury
      Corporation  [1948]  1  KB  223  which  set  out   the   standard   of
      unreasonableness of public-body decisions that would make them  liable
      to   be   quashed   on   judicial   review,   known   as   'Wednesbury
      unreasonableness'. That test requires an applicant to prove  that  the
      public body has acted so unreasonably that no other public body acting
      reasonably would do as that body did.
  33. In relation to the challenge to the decision to certify in this  case,
      it has not been shown the respondent failed to consider  the  material
      made available with the required  degree  of  anxious  scrutiny  as  a
      reading  of  the  material  provided  and  impugned  decision  clearly
      demonstrates.   The  Tribunal  is  grateful  to  Ms  Harvey  for   her
      confirmation during her submissions, following  Mr  Jowett's  forensic
      examination of each decision and the material considered  in  arriving
      at the same, that this aspect is not in dispute. That is  the  correct
      position in law.
  34. What remains in issue is the decision makers conclusion that this is a
      claim that is bound to fail. That is a fact sensitive issue.
  35. The impugned decision considered, among the applicant's other  papers,
      his witness statement of the 29 January 2028 and a psychiatric  report
      of Dr Chiediu Obuaya dated 16 March 2018.
  36. It is not made out the decision maker adopted a flawed approach to the
      evidence and/or the applicable standard of proof.
  37. In his report Dr Obuaya concluded the applicant fulfils  the  criteria
      of a moderate depressive episode  complicated  by  symptoms  of  PTSD,
      although he did not  meet  the  diagnostic  criteria  for  a  separate
      diagnosis of PTSD in its own right.
  38. In Dr Obuaya's opinion the depressive symptoms are  said  to  be  best
      understood as occurring in the context of several traumatic events  in
      Sudan which have been exacerbated by the  difficulties  the  applicant
      claimed to have faced in Italy where he claimed to have been destitute
      and felt vulnerable. Uncertainty about his immigration status is  also
      said to be a contributing factor to perpetuating his depression.
  39. It is stated the  applicant  was  not  receiving  any  anti-depressant
      medication or psychological therapy. It is noted in  the  report  that
      the NICE recommendation is to treat  depression  with  anti-depressive
      medication for up to six months. It is also recommended the  therapies
      outlined at [46-48] of the report should be commenced.
  40.  The  applicant's  case  is  that  based  on  this  material  and  his
      experiences in Italy, his claim is not one that is bound to fail, even
      when considering the judgment in SM and Others.
  41. R (on the application of SM & Others) v Secretary  of  State  for  the
      Home Department (Dublin Regulation - Italy) [2018]  UKUT  00429  (IAC)
      was promulgated on 4 December 2018, the headnote of which reads:

      (1)         Subject to paragraph (2) below, on the evidence before the
           Upper Tribunal, no judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal,  properly
           directed, could find there is a real risk of an asylum seeker or
           Beneficiary of International Protection (BIP) suffering  Article
           3 ill-treatment if returned to  Italy  pursuant  to  the  Dublin
           Regulation, by reason only of  the  situation  that  the  person
           concerned may be reasonably likely to experience in Italy, as  a
           "Dublin returnee". The  evidence  does  not  rebut  the  general
           presumption  that  Italy  will  comply  with  its  international
           obligations in such cases.


      (2)          However,  the  evidence  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
           markedly different from that previously considered by  the  High
           Court in "Dublin" cases concerning Italy, such that  it  cannot,
           without more, be said a human rights claim based on Article 3 is
           bound  to  fail,  if  the  claim  is  made  by  a  'particularly
           vulnerable person' (as described in paragraph (3) below).


      (3)         The categories of "vulnerable persons" identified  in  the
           Reception Directive are a starting point for assessing whether a
           person has a particular vulnerability for the purposes  of  this
           paragraph. The extent of  a  person's  particular  vulnerability
           must be sufficiently  severe  to  show  a  potential  breach  of
           Article  3.  It  is  difficult  to  specify  when  a  particular
           vulnerability might require additional safeguarding to protect a
           person's rights under Article 3. The assessment will  depend  on
           the facts of each case. However,  a  person  who  makes  general
           assertions about  mental  health  problems  without  independent
           evidence or who has been diagnosed with  a  mild  mental  health
           condition  or  has  a  minor  disability  may  have   sufficient
           resilience to cope with the procedures on return to Italy,  even
           if it entails the possibility of facing  a  difficult  temporary
           period  of  homelessness  or  basic  conditions  in   first-line
           reception facilities. There  will  be  cases  where  a  person's
           particular vulnerability is sufficiently serious that  the  risk
           of even a temporary period of homelessness  or  housing  in  the
           basic  conditions  of  first-line  reception  might  cross   the
           relevant threshold. Such cases are likely to include those  with
           significant mental or physical health problems or  disabilities.
           Other people may have inherent characteristics that render  them
           particularly  vulnerable  e.g.  unaccompanied  children  or  the
           elderly.


      (4)         In the case of a  'particularly  vulnerable  person',  the
           following considerations apply:


              i) A failure by the respondent to consider whether to exercise
                 discretion under article 17(2) of the Dublin Regulation  is
                 likely to render the certification decision unlawful;


             ii) If  the  respondent  considers  whether  to  exercise  such
                 discretion but  decides  not  to  do  so,  the  return  and
                 reception of the person concerned will  need  to  be  well-
                 planned. Although the Italian authorities would not want to
                 leave  a  particularly  vulnerable  asylum  seeker  or  BIP
                 without support, the evidence indicates that  there  is  no
                 general process, similar to that which exists for  families
                 with  children,  to  ensure  that  particularly  vulnerable
                 persons will not be at real risk of  Article  3  treatment,
                 while waiting for suitable support  and  accommodation,  of
                 which there is an acute shortage. In order to  protect  the
                 rights of such a person in accordance with the respondent's
                 duties under the European Convention, the respondent  would
                 need to seek an assurance from the Italian authorities that
                 suitable support and accommodation will be in place, before
                 effecting a transfer.


            iii) It follows that a failure to obtain such an assurance prior
                 to the transfer of  a  particularly  vulnerable  person  is
                 likely to give rise to a human rights  claim  that  is  not
                 necessarily 'bound to fail' before the First-tier Tribunal.

  42. Following publication of SM and Others a supplementary decision letter
      of 14 November  2019  was  published  and  the  Grounds  of  challenge
      amended.
  43. The applicant's  case  is  that  he  satisfies  the  definition  of  a
      'particularly vulnerable person' on the evidence such that  his  claim
      was not bound to fail. The respondent's case is that the evidence  did
      not  establish   that   the   extent   of   the   applicant's   health
      issues/vulnerability were sufficiently  severe  to  show  a  potential
      breach of Article 3 ECHR, on the facts.
  44. This issue is of importance in light of [339] of SM and  Others  where
      it is written:

           339.        In  conclusion,  the  Tribunal  finds  that,  having
                 regard to the evidence as a whole,  a  hypothetical  First-
                 tier Tribunal could not, on the  basis  of  that  evidence,
                 rationally conclude that a BIP would be  at  real  risk  of
                 Article 3 treatment,  if  returned  to  Italy  pursuant  to
                 Dublin III.

  45. The applicant refers to part of the headnote in SM and Others where it
      is written "However, a  person  who  makes  general  assertions  about
      mental health problems without independent evidence or  who  has  been
      diagnosed  with  a  mild  mental  health  condition  or  has  a  minor
      disability may have sufficient resilience to cope with the  procedures
      on return to Italy, even if it entails the  possibility  of  facing  a
      difficult temporary period of  homelessness  or  basic  conditions  in
      first-line reception facilities" asserting this does not apply to  him
      as he has been  diagnosed  as  suffering  from  a  moderate  not  mild
      depressive episode. Such a submission in isolation does  not  arguably
      assist the applicant, per se.
  46. It is important to read SM and Others as a whole.  The section of  the
      headnote:  "There  will  be  cases   where   a   person's   particular
      vulnerability  is  sufficiently  serious  that  the  risk  of  even  a
      temporary period of homelessness or housing in the basic conditions of
      first-line reception might cross the relevant  threshold.  Such  cases
      are likely to include those with significant mental or physical health
      problems   or   disabilities.   Other   people   may   have   inherent
      characteristics  that  render  them   particularly   vulnerable   e.g.
      unaccompanied children or the elderly" is of importance. A significant
      mental illness can be defined by its duration and  the  disability  it
      produces and impact this may  have  upon  the  sufferer  in  light  of
      conditions he or she is likely to experience on return. This  is  fact
      sensitive. The conclusion the report of Dr Obuaya did not support  the
      applicant's case that his presentation meant there will be a breach of
      Article 3 has not been shown to irrational.
  47. It has also not been shown to be irrational for the decision maker  to
      conclude in the impugned decision that the applicant had  demonstrated
      through his actions, considerable resilience  and  not  vulnerability.
      Whilst the applicant disagrees and challenges such an assertion it has
      not been shown it is a conclusion outside the range of those available
      to the decision maker on the evidence.
  48. It is also noted in the supplementary decision that consideration  has
      been given to the applicant's health care entitlement in  Italy  as  a
      beneficiary of international protection.  It  was  not  shown  on  the
      evidence  available  to  the  decision  maker  that   the   treatments
      recommended by Dr Obuaya are not reasonably available, not accessible,
      or that they will not be sufficient to assist the applicant  with  his
      diagnosed mental health needs in Italy.
  49.  The  decision  maker,  whilst  not  accepting  the  applicant  is   a
      particularly vulnerable person,  also  confirmed  that  in  any  event
      adequate arrangements and assistance will be made to ensure  that  the
      applicant's return will not result in a breach of Article 3  ECHR.  It
      is the applicant's case that his return will be unlawful as there will
      be such a breach but as noted in SM and Other: "in  order  to  protect
      the rights of such a person in accordance with the respondent's duties
      under the European Convention, the respondent would need  to  seek  an
      assurance from the  Italian  authorities  that  suitable  support  and
      accommodation will be in place, before effecting a  transfer".  It  is
      reasonable to infer this is the nature of  the  enquiry  the  decision
      maker proposes to make.
  50. The requirement to take an applicant's case at its  highest  does  not
      mean the decision maker was bound to accept what  was  being  said  in
      support of the claim, without  more.  The  decision  maker  records  a
      number of concerns with the applicant's evidence which have  not  been
      shown to be conclusions not available to the  decision  maker  on  the
      material provided.
  51. I find the applicant has  failed  to  establish  the  decision  makers
      conclusion he is not a particularly  vulnerable  person  whose  return
      will result in a breach of Article 3 ECHR is  irrational,  based  upon
      the material  available  to  the  decision-maker.  Such  evidence  was
      considered with the required degree of anxious scrutiny and it has not
      made out that such material warranted a finding of the nature of  that
      the applicant is seeking.
  52. It is also arguable that the applicant  or  his  representatives  were
      aware of the lack  of  suitable  material  and  the  failings  in  the
      original report provided to the decision-maker as otherwise it is hard
      to see why they would incur additional cost to  the  public  purse  in
      securing the reports of Dr Sahota, Dr Freij and Dr Griffiths  to  deal
      with the deficiencies in the evidence.
  53. I find the applicant has failed to establish public law error  in  the
      decision-maker's conclusion that, on the basis of the material  relied
      upon by the applicant at that time and  applicable  legal  principles,
      the application was bound to fail warranting the certification of  the
      claim. Such conclusion is neither irrational on the facts  or  in  law
      and is a conclusion  wholly  within  the  range  of  those  reasonably
      available to the decision maker.

Order


  54. I therefore order that the judicial review application be dismissed.



Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal

  55. Of the Tribunal's own motion, permission to appeal  to  the  Court  of
      Appel is refused, no arguable basis for granting permission to  appeal
      having been identified.


 Costs

  56. The applicant shall pay the respondents reasonable costs of the  claim
      summarily assessed in the sum of �13,312.35.


                       Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
            Signed:




        Dated:    16 December 2020



Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

 A party may appeal against such a decision to the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3).

