
IAC-FH-CK-V1

                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                 EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT GIVEN FOLLOWING HEARING

                                                                JR/7806/2018


                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                                                             4 November 2019


                                  The QUEEN
                      (ON The application OF Mr Zi Ye)
                                                                   Applicant


                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L SMITH


                               - - - - - - - -

Mr A Pipe, instructed by Lin & Co Solicitors appeared on behalf of the
Applicant.

Mr Z Malik, instructed by the Government Legal Department appeared on
behalf of the Respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                    ON AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                              APPROVED JUDGMENT
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

JUDGE smith: This is a challenge to the Respondent's decision dated 3
September 2018, maintained following administrative review on 11 October
2018, refusing the Applicant further leave to remain as a Tier 1
Entrepreneur.  Permission to apply for judicial review was granted by Judge
Blum at an oral hearing on 24 July 2019 in the following terms:


"1.  Paragraph 47 of Appendix A of the Immigration Rules prohibits
investment in a UK business that manages property '..for the purpose of
renting it out or resale'.  Mr Pipe accepted that the transactions in the
applicant's bank account relating to 'rent' were prima facie 'suspicious'.
It is nevertheless arguable, on the particular facts of this case, that the
applicant's business did not manage property for rental purposes and that a
duty arose to give the applicant an opportunity to provide an explanation
for the transactions in light of the other documentary evidence suggesting
the applicant's business did not own any property and had not received any
rental income and in the absence of evidence that a service charge was
levied in respect of rent collected by the company.

2.   The respondent did not appear to expressly reject the explanation
provided by the applicant in his Administrative Review request, but
concluded that the original caseworker's decision was one he was entitled
to make based on the documents submitted with the application.  The
Tribunal may wish to consider the scope of Administrative Review,
particularly with respect of AR2.3 and AR2.11(d) (relating to 'case-working
errors'), given the need for Administrative Review to be an efficacious
remedy, R (on the application of Prathipati) v Secretary of State for the
Home Department (discretion - exceptional circumstances) [2018] UKUT 427
(IAC), and in the context of an explanation provided in the applicant's
Administrative Review request that did not rely on any new documents."

As a result of the exchange of pleadings, the issues have narrowed
considerably. In essence, the challenge is now confined to the
Administrative Review decision and whether the Respondent has engaged with
the explanation given and/or whether her decision is unreasonable.  Mr Pipe
fairly conceded that he could not challenge the Respondent's first decision
for reasons which follow and that if I am against him on the
rationality/reasoning point he cannot succeed on a fairness challenge as
the Respondent has confirmed that she considered the explanation put
forward on Administrative Review but that she had rejected it because that
explanation did not avail the Applicant.

The Respondent refused the application under paragraph 245DD of the
Immigration Rules, applying paragraph 47 of Appendix A to the Rules
("Paragraph 47"), which reads as follows:

"For the purposes of Tables 4, 5 and 6 'investment and business activity'
does not include investment in any residential accommodation, property
development or property management and must not be in the form of a
director's loan unless it is unsecured and subordinated in favour of the
business.  'Property development or property management' in this context
means any development of property owned by the applicant or his business to
increase the value of the property with a view to earning a return either
through rent or a future sale or both or management of property, whether or
not it is owned by the applicant or his business, for the purposes of
renting it out or resale.  The principle is that the business income must
be generated from the supply of goods and/or services and not derived from
the increased value of property or any income generated from property, such
as rent."

[my emphasis]

Applying that paragraph, the Applicant was awarded zero points for
"Attributes".

The reasoning in the Respondent's first decision was that the Applicant's
bank statements which accompanied his application disclosed a number of
entries referred to as "rent".  I observe that others also refer to what
are clearly property addresses.  As such, the Respondent took the view that
the Applicant was deriving his business income or at least some of it from
the management of property and accordingly that he could not satisfy the
Immigration Rules because such activity is precluded by Paragraph 47. It is
conceded by Mr Pipe that, based on the documents before the Respondent,
this was not an irrational approach in the first decision.

The way in which the Respondent explains the decision is this.  On the
clear and plain wording of Paragraph 47, the investment in the business
cannot include investment in property management, that management of
property is such whether or not the property is owned by the Applicant or
his business and that the business income cannot include any income
generated from property, such as rent.  The prohibition does not mean that
all the business income has to be generated from property and the income
does not need to be rent as such. That is simply an example.

The Applicant says that his business does not derive income from property
management but provides a concierge service.  In support of his case, he
relies on invoices which were issued to the students to whom he provides
services.  Those set out the services as a consultancy fee, and list the
other services performed.  There is then a subtotal of the amount and an
additional entry described as "transfer of rent".  As I indicated to Mr
Pipe in the course his submissions, that seems to me to be the strongest
evidence in favour of the Applicant's case that all he is doing is paying
over rent to the letting agency/landlord without deduction or charge.

However, as part of the Administrative Review the Applicant provided a
fuller description of the nature of his business activities as follows:

"1.  The Company's main activities are to provide concierge-style services
as a package to international students in the UK.  The package includes,
but is not limited to, airport pickup upon the students' arrival in the UK,
finding suitable accommodation for the students, paying the rent and
deposit on behalf of the students to landlords or letting agencies,
providing storage services and providing any service that the students may
require during their time in the UK.  The Company has built up an excellent
reputation through word-of-mouth amongst the student and parent community
since it was established and has gained the trust of its customers who now
confidently allow the company to manage many aspects of the students' life
in the UK, including acting as the students' agent to liaise with letting
agents or landlords.  The Company's customers feel greater security and
confidence in paying the rent to the Company as a go-between instead of
paying the rent direct to the letting agent or landlord.  In addition, if
any issues arise with the letting agent and/or the landlord, then the
Company will deal with the issues on behalf of its customers.  As noted in
the Profit & Loss Account, the Company charges a 'Management Service Fee in
return for its concierge-style services.

2.   We understand that under the accounting rules, if a company were to
receive any rental income, then this income must be disclosed in the Profit
& Loss Account.  Please refer to the Company's Profit & Loss Account
already provided, which does not show any receipt of any rental income as
there was none.

3.   With reference to the Company's accounts already provided, they show
that the Company does not own any fixed assets, i.e., the Company does not
own any properties and therefore it cannot generate rental income.

4.   Please refer to the company's tax return for the period 01/03/2016 to
28/02/2017 already supplied, in particular section 190 shows "income from a
property business" as �nil.  This is because the Company does not receive
any rental income or any other income from the property business.

5.   With reference to the Company's business bank statements ('the
statements'), there are receipts of monies from its customers with the
narrative 'rent' or the narrative of a property address which has created
misunderstanding: such monies are not rental income for the Company.
Instead, the rental payments are for the Company to pass on to the various
letting agents and landlords.  Upon receipt of the rental payments, the
Company transfers the rent portion to the relevant letting agent or
landlord and retains the Management Service Fee portion for itself.
Therefore, the Statement shows a lot of entries paying various letting
agents and landlords.  With regard to entries showing in the Statements
relating to rental payments, only the Management Service Fee portion form
part of the Company's revenue and not any part of the actual rent.  The
Company charges for services of acting as a liaison with letting agents
and/or landlords on behalf of the students."

[my emphasis]

The difficulty for the Applicant is that whilst some parts of that
explanation might point in the direction for which he contends, such as the
reference to the "Management Service Fee portion" making up the Company's
revenue and not any part of the actual rent, the explanation as there given
is ambiguous.  In particular, at paragraph [1], the Company's main
activities are said to be to provide concierge-style services as a package,
but that package as then described is said to include the payment of rent
and deposits on behalf of the students.  The final sentence confirms that
the Company charges a "Management Service Fee" in return for provision of
those services.

Whilst I accept that the profit and loss account does not include rental
income, that does not assist the Applicant. As I understand the
Respondent's case, the prohibited activity is the charging of a management
service fee for collection and payment of rent and not the receipt of
rental as such.  Indeed, I did not understand Mr Pipe to dispute that if
the Applicant was operating a business purely as a letting agency and
levying a fee based on a percentage of the rent or even a flat fee per
property, this would fall within the prohibition in Paragraph 47.  The
income does not have to be rent as such, that is just one example.

The Respondent relies heavily on paragraph [5] of the explanation given in
the Administrative Review.  As I have already noted, the reference there to
"actual rent" might assist the Applicant but as the Respondent points out,
the reference to the rent portion being passed on whilst the "Management
Service Fee portion" is retained does not.

Further, the last sentence makes the point that the Company charges for
acting as liaison with the letting agents and/or landlords, which, if
anything, points in the direction of the Company deriving income from the
rents paid whilst also transferring over the actual rent payable.  Although
I accept therefore that the invoices are capable of supporting an
interpretation that no money is retained and the rent is transferred with
no deduction, those invoices have to be read with the explanation given in
the Administrative Review.

This is of course a judicial review and as such, it is not a matter of how
I understand the explanation but how the Respondent understood it.  I
accept of course also that I am not here interpreting a statute either in
terms of the wording of Paragraph 47, still less in relation to the wording
of the explanation given in the Administrative Review.  I therefore turn to
the Respondent's administrative review decision which is under challenge to
see how she approached the issue.  Having referred to the original decision
and Paragraph 47, the Respondent goes on to say this:

"...Under those Rules, you were required to demonstrate that you were not
engaged with business activity related to residential accommodation.

You have challenged the decision to refuse your application for leave to
remain as a Tier 1 Entrepreneur, which was refused on the basis that the
original caseworker concluded your bank statements show a regular income
from rent and not from the supply of goods or services as specified in
Paragraph 47 of Appendix A of the Immigration Rules.  You have claimed in
your Admin Review that your business activities are a concierge service,
which in turn offers a range of services.  This includes you acting on
behalf of the students as a 'go-between', transferring rent money from the
students to the landlords.  You claim that your business accounts do not
confirm ownership of any assets or properties from which rent is generated,
nor is any rental income declared in those accounts.  You have highlighted
that your company's tax returns report no income from property business.

You claim that the bank statements which show income under the reference of
'rent' is a misunderstanding, because the rent is always passed on to the
relevant landlords or letting agents while you retain a service fee.

Upon review of your application we are satisfied that the original
caseworker was correct to refuse your application.  Please be aware that
the Admin Review process is limited to assessing the information which was
available to the original caseworker at the time of your application, and
whether or not the original caseworker was reasonable when deciding the
outcome of your application with respect to the evidence available."

    I pause to observe that it is that latter sentence which appears to be
    the basis on which permission was granted at least in part. However, it
    is now confirmed by the Respondent that the Applicant's explanation was
    in fact considered.  The decision letter continues as follows:

"A review of your bank statements confirms that there are numerous
instances where payment has been made into your business account under the
reference of 'rent', 'house rent', 'rent payment' or similar wording.
Furthermore, information about your company on the Companies House website,
under the heading of 'Nature of Business' lists 'other accommodation'.
Therefore we are satisfied that the original caseworker was reasonable to
raise concerns over the substantial rental payments entering your business
bank account because such activity is not permitted under the Immigration
Rules for Tier 1 Entrepreneurs.  Unfortunately there is no clear indication
on the other supporting documents submitted with your application which
would have lead the original caseworker to assess such
evidence/transactions within the context of a concierge service.  A lack of
declarations on your business accounts/tax returns related to property
ownerships is not considered sufficient to dispel the original caseworker's
concerns over the visible bank transactions."

As the Respondent accepts, there is no express rejection of the explanation
given by the Applicant in the Administrative Review decision.  However, the
Respondent has clarified her position at [21] to [25] of her detailed
grounds.  As she there explains, the explanation given by the Applicant is
consistent with the application of Paragraph 47.  As is said at [21] of the
detailed grounds by reference to [5] of the Administrative Review, the
activity as there described "is precisely what is excluded under Paragraph
47".

The issue for me is whether the Respondent has engaged with the explanation
given and whether her decision is irrational or fails to give reasons for
rejecting it.  As I have already indicated, the Respondent did not reject
the explanation.  Her case is that the business activity as she understood
it and as set out in the Administrative Review is not permitted under
Paragraph 47. I cannot say that her conclusion to that effect was
irrational to the higher threshold which applies, particularly when the
explanation is read as a whole and notwithstanding those parts which might
support the Applicant's case (as I have already explained).

The outcome may have been different if the Applicant or his advisers had
attempted to reconcile the bank statement entries with the invoices and
perhaps included some evidence of the actual rent charged to show that no
part of the rent had been withheld.  It might have been different if the
Applicant had provided further detail of the consultancy fee and other
services and not made any reference to the services provided as including
liaison between student and landlord/letting agency or had stated in terms
that there were no deductions from rent and that the management service fee
has no link to the rent (if that is so).  It might have been different if
the Applicant had invoiced the students separately for rent, making clear
that the rent as transferred was the exact amount payable under the tenancy
agreement with no deductions and that no fee was charged for transferring
that rent.

I am not here, however, to make the Applicant's case for him any more than
was the Secretary of State.  It was for the Applicant to make his case to
the Secretary of State and to demonstrate that he was entitled to the
relevant points.  On this occasion, I am satisfied that he failed to do so
and that the Secretary of State was entitled to reach the decisions she
did.  For those reasons, I refuse the application for judicial review.

I end by expressing some sympathy for the Applicant if indeed his business
is simply transferring over rental income with no deduction or charge. If
he were to make a further application (in the event that he is able to do
so) he will, however, need to make plain how the Company's income is
derived so that his explanation clearly shows that the business activity is
not precluded by Paragraph 47.

For the foregoing reasons, I refuse the application for judicial review.

Application for Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal

Mr Pipe does not make an application for permission to appeal.  I am
required to deal with that, however, in any event.  I refuse permission to
appeal for the reasons I have already given.  There is no arguable error in
my decision.

Costs

I make an order that the Applicant pay the Respondent's reasonable costs on
the standard basis, to be assessed by a Costs Judge if not agreed.

                                  ~~~~0~~~~


                                                                      UTIJR6


                                                                JR/7806/2018


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber
                       Judicial Review Decision Notice







                       The Queen on the application of
                                    Zi Ye
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

                      Before Upper Tribunal Judge Smith


            Application for judicial review: substantive decision

Having considered all documents lodged and having heard from Mr  A  Pipe  of
Counsel instructed by Lin & Co solicitors on behalf of the Applicant and  Mr
Z Malik of Counsel,  instructed  by  the  Government  Legal  Department,  on
behalf of the Respondent, at a hearing at Field House, London  on  Monday  4
November 2019

Decision: the application for judicial review is refused
For the reasons contained in my decision given orally  at  the  end  of  the
hearing on 4 November, a transcript of which is attached hereto

Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal
No application was made for permission to appeal.  I  refuse  permission  to
appeal in any event.  There is no arguable error of law in my decision.


Costs
The  Applicant  shall  pay  the  Respondent's  reasonable  costs   of   this
application on the standard basis, to be assessed by a Costs  Judge  if  not
agreed.
Reasons
The Applicant confirmed that he could not resist such an order.  I  did  not
have any schedule of costs from the Respondent in order to  assess  quantum.



         Signed:  [pic]


                       Upper Tribunal Judge Smith


        Dated:         6 November 2019










Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

 A party may appeal against such a decision to the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was given (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3(2)).




