





                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

              Given orally at Field House on 5th December 2016

                                                                JR/2426/2016

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                                                           5th December 2016


                                  The QUEEN
                         (ON The application OF SA)
                                                                   Applicant


                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PETER LANE


                               - - - - - - - -

Mr R Khubber, instructed by Turpin & Miller LLP, appeared on behalf of the
Applicant.

Mr Z Malik, instructed by the Government Legal Department, appeared on
behalf of the Respondent.







                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                                  JUDGMENT
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -


JUDGE PETER LANE:  This  is  an  application  for  judicial  review  of  the
    respondent's decision of 4th December 2015 not to treat his submissions
    of January 2013 as a fresh asylum or human  rights  claim.   Permission
    was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun on 12th May 2016.


2.   The immigration history of the applicant  is  essentially  as  follows.
    In November 2007, he arrived in the United Kingdom claiming  to  be  an
    unaccompanied minor.  He also claimed asylum at  that  time.   In  June
    2008, his application for asylum was refused and he  appealed  to  what
    was then the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal, which heard his appeal in
    July 2008 and in August of that year dismissed it.

3.   In April 2012, the applicant made further submissions  and  those  were
    rejected by the respondent in July 2012.  Further submissions were made
    in 2013 and 2015, leading to the decision letter of 4th December 2015.

4.   The decision letter is a long and  relatively  detailed  document.   It
    describes the submissions as contending on the applicant's behalf  that
    he  feared  returning  to  Iraq  because  he  would  be  subjected   to
    persecution; and that, if he were removed, both Articles 3 and 8 of the
    ECHR would be breached, on the basis that he would be undocumented.  He
    also said that there was a level of indiscriminate violence in Iraq and
    that his life would, accordingly, be in danger there.

5.   The respondent noted that, in the 2008 determination of  the  AIT,  the
    applicant had been found not to have a well-founded fear at that  time.
    Indeed, the Immigration Judge in that case found that  the  applicant's
    claim was not credible and that no weight should be given to it.

6.    Pausing  there,  it  is  helpful  at  this  stage  to  turn   to   the
    determination.  The judge declined to believe the  applicant's  account
    that he would suffer religious discrimination as being a member of what
    is called the Kaka'I faith.  The judge regarded the applicant's account
    of how he had been removed from Iraq as not credible.   It  seems  that
    the judge was not persuaded that the applicant might be of the  age  he
    claimed, although no formal finding was made and  the  judge  certainly
    assessed the applicant on the basis that he was a minor.

7.   There was also doubt  in  the  judge's  mind  that  the  applicant  was
    without family members in Iraq.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  reasonably
    apparent that the judge thought the converse was  likely  to  be  true.
    What does appear to be common ground, however, is that  the  judge  did
    not dispute the fact that the applicant came from Kirkuk.   That  is  a
    matter of some significance, to which we will turn in due course.

8.   The decision letter continued by rejecting the challenge  based  on  an
    alleged failure to comply with the respondent's obligations relating to
    tracing.  It is common ground that that particular aspect of the matter
    is no longer in issue.

9.   The writer of the decision letter referred  to  the  issue  of  Article
    15(c), in the context of the  case  in  the  Upper  Tribunal's  country
    guidance in AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544  (IAC).   It  is
    significant that the decision in AA found no place in  the  submissions
    made to the respondent which  led  to  the  decision  letter.  That  is
    unsurprising because when those submissions were  made,  and  for  some
    time thereafter, AA had not been  promulgated.   So,  the  respondent's
    decision quite rightly engaged with AA, notwithstanding that it did not
    form part of the submissions made by the applicant  or  those  advising
    him.

10.  The decision letter considered the issue of internal relocation in  the
    context of AA.  It noted that internal relocation  might  be  a  viable
    option but only if the risk is not present in the place  of  relocation
    and it would not be unduly harsh to relocate.

11.  There was also consideration  made  of  the  significant  issue,  which
    featured in  AA,  regarding  documentation  and  the  effect  that  the
    presence or absence of documentation might have on  ability  to  return
    and, indeed, on risk on return.  As to that last issue,  permission  to
    appeal to the Court of Appeal  has  been  granted  in  respect  of  the
    decision in AA but I do not consider that that has any material part to
    play in the proceedings before this Tribunal.

12.  The letter accepted that the applicant came from Kirkuk.  It was  noted
    that Kirkuk was a contested area, as found by the Tribunal in AA.  That
    meant, of course, that internal  relocation  loomed  large  because  it
    could not be said that Kirkuk was a safe place  for  the  applicant  to
    return. However, the conclusion drawn by the respondent  was  that  the
    applicant could internally relocate, either to Baghdad or  to  the  IKR
    area; that is to say, the so-called Kurdish Autonomous Zone of Iraq.

13.    Mr Malik points out in  that  regard  and,  indeed,  in  relation  to
    relocation generally, that the writer of the decision noted the absence
    of any evidence from the applicant to make good a claim  that  internal
    relocation could not reasonably be undertaken.   For  example,  we  see
    references to the absence of evidence at page 16 and also at page 17 of
    the decision.

14.  Regarding assistance from others, it was noted  at  page  20  that  the
    applicant had a mother and two sisters, who were said to be living near
    Kirkuk, and that he also had an uncle who had helped  him.   All  those
    matters persuaded the respondent that, in the light of the case of  AA,
    the submissions would not give rise to a fresh claim.

15.  The challenge to the decision is mounted  on  two  bases.   Mr  Khubber
    contends first that it  appears  from  the  decision  letter  that  the
    respondent did not ask herself the correct question,  as  expressed  in
    the well-known case of WM (DRC) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1495.

16.  This  essential  question  is  whether  there  would  be  a  reasonable
    prospect of success before a hypothetical judge.  That is  a  different
    matter from the respondent asking herself whether she  would  or  would
    not conclude that a claim to international  protection  could  be  made
    good.

17.  So far as  that  challenge  is  concerned,  I  have  no  hesitation  in
    rejecting it.  Mr Malik has pointed to various passages in the decision
    letter, for example at the bottom of page 18 and the top  of  page  19,
    where the correct question is expressly posed. As  I  mentioned  to  Mr
    Khubber in the course of argument, I do not  consider  the  penultimate
    paragraph on page  24  of  the  decision  letter  (which  he  said  was
    indicative of the respondent displacing the hypothetical  judge)  falls
    to be read as heretical or problematic in any way.

18.  The issue, therefore, comes down to the sole question  of  whether  the
    respondent has demonstrated the requisite degree of  anxious  scrutiny.
    In this regard, Mr Khubber took me in some detail through the  relevant
    decisions, in particular the decision in AA, and  it  is  necessary  to
    look at that case with some care.

19.  The country guidance in AA may perhaps be summarised  very  briefly  as
    follows.  First, there was at  the  relevant  time  an  internal  armed
    conflict within  the  scope  of  Article  15(c)  of  the  Qualification
    Directive taking place in  various  parts  of  Iraq,  largely  but  not
    entirely as a result of the activities of an Islamist  group  known  as
    ISIL.  Amongst the places where problems  arose  was  the  area  within
    which the applicant's home was located.

20.   Various  findings  were  then  made  relating  to  documentation.   In
    particular, the issue  of  the  so-called  CSID  was  examined  by  the
    Tribunal.  As for this:

         "A CSID is generally required in  order  for  an  Iraqi  to  access
         financial assistance from the authorities;  employment;  education;
         housing; and medical treatment.  If P shows there are no family  or
         other members likely to be able to provide means of support,  P  is
         in general likely to face a real risk of destitution, amounting  to
         serious harm, if, by the time  any  funds  provided  to  P  by  the
         Secretary of State or her agents to assist  P's  return  have  been
         exhausted, it is reasonably likely that P will still have no  CSID"
         (Guidance, B11).

21.  What emerges, I think, from AA is that the presence of  family  members
    in Iraq and the ability of those members to contact and be  of  use  to
    the applicant are issues of general  significance  in  determining  not
    just whether the proposed returnee  may  be  able  to  acquire  certain
    documentation but also whether he or she may be assisted financially or
    in other ways.  That assumes particular significance  where,  as  here,
    the issue comes down to whether it would be reasonable in Januzi [2006]
    UKHL 5 terms for the applicant to relocate from the contested  area  of
    his home to some other part  of  Iraq.   In  practice,  that  would  be
    Baghdad,  at  least  initially,  and  possibly  later  on  the  Kurdish
    Autonomous Area.

22.  That, then, was the essence of the  country  guidance,  so  far  as  it
    relates to the applicant.  Mr Khubber  rightly  pointed  out  that  the
    issue of internal relocation, insofar as it  features  in  the  country
    guidance, was emphasised by the  Tribunal  in  AA  to  be  of  a  fact-
    sensitive nature.

23.  Mr Khubber then drew attention, importantly in my view, to the  way  in
    which the actual appellant in AA had  been  dealt  with  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in the country guidance case.   He  sought  to  draw  relevant
    parallels between the individual, AA, and his  client,  the  applicant.
    Thus, for instance, we see in paragraph 3 of AA that AA was a minor  at
    relevant times, as was the applicant in the present case.

24.  We also see that AA's credibility had been rejected by  an  Immigration
    Judge. That is to be found at paragraph 4 of AA.  AA came from  Kirkuk,
    which was subject to Article 15(c) risk, and that is  the  position  of
    our applicant.  AA was assumed hypothetically to be bound  for  Baghdad
    initially. So too is the present applicant.

25.  There was no evidence of AA's having, or having access to,  a  passport
    or a laissez-passer.  We see that from paragraph 206 of AA.  The  same,
    Mr Khubber says, is true of the present applicant.

26.  The passages of particular significance referred to by Mr  Khubber  are
    to be found at the very end of the decision in  AA.   Having  made  the
    various findings that I have just summarised,  the  Tribunal  concluded
    that further fact-finding was necessary in order to  determine  whether
    AA himself was or was not at real risk, applying the  country  guidance
    that was given by the Tribunal in the determination.

27.  In particular, the Tribunal said this:

         "209.    The Tribunal last undertook a  fact  finding  exercise  in
                relation to this appellant as long ago as  April  2011  i.e.
                over four years ago.  Whilst the findings of  fact  made  by
                Designated Judge Wynne have been preserved, he did not  make
                findings on all of the matters that have subsequently become
                relevant to assessment of  the  appellant's  claim.   It  is
                equally clear that as a consequence of the passage  of  time
                the situation in Iraq for the appellant's  family  may  have
                changed.  Findings are required in this regard.

         210. In light of all that we have said above, we conclude that  the
                most appropriate course,  given  the  extent  of  the  fact-
                finding necessary in this appeal, is to remit the matter  to
                the First-tier Tribunal for it to make the further necessary
                findings  of  fact.  The  Tribunal  is  hereby  directed  to
                thereafter apply the relevant country guidance."

28.  Mr Khubber says that this is a conclusion of the Tribunal in AA,  which
    should have been, but was not, taken into  account  by  the  respondent
    when  she  came  to  arrive  at  her  decision  regarding  the  present
    applicant.  In effect, what the respondent did was  to  concentrate  on
    the country  guidance  and  then,  in  Mr  Khubber's  submission,  make
    excessive and inappropriate use of the negative credibility findings of
    the Immigration Judge who had heard the applicant's appeal, some  eight
    years previously, when the applicant was said to be 16 years old.

29.  Mr Khubber supported his submissions in  that  regard  by  pointing  to
    passages of recent guidance from the  respondent.   Insofar  as  it  is
    necessary to summarise that guidance, it  reiterates  problems  arising
    from internal armed conflict in  various  areas  of  Iraq  and  focuses
    attention on the fact-sensitive nature  of  any  approach  to  internal
    relocation.

30.  Mr Khubber highlights passages in the respondent's own guidance,  which
    make it plain that all of the evidence must be looked at in  the  round
    when concluding whether internal relocation is appropriate.

31.  Mr Malik submits that the decision letter is not  flawed.   He  submits
    that the applicant did  not  say  anything  in  his  submissions  about
    internal relocation and, insofar as the submissions  had  any  meat  in
    them, the complaint being made was about the now  discarded  challenge,
    based on an alleged failure in respect of tracing family  members.   Mr
    Malik says that if one looks at the letters that form the  submissions,
    they were otherwise entirely generic in nature.

32.  The problem for Mr Malik, I find, is,  as  I  have  already  indicated,
    that the point at which the respondent chose or to make her decision in
    this case was shortly after the appearance of the country guidance case
    of AA.

33.  The decision letter rightly  concentrated  on  that  country  guidance;
    but, given that the applicant had had no  prior  ability  to  refer  to
    aspects of the case that might favour  his  position,  it  was  plainly
    incumbent on the respondent to look at the country guidance case  as  a
    whole, stand back and consider what it might say about this  applicant.
    I find that she did not do so.  The fact that she did not emerges  very
    powerfully from the  submissions  made  by  Mr  Khubber  regarding  the
    approach taken by the Tribunal to the actual appellant in that case and
    the  striking  factual  similarities  between  AA's   case   and   this
    applicant's case.

34.  If the Upper Tribunal had considered that a  decision  in  AA's  appeal
    could have been made without further  fact-finding,  then  plainly,  it
    would have done so.  Had the Secretary of State approached the entirety
    of the case of AA in that light, I do not consider that the decision to
    reject the applicant's submissions as a fresh  claim  would  inexorably
    have followed.

35.  As Mr Khubber said, the situation in Iraq, as we all know, has  changed
    markedly over the intervening eight years, following the  dismissal  of
    the applicant's appeal.  Fighting in the contested areas may well  have
    disrupted means of communication, such that even if the applicant might
    in the past have been in touch  with  family  members  who  were  in  a
    position to help him, this could by no means be assumed still to be the
    position.  In that regard, the adverse credibility findings of the kind
    made by the Immigration Judge in 2008 clearly needed to  be  looked  at
    with considerable circumspection and I find that the respondent did not
    do so.

36.  As Mr Khubber said in reply to Mr Malik, the letter before  action,  or
    "pre-action protocol" letter, which the applicant's solicitors wrote in
    the light of AA, echoes many of the points  Mr  Khubber  has  made  and
    underscores the findings that  I  have  just  reached.  The  respondent
    failed properly to consider the significance of that case, in rejecting
    the submissions of the applicant.

37.  For this reason, the application for judicial  review  succeeds  and  I
    quash the respondent's decision.  Mr Khubber did not press his  request
    for a mandatory order and, indeed, I think he was right not to  do  so.
    One must assume that the respondent will reconsider the matter, in  the
    light of what is said in this judgment, and then decide how to proceed.
