
IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

               Give orally at Field House on 24 February 2017

                                                                JR/3565/2016

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                                                  Heard on: 24 February 2017

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE peter lane

                                   Between

                                  The Queen
                           (on the application of)
                                     an

                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
                               - - - - - - - -

Mr G Dolan, instructed by Satha & Co Solicitors, appeared on behalf of the
applicant.

Ms S Idelbi, instructed by the Government Legal Department appeared on
behalf of the respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -


                                  JUDGMENT

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    JUDGE peter lane:  This is an application for judicial review in  order
    to challenge the respondent's decision of 15 February 2016 not to treat
    his submissions of 14 May 2015 as a fresh asylum or human rights claim.
     Permission to bring judicial review proceedings was granted  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Perkins on 12 July 2016.

 2. The applicant's immigration history so far as relevant is  as  follows.
    The applicant was born in 1987 in Sri Lanka.   On  23  March  2011,  he
    arrived in the United Kingdom hidden in a container and claimed  asylum
    on 12 April 2011.  His case was that he had been compelled to join  the
    LTTE and perform non-fighting tasks.  He alleged that in February  2009
    the Sri Lankan army attended the family home looking  for  his  brother
    and as a result  the  applicant  was  taken  into  detention.   He  was
    eventually released with the assistance of a lawyer but was required to
    report.  Finally, he was asked by the LTTE  to  transport  for  them  a
    pistol and a walkie-talkie.  He did this but was stopped by  the  army,
    arrested and, he says, tortured until he was released in December 2010.

 3. The respondent did not believe the applicant's account and refused  his
    claim.  The First-tier Tribunal which on 7  September  2011  heard  the
    applicant's appeal against that decision of the respondent also did not
    believe the applicant.  In particular, the First-tier Tribunal did  not
    consider the applicant's account was consistent and did  not  find  his
    description of torture to be credible.  Although the Tribunal  accepted
    that two of the applicant's brothers had been granted asylum in France,
    the judge did not consider that this would have a bearing  on  risk  to
    the applicant.  The applicant eventually became appeal rights exhausted
    in respect of this matter in November 2011.

 4. In  2012  further  submissions  were  made  by  the  applicant  to  the
    respondent.

 5. In July 2013 the Upper Tribunal published its country guidance decision
    in GJ and Others [2013] UKUT 319.  We will return to  the  significance
    of that country guidance decision in due course.

 6.  In  July  2014,  the  respondent  rejected  submissions  made  on  the
    applicant's behalf.  There was no judicial review  application  brought
    in respect of that  rejection.   The  submissions  with  which  we  are
    concerned were, as I have said, made on 14  May  2015.   In  them,  the
    applicant contended that he had been involved in demonstrations in  the
    United Kingdom in November 2010, December 2010 and  May  2011.   It  is
    noteworthy that all of those occurred before his appeal hearing in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  He also said that he attended  demonstrations  on
    unspecified dates in 2012 and 2013 for the LTTE Heroes' Day;  and  also
    attended a demonstration on 19 May 2013.   The  respondent  refused  to
    accept those submissions and that refusal has given rise to the present
    proceedings.

 7. Before going further, it is  necessary  to  note  that  the  judge  who
    granted permission on the papers did so on the mistaken basis that  the
    impugned decision  was  considered  by  him  to  be  a  "certification"
    decision, by which is meant  certification  under  section  94  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  In fact,  it  is  common
    ground that this is not the position.  What we are concerned with is  a
    refusal to treat submissions as a fresh claim.  As  we  know  from  the
    case law of the Court of Appeal, the standard to be applied in deciding
    the legality or otherwise of the respondent's decision under  paragraph
    353  is  that  of  Wednesbury  reasonableness  or,  put  another   way,
    rationality.  However, that is subject to the  important  qualification
    which finds expression in WM (DRC) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1495 and other  cases  that  the  respondent
    must apply a degree of anxious scrutiny.  An alleged failure to do that
    this forms the basis of the applicant's claim.

 8. The submissions of 14 May 2015 are to be found beginning at page 91  of
    the trial bundle.  They set out a number of materials that are enclosed
    with  the  submissions  including  "photographs,  CD  and  a  copy   of
    envelopes".  The letter ends by stating as follows:  "We  request  that
    due consideration is given to the documentary evidence now available in
    light of the new aspect of our client's case".

 9. At pages 93 onwards, we find the grounds for  further  representations.
    They are essentially to the  effect  that  the  applicant's  sur  place
    activities in the United Kingdom  would  place  him  at  real  risk  of
    serious harm if returned, applying the country  guidance  contained  in
    GJ.   The submissions made no further mention of the CD referred to  on
    page 91.

10. The respondent's  decision  proceeded  as  follows.   It  set  out  the
    materials which had been submitted on behalf of the  applicant  and  to
    which I have  made  reference.   It  then  referred  expressly  to  the
    decision of the  Tribunal  in  Devaseelan  [2002]  UKIAT  00702,  which
    requires a decision maker to treat the findings of the adjudicator - in
    fact Immigration Judge - as the starting  point  for  the  respondent's
    analysis.  References were then made in the letter to findings  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, stating in effect what I have already  summarised;
    that  is  to  say,  that  there  were  credibility  problems  with  the
    applicant's account and that the recognition by France of his  brothers
    as refugees did not materially affect his own position.

11. The decision continued by noting  that  the  applicant  claimed  to  be
    actively involved in an organisation known as The British Tamils Forum.
     Pausing there, although that organisation was proscribed under  United
    Kingdom law at the time of the decision, Mr Dolan helpfully informs  me
    that it has subsequently lost its proscribed status.  In any event, the
    decision  letter  examined  the  applicant's  membership  document,  by
    reference to the country information guidance 2014.  The decision maker
    considered that whilst the letter provided evidence that the  applicant
    was a member of the BTF for a  period  of  one  year,  it  provided  no
    evidence as to his role in the organisation.  There was, in particular,
    nothing to suggest that he attended meetings or  anything  to  indicate
    that his role within the group would be such as to  bring  him  to  the
    adverse interest of the current Sri Lankan Government.  No  weight  was
    accordingly placed upon that letter.

12.  Next,  the  decision  considered  certain  photocopy   documents   and
    translations  in  support  of  the  applicant's  claim  to  have   been
    previously detained in Sri Lanka.  Here the decision  maker  considered
    that  the  material  was  not  significantly  different  to  previously
    submitted in connection with the applicant's claim.  Sri  Lankan  birth
    certificates were untranslated and the copies  were  of  poor  quality.
    There was no explanation as to why these had come into  the  possession
    of the applicant.  Overall, no weight was placed  on  these  materials.
    In so finding, the respondent applied the starred case of Tanveer Ahmed
    UKIAT 00439.

13. The decision maker then looked at the issue of the photographs and CDs,
    of which there appears to have  been  two.   The  photographs  did  not
    provide in her view any evidence as to what  the  applicant's  specific
    role was during the demonstrations, which were said to be shown in  the
    photographs.    There was no evidence as to why the demonstrations were
    organised nor was there any indication that the applicant was  a  high-
    profile active member.  Overall, the decision maker considered that the
    applicant had failed to provide any evidence to suggest  that  the  Sri
    Lankan  authorities  would  be  aware  of   his   attendance   at   the
    demonstrations.

14. So far as the CDs were concerned, the decision maker said this:

         "You have failed to provide any information about what is contained
         on  them.   You  have  also  failed  to  provide  any  evidence  of
         determining who and what is depicted and also how the  contents  of
         the CDs are of any relevance to your claim.   Therefore  no  weight
         has been placed upon the CDs due to the fact  that  no  explanation
         has been provided as to its contents or relevance to the  submitted
         claim."

    I will return to that passage in due course.

15. The decision maker looked at the issue of  the  applicant's  sur  place
    activity by reference to the guidance given in  BA  (demonstrations  in
    Britain - risk on return) [2011]  UKUT  36.   Although  concerned  with
    Iran, that case contains important assistance for  judicial  and  other
    decision  makers  in  deciding  the  significance  of   attendance   at
    demonstrations.  Amongst other matters, it is relevant to  have  regard
    to the nature of the  sur  place  activity,  the  identification  risk,
    factors  triggering  inquiry  or  action  on  return,  consequences  of
    identification and identification risk on return.

16.  As far as the present decision maker was concerned, she  was  troubled
    by the fact that the applicant had failed to provide evidence  "of  why
    you attend demonstrations".  She also noted an absence of  evidence  as
    to how the Sri Lankan authorities would identify him  engaging  in  sur
    place activity or that they were even  aware  of  that  activity.   She
    concluded in all the circumstances that, applying the BA guidance,  the
    sur place activity did not have any material bearing on the applicant's
    position.

17. She then looked at risk on return in the light of all these conclusions
    and by reference again to  the  case  of  GJ.   In  the  light  of  her
    reasoning,  she  concluded  that  GJ  provided  no  assistance  to  the
    applicant.

18. Finally, the decision maker turned to Article 8  issues  and  concluded
    that there was nothing of  material  significance  in  any  submissions
    relating to those.  I think it is right that no issue  has  been  taken
    regarding  that  aspect  of  the  decision.   The  overall  conclusion,
    therefore, was that the submissions could not  give  rise  to  a  fresh
    claim under paragraph 353.

19. Mr Dolan spoke to his skeleton argument which, notwithstanding its late
    filing, I earlier decided should be considered by the Tribunal in these
    proceedings.  Mr Dolan submitted that it was an important  matter  that
    CD material had been submitted.  It was when Mr Dolan  became  involved
    in the case that he formed the view that the CD issue, if I can call it
    that, was of potentially material significance.  It was for that reason
    that those instructing him wrote on 14 February 2017 to ask whether the
    CD was watched by the decision maker.  It seems  to  be  common  ground
    that only one CD is being relied upon  by  the  applicant.   Mr  Dolan,
    however, acknowledges, as he had to,  that  there  had  been  no  prior
    request of the kind made on 14  February  from  the  applicant  to  the
    respondent.

20. Ms Idelbi informed me that  any  response  by  the  respondent  to  the
    request of 14 February is hampered by the fact that the person who took
    the decision is currently on maternity leave.  However,  she  submitted
    that in any event the issue of the CD was not  such,  either  alone  or
    together with any other matter, to give rise to  the  quashing  of  the
    decision.

21. Mr Dolan described the CD as deriving from 2013/2014.  He told me  that
    the CD was some two and a half minutes long.  He said it  features  the
    applicant attending in the United Kingdom  a  demonstration,  which  is
    said to be plainly hostile to  the  Sri  Lankan  Government.   It  then
    intercuts with images of the then Prime Minister, David Cameron  and  a
    senior advisor to the Sri Lankan Government.  The CD is said  to  be  a
    copy of a news report that featured on Agence France-Presse.   It  also
    contained captions.  Later in the  course  of  submissions,  Ms  Idelbi
    pointed out that some of the photographs in the  bundle  appear  to  be
    stills from that CD, since there is a news caption at the bottom on the
    pages

22. On the issue of the CD, Ms Idelbi pointed out that it was not  included
    in the papers relating to these proceedings. That is so and as far as I
    am aware, the CD has not  been  filed  with  the  Tribunal.   She  also
    pointed out, rightly, that the issue of the CD did not feature  in  the
    grounds of application submitted with the judicial review claim.  In  a
    sense, therefore, the CD issue is one which has not been pleaded.

23.  I do not, however, consider that it is necessary to go so  far  as  to
    take any pleading argument in order to deal with  the  CD  issue.   The
    submissions on 14 May 2015, as I have already mentioned,  merely  refer
    to a CD  and  ask  that  consideration  be  given  to  the  documentary
    evidence.  No description of what might be on the CD  is  contained  in
    the pages of submissions and representations that follow.  It is, in my
    view, quite wrong in those circumstances for the applicant  to  contend
    that there has been a failure of anxious scrutiny on the  part  of  the
    respondent in not viewing a CD or, as it  more  properly  ought  to  be
    described, a DVD.  The pressures on decision  makers  working  for  the
    respondent are well-known.  Although I  take  the  point  that  several
    months elapsed between the making of the submissions by  the  applicant
    and the eventual decision, there is no indication that the  matter  was
    being worked on over any significant period of time by the  respondent.
    A CD or DVD  that  is  merely  sent  to  the  respondent,  without  any
    indication whatsoever as to what might be on it, is not a document that
    needs to be accessed by the  decision  maker,  absent  any  independent
    indication as to what its contents source and/or significance might be.
     For one thing, the CD or DVD may be hours long.  We know from Mr Dolan
    that the CD in question here lasts only two and a half minutes, but one
    would not know that unless one watched it.  A CD of  any  length  would
    need to be watched from beginning to end in order to determine  whether
    anything of significance was on it.  It is entirely unacceptable, in my
    view, for those making submissions  on  behalf  of  applicants  seeking
    favourable decisions under paragraph 353 to proceed in the way in which
    the solicitors acting for the applicant proceeded.  I therefore  reject
    the submission of Mr Dolan that there is a failure of anxious  scrutiny
    in relation to the CD.

24. I do so on the assumption that the CD was not viewed  by  the  decision
    maker. For  the reasons already given, the  respondent's  approach  was
    entirely valid and  certainly  well  within  the  realm  of  Wednesbury
    reasonableness.  Even if that were not the  case,  I  would  have  been
    inclined to refuse relief in this matter on the basis that  the  manner
    in which the CD issue was handled by the applicant's solicitors (not, I
    emphasise, Mr Dolan) is troubling.  The issue was not mentioned in  the
    grounds or subsequent stages, but only when Mr Dolan became involved in
    the case as recently as 14 February.  There have been other  procedural
    failings in this case relating, in particular, to the failure to  serve
    a skeleton argument on time.  For those reasons I would have considered
    very carefully whether to refuse relief.  As it  is  however,  for  the
    reasons I have given, the challenge by reference to the CD fails in any
    event.

25. The general matter of the  applicant's  attendance  at  demonstrations,
    however, needs to be looked at  in  more  detail.   Leaving  aside  the
    CD/DVD, there is material that was before the  Secretary  of  State  in
    readily accessible form.  The quality of the photographs,  which  begin
    at page 128 of the bundle, is, however, extremely poor.  That was noted
    by the respondent in her letter and that issue has not got  any  better
    as these proceedings have continued. On page 128, we see the  applicant
    wearing what is said to be LTTE clothing but,  as  I  mentioned  to  Mr
    Dolan, it is difficult to ascertain from those photographs  whether  he
    is doing  so  in  the  context  of  a  demonstration  or  other  public
    gathering.  That is significant, given that we are concerned  with  the
    issue of whether the Sri Lankan authorities, through their surveillance
    techniques, would be reasonably likely to have detected  the  applicant
    at demonstrations against their  government  in  London  and  would  be
    likely to take adverse  action  against  him  on  return  as  a  result
    thereof.

26. Although I am prepared to accept, notwithstanding their  poor  quality,
    that photographs of the applicant at demonstrations place  him  near  a
    flag or other emblem of the LTTE and that he is to  be  seen  in  other
    images, none of that I consider goes to show that  the  respondent  was
    wrong to reject the submissions as a fresh claim.  The guidance  in  GJ
    in this respect is clear.  At paragraph 336, the Tribunal said, "We  do
    not consider that attendance at demonstrations in the Diaspora alone is
    sufficient to create a real risk or a reasonable degree  of  likelihood
    that a person would attract adverse attention on return to Sri  Lanka".



27. The nub of the matter is  whether  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  would
    perceive a returnee as posing a threat to the unitary Sri Lankan state.
     It is important to note that what we are concerned with is  perception
    rather than actuality.  I bear that point  firmly  in  mind.  But  such
    material as we have and which the respondent was able to consider  does
    no more than indicate that the applicant is someone who is  engaged  in
    demonstrations.  The fact that those demonstrations bear the  hallmarks
    of the LTTE is in itself not enough to give rise to even  a  reasonable
    likelihood of a judge allowing the applicant's appeal.

28. Much mention is made in GJ and has been made in the present proceedings
    of the sophisticated nature of the Sri Lankan authorities' surveillance
    techniques.  That of course must be accepted. It is part of the country
    guidance in  GJ.  But  the  point  cuts  both  ways.   A  sophisticated
    government operation to seek out people  who  in  its  view  would  de-
    stabilise the nation is very likely to differentiate between people who
    are merely attending demonstrations and engaging  in  other  activities
    with the sole purpose of seeking to remain in the United  Kingdom,  and
    people who have a more prominent position, such for  example  as  those
    who actually organise the demonstrations.  These same  concerns  affect
    the membership of the  now  un-proscribed  British  Tamil  Forum.   The
    decision maker  was  quite  entitled  in  my  view  to  note  that  the
    applicant's membership document did no more than record the applicant's
    membership of the organisation,  admittedly  one  with  very  different
    interests than those of the  Sri  Lankan  Government.   The  membership
    document did not point to the applicant as having any significant  role
    in the Forum.

29.  That brings me to an  important  matter  made  in  submissions  by  Ms
    Idelbi.  She said it was striking that there were no materials  in  the
    submissions from others in the Diaspora, attesting to  the  applicant's
    prominent position.   I  agree.  This  is  in  my  view  a  significant
    omission.

30. Finally, it is necessary to mention the following.  The  applicant  has
    been well-served by Mr Dolan since he became seized  of  the  case.   I
    think Ms Idelbi was correct in stating that  if  submissions  had  been
    made with the benefit of Mr Dolan's  input,  the  applicant's  position
    might well have been different.  However, I must approach the  case  by
    reference to what was put to the respondent in 2015; the way  in  which
    it was put; and the position as it was when  the  respondent  took  her
    decision.  For the reasons I have given,  I  am  fully  satisfied  that
    there is no illegality in the respondent's decision of 15 February 2016
    and this application is therefore refused.  ~~~~0~~~~
