

                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL



                                                                JR/4793/2016

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                                                               30 March 2017


                                  The QUEEN
                 (ON The application OF pernella darlington)
                                                                   Applicant


                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE peter lane


                               - - - - - - - -

For the Applicant:     Mr E. Nicholson, Counsel, instructed by Igor & Co
                      Solicitors.

For the Respondent:    Mr Z. Malik, Counsel, instructed by the Government
                      Legal Department.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                                  JUDGMENT


                               (13 July 2017)

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    JUDGE peter lane:





A. Introduction


1. The applicant, a citizen of Trinidad and  Tobago,  born  on  10  November
    1972, seeks judicial review of the respondent's  decision  on  9  March
    2016 to refuse the applicant's human rights claim  and  certify  it  as
    clearly unfounded under section 94 of the Nationality, Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.  Permission to bring judicial review  proceedings  was
    granted by the Upper Tribunal on 13 July 2016.


2.   The applicant arrived in the United Kingdom on 19 April 2007, when  she
    was aged 34.  She came as a student, in which capacity she was  granted
    further leave until 19  October  2011.   On  that  day,  the  applicant
    applied for further leave  to  remain  as  a  student.   Following  the
    refusal of that application, the applicant appealed to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  On 23 March 2012,  that  Tribunal  allowed  the  applicant's
    appeal on the limited basis that the applicant should  be  permitted  a
    period of time to complete her  volunteer  activities  and  prepare  to
    leave the United Kingdom.

3.   Consequent upon the Tribunal's  decision,  on  3  September  2012,  the
    respondent granted the applicant discretionary leave to remain until 29
    September 2012.

4.   Instead of leaving the United Kingdom, however,  the  applicant  on  27
    September 2012 made an application for further leave to remain, relying
    on Article 8.

5.   The respondent rejected that application as invalid on 31 October  2012
    on  the  ground  that  it  was  not  unaccompanied  by  the   specified
    application fee.  A further application, lodged on  10  November  2012,
    was refused by the respondent on the basis that it had been made  at  a
    time when the applicant did not have leave to remain.  Accordingly, the
    only decision which the respondent could make was to  refuse  to  grant
    leave to remain (which did not carry a right of appeal under  the  2002
    Act, as it then stood) as opposed to refusing to vary leave  to  remain
    (which did carry such a right).

6.   The applicant, nevertheless, filed a notice of appeal with  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.   The  matter  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Canavan (as she then was) on 11 February  2014.   She  found  that,  in
    accordance with the decision of the Upper Tribunal in Basnet  (validity
    of application - respondent) [2012] UKUT 00113, the respondent had  not
    established that the requisite application fee had been  unable  to  be
    taken  from  the  applicant's  payment  card  account.   Judge  Canavan
    accordingly found that that application should  have  been  treated  as
    valid.  This meant that the decision to refuse to grant leave to remain
    should, in fact, have been treated  as  a  refusal  to  vary  leave  to
    remain.

7.   In the event, Judge Canavan held that there was no valid appeal  before
    her for a different reason.  The applicant had not been served with  an
    appealable immigration decision  in  accordance  with  the  Immigration
    (Notices) Regulations 2003.  Judge Canavan accordingly held that  there
    was no valid appeal before the Tribunal.

8.   Following further correspondence, on 12  August  2015,  the  respondent
    issued the applicant with a decision refusing her  human  rights  claim
    and certifying it under section 94 of the 2002 Act.  The applicant  was
    subsequently detained,  following  which  she  issued  judicial  review
    proceedings.  These resulted in  an  order  from  the  Upper  Tribunal,
    staying the removal of the applicant  from  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    applicant was released from  detention  on  16  October  2015  and  the
    judicial review claim was settled by a consent  order,  which  provided
    that the respondent would reconsider her decision within three months.

9.   It was as a result of this reconsideration  that  the  respondent  made
    the decision of 9 March 2016, which  is  the  subject  of  the  present
    challenge.  Following the grant of permission to bring judicial  review
    proceedings, the applicant did not pay the continuation fee.  Her claim
    was, accordingly, struck out.  On 24 August 2016, Upper  Tribunal  Gill
    ordered the claim to be reinstated, on condition that the fee was  paid
    within ten working days.  This occurred and the claim was, accordingly,
    reinstated.



B. The applicant's case

10.  The case for the applicant is that she enjoys a  private  life  in  the
    United Kingdom, in stark contrast to the position that she  would  face
    if she were returned to Trinidad and Tobago.  The applicant  says  that
    she was adopted one month after her birth by  one  Valerie  Darlington.
    This lady suffered an accident when the applicant was 12 years old,  as
    a result of which Ms Darlington Sr. lost almost all of her sight.   The
    applicant had few friends in Trinidad and Tobago.  They all now  reside
    in the United Kingdom.  She has no home in that country and no ties  to
    it.

11.  Conversely, the applicant has obtained a degree in tourism  management,
    as a result her studies in the  United  Kingdom.   She  has  also  made
    several close friendships.  The applicant says  that  as  a  result  of
    incorrect information being passed by the respondent to  her  employer,
    concerning the applicant's inability legally  to  work  in  the  United
    Kingdom, the applicant was unfairly  dismissed  by  her  employer.  The
    applicant brought proceedings in the Employment  Tribunal,  which  were
    settled by consent, on the basis that the employer paid  the  applicant
    what is said to be "a  substantial  payment".   It  appears  that  this
    payment was, in fact, made in respect of abuse the applicant said  that
    she had suffered at work, owing to her  gender  and  membership  of  an
    ethnic minority.

12.  When the respondent made the certification  decision,  she  had  before
    her a number of letters  from  friends  of  the  applicant.   Catherine
    Korgba wrote on 21 January 2014 to say that she had shared a house with
    the applicant for the past three years.  They had become  friends.   Ms
    Korgba regarded the applicant as a "caring, hardworking and  thoughtful
    person,  full  of  passion,  warmth  and  compassion".   She  was  also
    unselfish and had committed time to volunteering for various events and
    activities, including the 2012 Olympics.

13.  Ms Korgba understood that the applicant's adopted mother died  in  1999
    and she had "no other real family or solid ties back  in  Trinidad  and
    Tobago".  As a result, Ms Korgba had introduced the  applicant  to  her
    own family "in a  bid  to  give  her  that  sense  of  family  she  may
    occasionally miss".

14.  Glorell-Marie Banister wrote on 20 January 2014 in similar terms.   She
    detailed an instance about  three  years  earlier  when  the  applicant
    assisted her when Ms Banister was admitted to hospital.

15.  Other letters made similar points.



C. The respondent's decision letter

16.  The respondent's  decision  letter,  having  set  out  the  applicant's
    immigration history up to that time, summarised the  applicant's  human
    rights claim as being "that you have developed  a  private  life  while
    staying in the UK, you claim to have lost all ties to your  country  of
    origin as your adopted parents passed away, and therefore you  have  no
    family in your country of origin".

17.  The letter analysed the applicant's case, initially,  by  reference  to
    the Immigration Rules.  The respondent noted that the applicant had not
    put forward anything to suggest that she enjoyed a family life  in  the
    United Kingdom.

18.  So far as private life was concerned, the  respondent  considered  that
    the  relevant  provision  of  the  Rules  was  paragraph  276ADE.   The
    respondent observed that the applicant had not  lived  continuously  in
    the UK for the  past  twenty  years.   Accordingly,  having  regard  to
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), the applicant needed to show that there "would
    be very significant obstacles" to her integration into the  country  to
    which she would be required to go; namely, Trinidad and Tobago.

19.  The respondent did not consider that  the  applicant  had  demonstrated
    the existence of any such significant obstacles.  It was observed  that
    the applicant had spent 34 years in Trinidad and Tobago, which was more
    than half her life,  including  her  formative  years.   She  would  be
    returning to a country of which she would have some knowledge,  due  to
    the length of time she had lived there.  It  was  considered  that  the
    applicant would have retained the language and culture of Trinidad  and
    Tobago.  There would be no linguistic problems, given that Trinidad and
    Tobago's national language is English.

20.  Any relationships developed in the United Kingdom could be  maintained,
    according to the respondent, by way of modern forms  of  communication.
    No evidence had been submitted to "portray that any relationships  with
    your friends are exceptional and go beyond the  normal  emotional  ties
    between adult friends".

21.  In the respondent's view, the applicant's  knowledge  of  Trinidad  and
    Tobago would  assist  her  in  gaining  employment  and  reintegration,
    following her return.  The applicant had worked in the  United  Kingdom
    for a fitness company and "therefore you can use the skills you  learnt
    in the UK to help look for employment in your country of origin".

22.  Although the applicant said that  she  had  no  ties  to  Trinidad  and
    Tobago, the respondent noted that the  applicant  had  friends  in  the
    United Kingdom and it would not be unreasonable for  those  friends  to
    assist the applicant by providing "emotional support during this period
    of transition".

23.  For these reasons, it was not considered by  the  respondent  that  the
    applicant met the requirements of  paragraph  276ADE.   The  respondent
    therefore turned to the issue of whether the  application  raised  "any
    exceptional circumstances which, consistent with the right  to  respect
    for private and family life contained in  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights, might warrant a grant of leave to remain in
    the United Kingdom outside the requirements of the Immigration Rules".

24.  As regards Article 8, the respondent noted the  applicant's  submission
    that her application for a variation of leave, dated 27 September 2012,
    should in her view have led to an  appealable  decision  and  that,  in
    addition, the applicant should have been entitled to  work  during  the
    requisite period, since her leave would have been extended  by  section
    3C of the Immigration Act 1971.

25.  On this issue, the writer of the letter said:-

         "After  a  thorough  investigation  I  can  confirm  now  that  the
         application was  rejected  due  to  incorrect  card  details  being
         submitted on your application, and for this reason the  transaction
         could not be completed".

26.  The letter went on to note that the applicant's employer dismissed  the
    applicant, as the results of  the  employer's  employment  verification
    check demonstrated  that  the  applicant  was  in  the  United  Kingdom
    illegally.  The decision letter noted that, at that time, an Employment
    Tribunal hearing was due to take place.

27.  The letter continued as follows:-

         "28.  Previously  to  this  application  you   had   been   granted
             Discretionary Leave from the Home Office to  give  you  enough
             time to finish a volunteering role at the London Olympics  and
             further to then arrange to leave the UK.  Your course had also
             been curtailed as  the  licence  from  the  college  had  been
             revoked".

28.  So far as financial issues were concerned, the letter stated:-

         "30. In a previous application you  were  refused  due  to  another
             financial issue, so this was not the first time this issue has
             occurred in your history of applications to the  Home  Office.
             In 2010 you had a Student Application refused as you could not
             prove your could sustain funds in your account for 28 days".

29.  The decision letter then returned, in the context of Article 8, to  the
    issue of the applicant's private life:-

         "31. You claim to have  developed  relationships  with  family  and
             friends in the UK but haven't provided sufficient evidence  to
             prove this.   However,  it  is  generally  accepted  that  the
             protection of life under Article  8  involves  a  relationship
             between co-habiting adults and their dependant minor children.
              Even if the relationships you describe  exist,  consideration
             of other relationships between adult family  members  requires
             evidence that  substantiates  involvement  of  more  than  the
             normal emotional ties that exist between adult family members.

         32.  You will be returning to a country that will  be  familiar  to
             you in terms of the language, traditions, customs  and  social
             structure.  You have proved that you  are  capable  of  living
             independently as an adult, therefore you will be able to  work
             to support yourself and make the most of any skills  you  have
             developed whilst living in the UK.

         33.   Regarding  compliance,  your  leave  to  remain  expired   on
             27/09/2012 and you have  remained  in  the  UK  illegally  and
             continued to work ever since despite knowing that you have  no
             basis to work or remain in the UK.

         34.  Regarding delay, considering all the information of the  case,
             it is not accepted that  there  have  been  any  circumstances
             beyond your control that have prevented you from returning  to
             your country of origin.  The amount of time you have  been  in
             the UK, is  not  a  factor  in  itself,  which  would  justify
             allowing you to remain here.

         35.  It has therefore been decided that there  are  no  exceptional
             circumstances in your  case.   Consequently  your  application
             does not fall for a grant of leave outside the Rules."

30.  Although the applicant claimed that any attempt to remove her from  the
    United Kingdom would breach  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  under
    Articles 3 and 8 in respect of her medical  condition,  the  respondent
    found that there was no  satisfactory  evidence  to  substantiate  this
    assertion.  I should here record that this aspect formed no part of the
    judicial review challenge, as advanced by the applicant at the hearing.





D. The "certification" paragraph

31.  At the end of the section headed  "exceptional  circumstances"  in  the
    decision letter, there is the following:-

         "36. In addition, after considering all the evidence  available  to
             them, the Secretary of State's official has decided that  your
             Human Rights claim is clearly unfounded and  hereby  certifies
             it  to  be  so  under  section  94(1)  of   the   Nationality,
             Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  This is because you  do  not
             meet the requirements of leave to remain on grounds of  family
             life  under  Appendix  FM  or  private  life  under  Paragraph
             276ADE(1) of the Immigration  Rules.   Further  you  have  not
             raised any circumstances that are considered exceptional.   In
             light of this and the consideration above,  it  is  considered
             that your application for leave to remain on the basis of your
             Human Rights is clearly without substance and  cannot  succeed
             on any legitimate view.

         37.  This means that you may not  appeal  whilst  you  are  in  the
             United Kingdom."




E. The grounds of challenge

32.  The grounds of application contend that the  respondent  "was  directed
    by the First-tier Tribunal in February 2014 to issue  the  applicant  a
    notice of an appealable decision, following the refusal  letter  of  28
    May 2013, refusing leave to remain to the applicant.  No such  decision
    has been issued by the respondent to the applicant to the present  day,
    preventing the applicant to appeal to the First-tier Tribunal".

33.  This contention is incorrect.   Although,  as  I  have  already  noted,
    Judge  Canavan  considered  that,  on  the  evidence  before  her,  the
    respondent had not made good her contention that she had been unable to
    take the requisite fee for  the  application  from  the  applicant,  in
    paragraph 7 of her decision, the judge said  "whilst  nothing  in  this
    notice is binding the respondent may want to take note  of  my  finding
    that there is no evidence to show that the initial application  was  in
    fact invalid".  Since the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  decided  that  it
    lacked  jurisdiction,  it  could  not  issue  any  "direction"  to  the
    respondent.  In any event, it did not purport to do so.

34.  The second problem  with  this  aspect  of  the  grounds  is  that  the
    decision under challenge is appealable, but only once the applicant has
    left the United Kingdom.

35.  The grounds continue by stating  that  the  respondent  has  still  not
    produced any evidence to discharge the burden of proof on her that  the
    requisite payment could not be taken by the respondent  in  respect  of
    the 2012 application for variation of leave.

36.  The second ground relates to the respondent's alleged failure to  grant
    leave to the applicant in order for her to pursue her employment claim.
     This was said to be contrary to Article 6 of the ECHR.   As  has  been
    noted, her employment claim has been settled.

37.  The third ground attacked the  basis  of  certification  under  section
    94(1).  The grounds contended that, in determining that there  were  no
    exceptional circumstances in the applicant's case, such as  to  warrant
    the grant of leave by reference to Article 8, the respondent had failed
    to have regard to the full circumstances of the matter.  The respondent
    had been wrong to reject  the  application  of  27  September  2012  as
    invalid, which had led to the  applicant  being  denied  an  in-country
    right of appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.  Furthermore,  a  large
    part of the applicant's case had been ignored.

38.  Finally, the grounds took issue with the terms  of  the  certification,
    as set out in the decision letter.  Those terms failed to  comply  with
    the respondent's guidance, in that the writer of the decision  had  not
    appreciated that a failure to meet the requirements of  the  Rules  was
    not itself a ground on which to certify the claim as clearly unfounded.



F. Supreme Court case law

39.  Mr Nicholson sought to rely upon the judgments of the Supreme Court  in
    Hesham Ali v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] UKSC 60,
    MM (Lebanon) & Ors v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2017]
    UKSC 10, and Agyarko v The Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    [2017] UKSC 11.  In summary, Mr Nicholson submitted that  the  approach
    of the Court of Appeal to Article 8 cases, as set out in MF (Nigeria) v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1192  was
    criticised by the Supreme Court and that, in any  event,  the  approach
    adopted by MF (Nigeria) cannot be used to determine the  lawfulness  of
    certification under section 94 of the  2002  Act.   In  Mr  Nicholson's
    submission, the respondent's decision in the present  case  had  fallen
    into error by employing MF (Nigeria) in that way.

40.  In fact, in Hesham Ali, the Supreme  Court  approved  of  the  approach
    adopted in MF (Nigeria), whereby a person's case is analysed  first  by
    reference to the Immigration Rules.  If the person does  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Rules, then consideration is given to whether there
    are any factors which demonstrate  that  leave  should  be  granted  by
    reference to Article 8 of the ECHR, on the basis that to  do  otherwise
    would violate the United Kingdom's obligations under that Convention.

41.  The only qualification was that the Supreme Court did  not  agree  that
    the Immigration Rules in the context of  foreign  criminal  deportation
    constitute a "complete code" in that area.  The Court  held  that  this
    error was "insignificant" (paragraph 80) but that it:-

         "... appears to have been misinterpreted in  some  later  cases  as
         meaning that the Rules,  and  the  Rules  alone,  govern  appellate
         decision-making.  Dicta seemingly to that effect can be found,  for
         example, in LC (China) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
         [2014] EWCA Civ 1310 ... and AJ (Angola) v Secretary of  State  for
         the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 1636" (paragraph 52).

42.  In MM (Lebanon), the  Supreme  Court  confirmed  that  the  Immigration
    Rules "do not absolve decision-makers from carrying out a  full  merits
    based fact-sensitive assessment outside the Rules" (paragraph 58).   It
    is clear the respondent's decision of 9 March 2016  proceeded  in  what
    may be described as the usual way, compatibly with MF (Nigeria) and the
    earlier judgment of Sales J in Nagre v Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department  [2013]  EWHC  720  (Admin),  by  considering  whether   the
    applicant met the requirements of the Immigration Rules, before turning
    to consider at paragraphs 21 to 35, whether there were "any exceptional
    circumstances which, consistent with the right to respect  for  private
    and family life contained in Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights, might warrant a grant of leave to remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom outside the requirements of the Immigration  Rules"  (paragraph
    21).

43. In Agyarko, the Supreme Court found  there  was  nothing  amiss  in  the
    respondent's use in her Immigration Rules and Instructions of the  term
    "exceptional circumstances". Lord Reed had this to say:



          58. The expression "exceptional circumstances" appears in a number
          of places in the Rules and the Instructions. Its use in  the  part
          of the Rules concerned with the deportation of  foreign  offenders
          was considered in Hesham Ali. In the present context, as has  been
          explained, it appears in the Instructions dealing with  the  grant
          of leave to remain outside the Rules. Its use is challenged on the
          basis that  the  Secretary  of  State  cannot  lawfully  impose  a
          requirement that  there  should  be  "exceptional  circumstances",
          having regard to the opinion of the  Appellate  Committee  of  the
          House of Lords in Huang.

          59. ... the case of Huang was decided at a time when the Rules had
          not been  revised  to  reflect  the  requirements  of  article  8.
          Instead, the Secretary of State operated arrangements under  which
          effect was given to article 8 outside  the  Rules.  Lord  Bingham,
          giving the pinion of the Committee,  observed  that  the  ultimate
          question for the appellate immigration authority was  whether  the
          refusal of leave to enter or remain, in  circumstances  where  the
          life of the family could not reasonably be expected to be  enjoyed
          elsewhere, taking full account of all considerations  weighing  in
          favour of the refusal, prejudiced the family life of the applicant
          in a manner sufficiently serious to amount to a breach of  article
          8. If the answer  to  that  question  was  affirmative,  then  the
          refusal was unlawful. He added:




               "It  is  not  necessary  that  the   appellate   immigration
               authority, directing itself along  the  lines  indicated  in
               this opinion, need ask in addition whether the case meets  a
               test of exceptionality. The suggestion  that  it  should  is
               based on  an  observation  of  Lord  Bingham  in  Razgar  [R
               (Razgar) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004]
               UKHL 27; [2004] 2 AC 368], para 20. He was there  expressing
               an expectation, shared with the Immigration Appeal Tribunal,
               that the number of claimants not covered by  the  rules  and
               supplementary  directions  but  entitled  to  succeed  under
               article 8 would be a very small minority. That is still  his
               expectation. But he was not purporting to lay down  a  legal
               test" (para 20).

          60. It remains the position that the ultimate question  is  how  a
          fair balance should be struck between  the  competing  public  and
          individual interests involved, applying  a  proportionality  test.
          The Rules and Instructions in issue in the  present  case  do  not
          depart from that position. The Secretary of State has not  imposed
          a test of exceptionality, in the sense in which Lord  Bingham  had
          in mind: that is to  say,  a  requirement  that  the  case  should
          exhibit  some  highly  unusual  feature,  over   and   above   the
          application of the test of proportionality. On the  contrary,  she
          has defined the  word  "exceptional",  as  already  explained,  as
          meaning  "circumstances  in  which   refusal   would   result   in
          unjustifiably harsh consequences for the individual such that  the
          refusal  of  the  application  would  not  be  proportionate".  So
          understood, the provision in the Instructions that  leave  can  be
          granted outside the Rules where  exceptional  circumstances  apply
          involves the application of  a  test  of  proportionality  to  the
          circumstances of the individual case, and cannot  be  regarded  as
          incompatible with article 8. That conclusion is fortified  by  the
          express statement in the Instructions that "exceptional" does  not
          mean "unusual" or "unique" ..."

44.  As can be seen, in this important group of  cases,  the  Supreme  Court
    has, in substance, endorsed the approach that the Court of  Appeal  and
    both levels of the Tribunal has adopted, following Nagre,  in  reaching
    decisions in Article 8 cases.



G. The hypothetical Tribunal

45. I do not consider Mr Nicholson is correct to suggest that  the  approach
    adopted by the respondent in the present decision letter has no part to
    play when the respondent is deciding whether to certify  a  case  under
    section 94(1),or where the Upper Tribunal is deciding on the lawfulness
    of such a certification decision.  On the contrary, the starting  point
    must always be whether the decision maker considers that  leave  should
    be granted, either under the Rules or by reference to Article 8.  If he
    or she does, then, plainly, certification is irrelevant.  If not,  then
    the question  will  be  whether  any  hypothetical  Tribunal,  properly
    directing itself, could conclude that, in fact, the  appeal  should  be
    allowed on the basis that it would be a  disproportionate  interference
    with the Article 8 rights  of  the  person  concerned  (or  some  other
    person) to require the person concerned to leave the United Kingdom.

46.  By the same token, I do not accept Mr Nicholson's submission that  Part
    5A  of  the  2002  Act,  which   requires   certain   public   interest
    considerations to be taken into account  by  a  court  or  tribunal  in
    deciding Article 8 proportionality, has no part to play  in  a  section
    94(1) certification case.  On  the  contrary,  since  the  hypothetical
    Tribunal would be required to have regard to the provisions of Part  5A
    in determining where to strike the proportionality balance, the  person
    deciding  upon  certification  must  have  regard  to  that  fact,   in
    determining whether the hypothetical appeal would be  "bound  to  fail"
    (ZT (Kosovo) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2009]  UKHL
    6). Part 5A is part  of  the  legal  landscape  that  the  hypothetical
    Tribunal must traverse. Anyone deciding whether to certify (or  whether
    certification was lawful) has to keep that in mind.







H. Is the certification paragraph (36) of the decision letter defective?

47.  It is convenient at this point to address what is the  final  challenge
    in the grounds; namely, that the decision letter was legally  defective
    in failing to differentiate  between  what  the  respondent's  decision
    maker  made  of  the  applicant's  human  rights  claim  and   what   a
    hypothetical Tribunal might make of it.

48. The fact the Supreme Court in MM (Lebanon) reiterated the point made  by
    the Court of Appeal in Mukarkar v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1045, that different judges may legitimately
    come to different conclusions on Article 8 on the same set of facts, is
    emphatically not authority for the proposition that certification under
    section 94(1) of the 2002 Act is  no  longer  possible.  Section  94(1)
    certification can occur, provided that the applicant's Article  8  case
    is so weak as to remove it from  the  category  where  different  views
    might legitimately be taken, and place it instead in  the  category  of
    cases that are so hopeless as to be bound to fail before  any  Tribunal
    that is properly applying the law.

49.  Having so found, I turn to FR (Albania) & Anor  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  605.
    In his judgment, with which Lindblom LJ agreed, Davis LJ  had  this  to
    say:-

         "122.    The power to certify conferred on the Secretary  of  State
                is an important one.  Many asylum claims,  regrettably,  are
                indeed clearly unfounded: to permit such claims to  progress
                through the  in-country  appeals  system  not  only  has  an
                adverse impact on limited  resources  it  also  operates  to
                delay the hearing of the many other asylum appeals which are
                properly arguable.  The rationale  behind  s.  94  is  self-
                evident: and the importance Parliament has attached to it is
                illustrated by the language it has chosen, which the  courts
                must respect and follow.

         123. The power to certify is, in substance,  in  the  nature  of  a
                summary decision.  But it is a decision, or judgment,  which
                has been conferred by statute on  the  executive.   I  agree
                with Beatson LJ that in this context the role of the  court,
                in any consequential claim in judicial  review  proceedings,
                is one of review.  The decision is not  that  of  the  court
                itself: and, as Lord Phillips has explained in the  case  of
                L, the assessment by the  court  ultimately  is  as  to  the
                rationality of the decision to certify made on behalf of the
                Secretary of State.

         124. The style of drafting of the decision  letters  in  these  two
                cases is, in my experience, one commonly used on  behalf  of
                the Secretary of State.  The drafting technique  is  to  set
                out in detail and at considerable  length  the  reasons  for
                rejecting the asylum claim followed by a relatively  shortly
                stated conclusion that the  claim  is  assessed  as  clearly
                unfounded.   That  is  not  necessarily   an   objectionable
                technique: but of course it  does  necessarily  then  invite
                close attention to the reasons (and the manner of expression
                of those reasons) in the preceding  parts  of  the  decision
                letter.

         125. I would not agree, however, as a matter  of  generality,  with
                the suggestion to the effect that prior isolated  references
                in a decision  letter  to  (say)  'inconsistencies  in  your
                evidence'  or  'improbabilities  in  your   account'   would
                necessarily be incompatible with a decision  to  certify  as
                clearly  unfounded.   It  all  depends.   Cherry-picking  of
                certain  expressions  in  the  decision  letter   will   not
                necessarily vitiate a decision to  certify,  any  more  than
                carefully chosen language in such  letter  will  necessarily
                validate a decision to certify.  The substance of the matter
                has to be appraised.  Ultimately the decision letter must be
                read in a practical way and as a whole, in  the  context  of
                the surrounding evidence.

         126. The crucial point to emphasise  for  these  purposes  is  that
                there is a two-stage reasoning process in  play  here.   The
                style of drafting adopted in  this  case,  although  not  of
                itself objectionable, should not be permitted  to  lend  any
                encouragement to an approach: 'because I have  rejected  the
                asylum claim therefore  I  certify  as  clearly  unfounded'.
                That is not permissible: and in fairness the policy guidance
                recognizes as much.

         127. An analogy can be drawn here with a decision of the  court  or
                Upper Tribunal to certify  proceedings  as  totally  without
                merit.  Indeed the certificate of the Upper  Tribunal  Judge
                to that  effect  in  FL  was  one  of  the  bases  on  which
                permission to appeal was given by McCloskey J.  The  parties
                pragmatically did not seek to  develop  before  us  separate
                arguments on that point.  But the two separate jurisdictions
                - the power of the Secretary of State to certify as  clearly
                unfounded under s. 94 and the power of the  Court  or  Upper
                Tribunal to certify proceedings as totally without  merit  -
                have this consideration in common: that is, that both powers
                are exercisable in a case assessed, putting it  broadly,  as
                'bound to fail'.  For that reason,  it  is  commonplace  for
                judicial decisions to  refuse  permission  to  apply  for  a
                review of a decision to certify as clearly unfounded also to
                certify the proceedings -  and  properly  so  -  as  totally
                without merit.

         128. I would draw attention in this regard to  the  decision  of  a
                constitution of this court in the case of Wasif v  Secretary
                of State for the Home Department [2016]  EWCA  Civ  82.   In
                that case, addressing in general terms decisions to  certify
                as totally  without  merit,  Underhill  LJ  (in  giving  the
                judgment of the Court) emphasised  that  the  reasoning  for
                refusing permission to  apply  for  judicial  review  is  an
                exercise distinct  from  the  reasoning  for  certifying  as
                totally without merit.  That remains the case  even  if  the
                latter decision is founded upon the reasons  given  for  the
                former decision: see in particular at paragraph  21  of  the
                judgment.  That two-stage approach accords with the approach
                necessitated in the present kind of case."


50.  The Court of Appeal did not strike down the section  94  certifications
    of FR and his co-appellant,  KL,  because  of  the  way  in  which  the
    respondent had phrased the respective paragraphs of her decisions  that
    were  dealing  with  certification.   Rather,  the  Court  quashed  the
    certificates  because  deficiencies  in  the  respondent's  substantive
    Article 8 analysis demonstrated that she was wrong to conclude that the
    cases were bound to fail.

51.  I accordingly find that FR (Albania) contains  no  basis  for  quashing
    the decision in the present case, because  of  the  way  in  which  the
    "certification"  paragraph  was  phrased.   On  any  fair  reading   of
    paragraph 36 of the present decision  letter,  the  respondent  treated
    certification as a discrete matter, as evidenced by the  opening  words
    "In  addition".   Although  the  stated  rationale  for   certification
    required the reader to return to the  respondent's  earlier  Article  8
    analysis, it is plain from the closing  words  -  "is  clearly  without
    substance and cannot  succeed  on  any  legitimate  view"  -  that  the
    respondent viewed the applicant's Article 8 case as one falling outside
    the  category  of  cases  in  which  different  Tribunal  judges  could
    legitimately reach different decisions.







I. The nature of the applicant's human rights claim

52.  I therefore turn to the nature of the applicant's human rights claim.

53.  Although Mr Nicholson categorised the applicant  as  an  "orphan",  she
    shares that characteristic with every other  adult  whose  own  parents
    have died.  The applicant was already 34 years of age when she  arrived
    in the United  Kingdom  in  2007.   The  lady  who  had  acted  as  the
    applicant's mother had, we are told, died in 1999.  The applicant  had,
    accordingly, been able to live in Trinidad and Tobago in  the  interim,
    notwithstanding her orphan status, without any problems of which I have
    been  made  aware.   Her  ostensible  purpose  for   coming   to,   and
    subsequently remaining in, the United  Kingdom  was  to  study.   As  a
    result, the applicant's position was plainly "precarious" in  terms  of
    section 117B(5) of the 2002 Act.  Other things being equal,  therefore,
    little weight should be given to the applicant's private  life  in  the
    United Kingdom, in determining the proportionality  of  any  Article  8
    case.

54.  There is clearly a dispute  between  the  parties  as  to  whether  the
    applicant put the respondent in the position of being able to take from
    her bank account the money required to pay for her application to  vary
    her leave to  remain.   Although  her  view  was  not  binding  on  the
    respondent, Judge Canavan considered the respondent had  not  made  out
    her case  in  this  regard.   It  is,  however,  noteworthy  that  that
    application was made only two days before the applicant's discretionary
    leave to remain ended on 29 September 2012. The applicant thus ran  the
    risk of finding herself without leave if her application proved  to  be
    ineffective for any reason. Furthermore, the only reason the  applicant
    had been given that discretionary leave was because the respondent  had
    complied with the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  which  had
    allowed the applicant's appeal on the basis that the  applicant  should
    be given a period of time to  complete  her  volunteer  activities  and
    prepare to leave the United Kingdom.   The  applicant  did  neither  of
    these things.  On the contrary,  she  continues  to  pray  in  aid  her
    volunteer activities as an aspect of her private  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom, which she says entitles her to remain here.

55.  Viewed in  its  own  terms,  the  applicant's  private  life  claim  is
    exiguous.  She has some friends and she undertakes  social  activities,
    as well as helping people in various ways.  Benign though this may  be,
    hers is a very weak private life case.

56.  The applicant contends, both by reference  to  Article  8  and  to  the
    Immigration Rules, that she has lost ties with Trinidad and Tobago  and
    would face serious difficulties  in  resuming  her  life  there.   That
    aspect of the applicant's claim  was  rejected  by  the  respondent  at
    paragraphs 16 to 18 and 32 of  the  decision  letter.   The  respondent
    found that the applicant had spent 34 years in Trinidad  and  Tobago  -
    more than half her life - which also included her formative years.  She
    would be returning to a country of which she would have some  knowledge
    and whose national language was English.  That knowledge  would  assist
    the applicant in gaining employment in  reintegration.   It  was  noted
    that the applicant had worked in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a  fitness
    company and could use her skills in order to look for employment in her
    country of origin.  Any  friends  in  the  United  Kingdom  could  lend
    emotional support to the applicant during her period of transition.

57.  All of that strikes me not only as unarguably cogent but so  cogent  as
    to preclude any hypothetical Tribunal from properly reaching a contrary
    conclusion.

58.  The fact that  the  applicant  brought  proceedings  in  an  Employment
    Tribunal and subsequently settled them on  what  appear  to  have  been
    favourable terms cannot rationally be said to enhance  the  applicant's
    private life claim.  The proceedings are at an end.  The applicant  has
    received financial compensation.  Article 8 does not exist in order  to
    reward persons further in this regard.

59.  The final issue, therefore, is whether the applicant's weak  Article  8
    claim is nevertheless such as to be capable of outweighing  the  public
    interest in maintaining immigration controls because that interest  has
    been diminished in some way.



J. The September 2012 application for leave

60.  Since this is a section 94(1) certification  case,  I  shall  take  the
    applicant's case at its highest and assume that the respondent may have
    made a mistake in concluding the applicant provided  incorrect  payment
    card  details  in  connection  with  her  application  for   leave.   I
    nevertheless find that this scenario is not capable on  any  legitimate
    view of materially  diminishing  the  public  interest  in  maintaining
    immigration controls.  The respondent's task in processing applications
    and making myriad decisions under the Immigration Acts is daunting.  It
    cannot be right that an administrative mistake, without more, must lead
    to a diminution in the general public interest.

61.  Instead, I consider the matter falls to be examined along the lines  on
    which the issue of delay in reaching decisions in the immigration field
    was considered by the House of Lords in  EB  (Kosovo)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2008]  UKHL  41.   In  that  case,  Lord
    Bingham identified various ways in which  delays  in  making  decisions
    under the Immigration Acts might affect a person's Article 8 rights.  I
    address these in turn, adapting them as necessary by reference  to  the
    facts of the present case.

62. If one assumes the fee issue  in  favour  of  the  applicant,  then  two
    matters arise. First, the applicant  would  have  been  entitled  to  a
    decision to refuse to vary leave to remain. My attention has  not  been
    drawn to any details of what the applicant's ostensible reason was  for
    making the September 2012  application.  On  such  facts  as  we  have,
    however, it is in my view self-evident that the application would  have
    been refused by the respondent. The applicant had not  used  the  leave
    granted to her in the way that the First-tier Tribunal  had  envisaged.
    If, as seems to be the  case,  her  private  life  was  at  that  point
    essentially of the same character as it is now, then not only would the
    application have been refused by the respondent but  any  appeal  would
    have been doomed to failure.

63. The second matter is that the  fact  the  applicant  was  still  in  the
    United Kingdom at the date of the decision on 6  March  2016  might  be
    ascribed, at least in part, to her  determination  to  argue  that  the
    respondent was wrong to reject the 2012 application.  In  other  words,
    the issue regarding the status of the applicant's application could  be
    said to have had the effect  of  prolonging  her  time  in  the  United
    Kingdom, analogously with the situation in EB (Kosovo). As will by  now
    be  evident,  this  is  perhaps  a  generous  assumption,   given   the
    applicant's  history,  which  suggests  she  is  likely  to  have  been
    determined to remain in this country, come what may. Nevertheless,  the
    effect of that passage of time has still not  been  such  as  to  bring
    about any qualitative change in the nature of the  applicant's  private
    life. Her private life remains as it has been at all  relevant  points,
    revolving around friends, volunteering and social activities.

64. Nor can it be said that the passage of time  has  reasonably  given  the
    applicant any greater sense of security in the United Kingdom.  On  the
    contrary,  her  immigration  history  shows  that  the  respondent  has
    maintained her stance that the applicant has no  legitimate  reason  to
    remain in the United Kingdom, following the completion of her  studies.
    Thus, for example, in the letter to the applicant of 3 September  2012,
    granting her leave in consequence of the First-tier Tribunal's decision
    of 23 March 2012 (see paragraph  2  above),  the  respondent  told  the
    applicant:

        "You should have no expectation that any further  application  will
        be granted on this basis  and,  as  this  leave  has  been  granted
        outside of the Immigration Rules, you will no  longer  be  able  to
        apply in country for a further extension of stay under the  Tier  4
        migrant route but may return to the United Kingdom with appropriate
        entry clearance obtained overseas".

65.  Finally, it cannot, I find, be rationally argued that the  respondent's
    error (if such it be) concerning the rejected application  is  evidence
    of a "dysfunctional system" of the kind that the House of Lords had  in
    mind in EB (Kosovo). If it was an error, it has not been  shown  to  be
    anything other than a simple mistake.



K. Section 94(1) certification: the present position

66.  I  have  already  explained  why  I  do  not  consider  section   94(1)
    certification has been thrown into  any  doubt,  as  a  result  of  the
    Supreme Court cases of MM, Hesham Ali and Agyarko. I should  also  make
    mention of the most recent immigration appeal in that Court, which  was
    decided after the hearing in the present case.

67. In Kiare and another v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2017] UKSC 42, the Supreme Court held that the  certification  of  the
    appellants' appeals under section 94B of the  2002  Act  was  unlawful.
    Section 94B provides that the respondent may  certify  a  human  rights
    claim if satisfied that despite the appeals  process  not  having  been
    begun or not having been exhausted, removal to the country or territory
    of proposed removal, pending the outcome of the appeal,  would  not  be
    unlawful in human rights terms; in particular because there  is  not  a
    real risk of serious irreversible harm being  caused  to  the  claimant
    before the appeals process is exhausted.

68. The majority of the Court took the position  that,  in  effect,  removal
    from the United Kingdom pursuant to section 94B certification  rendered
    ineffective the appellants' ability to pursue  effective  appeals.  The
    question arises whether the judgments in Kiare cast  doubt  on  section
    94(1) certification since the effect of such certification  is,  as  we
    have seen, to preclude the bringing of  an  appeal  whilst  the  person
    concerned is in the United Kingdom.

69. I am satisfied that  Kiare  does  not  have  this  effect.  The  Supreme
    Court's decision concerned section  94B  certification.  The  judgments
    make no negative observations on section 94(1): see eg  paras  35,  54,
    58, 73.

70. In any event, the essential  point  is  that,  although  the  effect  of
    section 94(1) certification is to  preclude  an  appeal  being  brought
    whilst the would-be appellant is in the United Kingdom, the case law on
    section 94(1) certification makes it clear that the decision to certify
    is not taken by reference to whether an out of country right of  appeal
    exists or whether, given the particular circumstances,  that  right  is
    likely to be an effective one. Instead, the case law requires the Court
    or Tribunal to be satisfied that the respondent was correct to conclude
    that any such appeal would be bound to fail. By  contrast,  in  section
    94B, the power of certification was framed by the legislature so as  to
    be available to the respondent regardless of  whether  the  applicant's
    case was, or was not, of that character.



L. Decision

71.  Standing back and drawing the various threads together, I  am  entirely
    satisfied that the respondent was entitled to certify  the  applicant's
    human rights claim as clearly unfounded. The applicant's  private  life
    is such as to be replicable in all material respects  in  Trinidad  and
    Tobago. She  has  lived  there  for  34  years,  without  any  material
    difficulty. The public interest in  maintaining  effective  immigration
    controls is not diminished by any error of the respondent regarding the
    2012 application for leave or by any other matter.

72.  The application is accordingly dismissed.  I shall hear Counsel on  the
    issue of costs, if those cannot be agreed.~~~~0~~~~
