
IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                                                JR/5732/2016

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR

                                                   Heard on: 16 January 2017


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                                  THE QUEEN
                           (on the application of)

                                     OR
                                                                   Applicant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Mr R Sharma, instructed by Mordi and Co Solicitors appeared on behalf of
the Applicant.

Mr R Turney, instructed by the Government Legal Department appeared on
behalf of the Respondent.


                                 DECISION ON
                       APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

Anonymity Direction

I make an anonymity order, pursuant to Rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008.   Unless  the  Upper   Tribunal   or   other
appropriate  Court  or  Tribunal  orders  otherwise,  no  report  of   these
proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall directly or  indirectly
identify the Applicant or any  members  of  his  family.   This  prohibition
applies to, amongst others, all parties and their representatives.
JUDGE O'CONNOR:

Introduction

 1. This is an application for judicial review challenging  a  decision  of
    the Secretary of State for the Home Department ("SSHD")  dated  17  May
    2016.

 2. That decision, headed  "Decision  to  refuse  a  human  rights  claim",
    internally focuses on Article 3 and Article 8 ECHR claims made  by  the
    Applicant in representations made on 16 February, 24 February, 8  March
    and 5 April 2016 - the overarching submission in these  representations
    being that the Applicant's deportation would breach his, and his family
    members, 'human rights'.

 3. The decision letter of 17 May ("the decision letter") also contains the
    following discrete elements:

      i) Decisions refusing to revoke the deportation order and refusing  to
         grant the Applicant leave to remain - it being concluded  that  the
         Applicant's deportation would be in accordance with the Immigration
         Rules and would not lead to a breach of Articles 3 or 8 ECHR;

     ii) An acceptance that the aforementioned representations  (insofar  as
         they related to Article 8 ECHR) amount  to  a  fresh  human  rights
         claim, as identified by paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules i.e.
         that the Applicant's human rights claim (Article  8),  inter  alia,
         has a realistic prospect of succeeding  in  an  appeal  before  the
         First-tier Tribunal ("FtT");

    iii) Certification of the claim brought in relation to Article  3  ECHR,
         pursuant to Section  94(1)  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
         Asylum Act 2002 i.e. the claim is clearly unfounded;

     iv) Certification of the Article 8 ECHR claim, pursuant to Section  94B
         of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (see below).

 4. It is common ground that it is only this latter aspect of the Secretary
    of State's decision, i.e. the decision to certify pursuant  to  Section
    94B of the 2002  Act,  that  is  the  subject  of  challenge  in  these
    proceedings.

 5. Permission to apply for judicial review was granted, in  the  following
    terms, by Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara in a decision sent to the parties
    on 4 October 2016:

         "In view of the medical considerations in this case, I consider  it
         arguable that the temporary removal of the  applicant  pending  his
         appeal will amount to a breach of his human rights and those of his
         wife and children and that serious irreversible harm could result."





Dramatis Personae

 6. There is no dispute  that  the  Applicant  has  three  British  citizen
    children, each of whom resides in the United Kingdom.

 7. The mother of two of the children, C1 (born 2006) and C2  (born  2008),
    is the Applicant's former partner, FP.  The third child, C3 (born April
    2008), is the fruit of the Applicant's relationship with W, to whom  he
    has been married for approximately six years and with whom he currently
    resides (along with C3).

 8. For reasons that will become obvious, the focus of the submissions and,
    consequently, this decision, largely related to the effect on W and  C3
    of the Applicant's temporary absence from the United Kingdom whilst  he
    pursues his appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

Applicant's Immigration and Criminal History in the UK

 9. The Applicant arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  in  2001,  having  been
    granted six months' leave to enter as a visitor.  Upon expiry  of  this
    leave the Applicant remained in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

10. On 21 January 2009 the Applicant was served with a notice of  liability
    for deportation and a form IS151A.  Subsequently, on 6 March  2009,  he
    was served with a 'decision to deport' letter, as a direct  consequence
    of a recently acquired conviction.  Nevertheless, just six  days  later
    the Respondent withdrew that decision, notifying him at the  same  time
    that should he come to the further adverse attention of the Home Office
    consideration would be given to deporting him.

11. On 20 May 2010 the Applicant was granted Discretionary Leave to  Remain
    until 20 May 2013.  That leave was  extended  on  2  July  2013  for  a
    further three years.  However, as  a  consequence  of  the  Applicant's
    further criminal offending (as  to  which  see  below)  the  Respondent
    served notice on him on 6 February 2015  of  an  intention  to  make  a
    deportation order against him. Having considered  representations  made
    by the Applicant objecting to  deportation,  the  Respondent  issued  a
    decision refusing his human rights claim on 8 April 2015. A deportation
    order was signed in the Applicant's name on 10 April 2015.

12. The Applicant brought an application for  judicial  review  challenging
    such decision on 28 July 2015, but the Upper Tribunal refused to  admit
    that application - a consequence of it having been lodged  outwith  the
    permitted timeframe.  Such decision  was  later  affirmed  at  an  oral
    hearing of 26 January 2016.

13. Undeterred by this,  the  Applicant  made  further  submissions  on  16
    February 2016, 24 February and 8 March 2016.  These prompted a decision
    by the Respondent on 1 April 2016, in which she  refused  to  recognise
    the further submissions as a fresh claim pursuant to paragraph  353  of
    the  Immigration  Rules.   The  Applicant  brought  challenge  to  this
    decision on 5 April 2016 and, on the same date,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Rintoul refused permission and refused to stay the Applicant's proposed
    removal.  The Applicant  was  not,  thereafter,  removed  because  when
    attempts were  made  to  do  so  "he  became  verbally  and  physically
    abusive."[1]  The Applicant was subsequently released from detention on
    11 May 2016, having originally been detained on 8  December  2015.   He
    was  re-detained  on  17  May,  presumably  as  a  consequence  of  the
    Respondent having made the decision currently under  challenge.  It  is
    understood that the Applicant was thereafter released from detention in
    late June 2016, and has been living in the family unit since that date.



14. Turning back to the Applicant's criminal  offending.   The  Applicant's
    first conviction resulted in a caution on 8 June  2006  for  disorderly
    behaviour or using threatening/abusive/insulting words likely to  cause
    harassment, alarm or distress. It was not until 22  January  2009  that
    the Applicant's list of criminal convictions was  furthered,  on  which
    date he was convicted at Thames Magistrates' Court for possession of an
    imitation firearm in a public place  and  sentenced  to  three  months'
    imprisonment.   It  was  this  conviction  that  initially  piqued  the
    Respondent's interest and led to the original decision to deport letter
    being served.  The service of such decision, and subsequent warning  by
    the Respondent, did  little  to  abate  the  Applicant's  appetite  for
    criminal offending.  He was  shortly  thereafter  convicted  of  common
    assault (2 June 2009) and for possession of cannabis (22 July 2009  and
    27 October 2009,) receiving  a  fine  for  each.   There  were  further
    convictions for possession of cannabis on 30 March 2010 and  1  October
    2010, the former resulting in a community order.

15. The Applicant was once again convicted for possession of cannabis on 19
    April 2011 for which he received a suspended sentence  of  three-months
    imprisonment, and on 15 October 2012 for which it appears he received a
    community order.  On  29  May  2013  the  Applicant  was  convicted  of
    possessing cannabis and a knife/sharp pointed article in a public place
    and  handed  a  sixteen-week  sentence  of  imprisonment,  once   again
    suspended.

16. The Applicant's final conviction was on 21  December  2015,  again  for
    possession of cannabis, for which he received a fine.

Legal Background

17. Section 94B of the 2002 Act states:
         "94B. Appeal from within the United Kingdom: certification of human
         rights claims made by persons liable to deportation
             (1)  This section applies where a human rights claim has  been
                  made by a person ('P') who is liable to deportation  under
                  -
                  (a)   section  3(5)(a)  of  the   Immigration   Act   1971
                      (Secretary of State deeming deportation conducive  to
                      public good) ...
             (2)  The Secretary of State  may  certify  the  claim  if  the
                  Secretary of State considers  that,  despite  the  appeals
                  process  not  having  been  begun  or  not   having   been
                  exhausted, removal of P to the  country  or  territory  to
                  which P is proposed to be removed, pending the outcome  of
                  an appeal in relation to P's claim, would not be  unlawful
                  under section 6 of  the  Human  Rights  Act  1998  (public
                  authority not to act contrary to Human Rights Convention).
             (3)  The grounds upon which the Secretary of State may certify
                  a claim under subsection (2) include (in particular)  that
                  P would not, before the appeals process is exhausted, face
                  a real risk of serious irreversible harm if removed to the
                  country  or  territory  to  which  P  is  proposed  to  be
                  removed."

18. The consequence of certification of a human rights  claim  pursuant  to
    Section 94B is that any appeal against such decision  (in  the  instant
    case the decision of 17 May 2016) must  be  brought  from  outside  the
    United Kingdom: Section 92(3) of the 2002 Act.

19. When consideration is being given by  the  Tribunal  to  an  Article  8
    claim, it must apply the obligatory statutory considerations  enshrined
    in Part 5A of the 2002 Act. I need not set out those  provisions  which
    are laid out in sections 117B(2)-(3) of the 2002  Act,  both  of  which
    operate entirely neutrally in the instant proceedings. Section  117B(4)
    identifies that little weight should be given to  private  life,  or  a
    relationship formed with a qualifying partner, that is established at a
    time when the Applicant's stay  in  the  United  Kingdom  is  unlawful.
    Section 117B(5) identifies  that  little  weight  should  be  given  to
    private life established at a  time  when  an  Applicant's  immigration
    status in  the  United  Kingdom  is  precarious,  as  this  Applicant's
    immigration status has always been.

20. Section 117C of the 2002 Act provides for additional considerations  in
    cases involving foreign criminals. A foreign criminal includes a person
    who is a persistent offender (section 117D(2)(c)(ii) of the 2002  Act).
    The Respondent  has  concluded  that  the  Applicant  is  a  persistent
    offender and that conclusion  is  not  the  subject  of  challenge.  By
    117C(2): "The more serious the offence committed..., the greater is the
    public interest in deportation of the criminal."  In  cases  where  the
    foreign criminal has not been sentenced to a term  of  imprisonment  of
    four years or more, the public  interest  requires  deportation  unless
    certain exceptions apply:

         "Exception 2 applies where C [the foreign criminal] has  a  genuine
         and subsisting relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine
         and subsisting parental relationship with a  qualifying  child  and
         the effect of C's deportation on the  partner  or  child  would  be
         unduly harsh."

The correct general approach to section 94B in  the  context  of  Article  8
ECHR

21. This issue was considered and determined by the Court of  Appeal  in  R
    (on the application of) Kiarie v SSHD [2015]  EWCA  Civ  1020,  in  the
    following terms:

         "[34] The central provision in section 94B is subsection  (2):  the
         power to certify arises only "if the Secretary of  State  considers
         that ... removal of P to the country or territory  to  which  P  is
         proposed to be  removed,  pending  the  outcome  of  an  appeal  in
         relation to P's claim, would not be unlawful under section 6 of the
         Human Rights Act 1998 ..." (emphasis added). In  other  words,  the
         Secretary of State cannot lawfully  certify  unless  she  considers
         that removal pending the outcome of  an  appeal  would  not  be  in
         breach of any of the person's  Convention  rights  as  set  out  in
         schedule 1 to the Human Rights Act.

         [35] By subsection (3), a ground  for  certification  is  that  the
         person would not, before the appeals process is exhausted, face  "a
         real risk of serious irreversible harm" if removed to  the  country
         or territory to which he or she is proposed  to  be  removed.  That
         ground does not,  however,  displace  the  statutory  condition  in
         subsection (2),  nor  does  it  constitute  a  surrogate  for  that
         condition. Even if the Secretary of State is satisfied that removal
         pending determination of an appeal would not give rise  to  a  real
         risk of serious irreversible harm, that is not a  sufficient  basis
         for certification. She  cannot  certify  in  any  case  unless  she
         considers, in accordance with subsection (2), that removal  pending
         determination of any appeal would not be unlawful under  section  6
         of the Human Rights Act. That the risk of serious irreversible harm
         is not the overarching test was rightly accepted by  Lord  Keen  on
         behalf of the Secretary of State at the hearing of the appeal.

         [36] It follows that the Secretary of State's guidance  on  section
         94B (see paragraphs 8-11 above) is  inaccurate  and  misleading  in
         focusing as it does on the criterion of serious  irreversible  harm
         in subsection (3) and failing to focus on the central provision  in
         subsection (2)

         [37]  It  is  unnecessary  in  the  circumstances  to  spend   time
         discussing the criterion of serious  irreversible  harm,  which  is
         drawn from the jurisprudence of the ECtHR on  the  availability  of
         interim measures under rule 39 of the  Rules  of  Court  (see,  for
         example, Mamatkulov v Turkey (2005) 41 EHRR 25, at paragraphs  102-
         104 and 108). There may in practice be relatively few  cases  where
         removal for an interim period pending an appeal would be in  breach
         of  Convention  rights  in  the  absence  of  a  risk  of   serious
         irreversible harm, but it is a possibility which must be focused on
         as a necessary part of the decision-making process.

         [38] Consideration must be given, in particular, to whether removal
         pending  determination  of  an  appeal  would  interfere  with  the
         person's rights under article 8 and, if  so,  whether  removal  for
         that interim period would meet the requirements of proportionality.
         Unless the decision-maker considers that there  would  be  no  such
         interference or that any such interference would be  proportionate,
         the claim cannot lawfully be certified under section 94B."

SSHD's Decision Letter of 17 May 2016

22. The decision letter initially sets out the Applicant's immigration, and
    criminal, history in the United Kingdom and,  thereafter,  proceeds  to
    summarise the further representations made on the  Applicant's  behalf.
    The decision  is  subsequently  divided  into  the  following  discreet
    sections: (i) a consideration of whether the deportation  order  should
    be revoked (this being the section in which the Applicant's substantive
    human  rights  claim  is  determined),  (ii)  a  consideration  of  the
    application of paragraph 353  of  HC  395;  (iii)  a  consideration  of
    whether to certify the Applicant's claims pursuant to section 94 of the
    2002 Act; and finally, (iv) a consideration of whether to  certify  the
    Applicant's Article 8 claim pursuant to section 94B of  the  2002  Act.
    For the present purposes the analysis by the Respondent  found  in  the
    former  and  latter  sections  of  the  decision  letter  is  the  most
    instructive.

Substantive Human Rights claim

23. Under the overarching heading "Article 8 ECHR" the  Respondent  directs
    herself, inter alia,  to  the  relevant  features  of  the  Applicant's
    circumstances, including his offending and his  relationships  with  W,
    FP, and C1 to C3. Conclusions  of  fact,  and  assessments  as  to  the
    consequences of the Applicant's deportation, are intertwined therein.

24. In relation to C1 and C2, the  Respondent  accepts  that  each  is  the
    Applicant's child, is under the age of 18, that they live in the United
    Kingdom, and that they are British citizens.  It is not  accepted  that
    the Applicant has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship  with
    either of them, although there is an acceptance of  weekly  contact  by
    the Applicant.  The  Respondent  concludes  that  it  is  in  the  best
    interests of C1 and C2 to remain in the United Kingdom in the  care  of
    their mother, and an acceptance that it would be unreasonable for  them
    to relocate to Jamaica to live with the  Applicant.   A  conclusion  of
    some significance, made in relation to C1 and C2, is that it would  not
    be unduly harsh for either to remain in the  United  Kingdom  were  the
    Applicant to be deported - FP (their mother) having responsibility  for
    their welfare and upbringing.

25. There is also specific consideration in relation to C1 of the fact that
    he has been diagnosed with ADHD, but it is concluded that this is being
    addressed and managed effectively through identified support networks.

26. Turning to the Respondent's consideration of W, it is accepted that the
    Applicant and W are in a genuine and subsisting relationship, that  the
    Applicant is married to W, that W is a British citizen,  and  that  the
    Applicant and  W  were  residing  together  prior  to  the  Applicant's
    detention.  It is observed that in 2008 W  indicated  in  an  affidavit
    produced in support of an application made by the  Applicant  that  the
    relationship  began  in  2004.  At  that  time  the  Applicant  was  an
    overstayer,  which  led  the  Respondent  to  a  conclusion  that   the
    Applicant's relationship with W was formed at a time when he was in the
    UK unlawfully. The decision goes on to conclude that it  would  not  be
    unduly harsh for W to live in Jamaica

27. There is no dispute that W suffers from  Charcot  Marie  Tooth  disease
    (CMT), a condition that damages the peripheral nerves  responsible  for
    passing on commands from the brain to the muscles  (motor  nerves)  and
    for passing information to the brain about  sensations  such  as  pain,
    heat, cold and touch (sensory nerves).  In this regard the Respondent's
    decision letter observes that there is no specific  treatment  or  cure
    for the illness.  Having taken into account the nature  of  the  health
    system in Jamaica the Respondent concludes that it would not be  unduly
    harsh for W to move there.  As to W remaining in the United Kingdom  if
    the Applicant were deported, the Respondent concludes:

         "[W] is a British citizen and is  entitled  to  remain  in  the  UK
         should she wish to do so.  It is not accepted that you are the sole
         carer for [W], as there are significant other family members in the
         UK who could offer support and are doing so now whilst you  are  in
         detention.  Even if it were accepted that you were the  sole  carer
         for [W], which it is not, she also has full access to  the  welfare
         system and NHS in the  UK  who  she  could  turn  to  for  support.
         Indeed, [W] has utilised the support of the NHS since 1 June  2010.
         [W] will be able to maintain contact with you including  visits  in
         Jamaica or in a third  country.   Again,  it  is  noted  that  your
         relationship began when you were in the UK unlawfully and both  you
         and  [W]  would  have  been  aware  from  the  outset   that   your
         relationship may not be able to continue in the UK."

28. Under  the  heading  "Very  Compelling  Circumstances"  the  Respondent
    recounts the fact that W has been diagnosed with CMT, and then states:

         "It is not accepted that you are the sole carer for  SH.   Evidence
         you have provided confirms  that  SH  is  employed...   documentary
         evidence you have provided confirms that SH  is  receiving  support
         for her CMT from her sister...,  and  has  numerous  other  support
         networks that both your own and her family could offer  support  to
         her.

         Since your detention it is clear that SH made  her  own  choice  to
         move out of the family home to stay with her  sister...  supporting
         letter from NG confirms that it was SH's choice to  move  from  the
         family home as SH became fearful upon leaving her work  environment
         to venture into her home alone.  You have  provided  evidence  that
         you are a self-employed painter  and  decorator,  therefore  it  is
         contended you are not physically present with SH all day and SH has
         demonstrated that she has been able to adapt  to  your  absence  by
         continuing to attend work and by seeking family support.

         Notwithstanding this  family  support  network,  even  if  it  were
         accepted that you were the sole carer for SH which it is  not,  she
         also has access to the welfare system and NHS in the  UK  whom  she
         could turn to for support."

29. As to C3, the Respondent accepts that she is the Applicant's  daughter,
    is under the age of 18, and  is  a  British  citizen.   It  is  further
    accepted that the Applicant is in a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with C3, that he takes an active role  in  her  day-to-day
    life and upbringing and that he lives as part of a family unit with her
    and W.

30. The Respondent thereafter concluded that it would not be  unduly  harsh
    for C3 to live in Jamaica if the Applicant were to be  deported  there.
    As to whether it would be unduly harsh for C3 to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom if the Applicant were deported,  the  Respondent  concluded  as
    follows:

         "It is not accepted that it would  be  unduly  harsh  for  [C3]  to
         remain in the United Kingdom even though you are to be deported. If
         your wife chooses to remain in the UK upon your  deportation,  [C3]
         can remain in the UK as a British citizen with her and continue her
         education in the UK.  It is considered that you  will  be  able  to
         maintain a level of contact with [C3] from Jamaica.  In particular,
         there is no credible evidence that she would lose all contact  with
         you in consequence  of  your  deportation  from  the  UK.   Current
         objective  country  information  on  Jamaica...  demonstrates  that
         access to telephone and  broadband,  internet  services  is  widely
         available in Jamaica.  No evidence has been provided to demonstrate
         that [C3] would not be able to visit you in Jamaica or in  a  third
         country during school holidays even if such visits could only  take
         place infrequently due to expense.

         Therefore, having considered all the available  information  it  is
         not accepted that you meet the requirements of  the  exceptions  to
         deportation on the basis of family life with a child."

31. A further section of the decision letter  relating  to  C3,  under  the
    heading "Very Compelling Circumstances", reads:

         "You have provided evidence that your daughter  [C3]  is  receiving
         counselling due to your detention and because  of  the  deportation
         order against you.  However, it is understandable that a child  who
         faces the prospect of losing a parent or guardian whilst they go to
         prison, are detained or deported may well be very upset.   However,
         this situation has arose as a direct consequence of  your  criminal
         behaviour and as stated above you were notified in writing in March
         2009 that further consideration would be given to your  deportation
         from the UK, should you come to the  adverse  notice  of  the  Home
         Office in the future.

         It  is  further  contended  that  [C3]  is  clearly  receiving  the
         sufficient help and support  from  your  extended  family  members,
         school and health professionals, who are  assisting  her  with  her
         distress and wellbeing and will continue to do so  if  required  in
         the future.  It is therefore not accepted that your deportation  to
         Jamaica would have a significant impact on [C3]."

The Respondent's consideration of whether to certify under Section 94B

32. Consideration and conclusions on the issue of whether  to  certify  the
    Applicant's  claims  pursuant  to  section  94B  of  the  2002  Act  is
    undertaken by the Respondent over 6 � pages of close type.

33. The decision initially, correctly, identifies the legal approach to  be
    taken to such considerations, citing from Kiarie. It then sets out  the
    Applicant's relevant personal circumstances and, once again,  traverses
    through a consideration of the Applicant's relationships in the  United
    Kingdom  and  an  analysis  of  the  respective  consequences  for  the
    Applicant, and those with whom he  has  a  relationship  with,  of  his
    temporary absence form the United Kingdom.

34. The Respondent concluded that it would be in the best interests of  the
    children for each of them to remain in the United  Kingdom  with  their
    respective  mothers,  taking  into  account   matters   such   as   the
    availability  of   long   distance   communication.   The   Applicant's
    relationship with each child is then dealt with in turn,  in  much  the
    same, although not identical, terms as those relationships  were  dealt
    with when by the Respondent in  the  assessment  of  substantive  human
    rights claim.

35. As has already been identified, Mr Sharma placed significance focus  on
    C3 and W during the course of the hearing and, in  such  circumstances,
    it is prudent to set out in some detail the Respondent's considerations
    and conclusions in regard to each:

         "It is considered that there would not be any serious  irreversible
         harm to [C3] during the period it takes to conclude any appeal  you
         may bring.

         It is contended that [C3] is clearly receiving the sufficient  help
         and support from your extended family members,  school  and  health
         professionals  who  are  assisting  her  with  her   distress   and
         wellbeing.  It is not accepted that  there  would  be  any  serious
         irreversible harm in the period it takes to conclude any appeal you
         may bring.  There is no evidence that [C3] would lose  all  contact
         with you as a consequence of your  deportation  from  the  UK.   No
         evidence has been provided to demonstrate that [C3]  would  not  be
         able to visit you in Jamaica or in a third  country  even  if  such
         visits  could  only  take  place  infrequently  due   to   expense.
         Furthermore [C3]  can  still  formulate  a  relationship  with  you
         through modern methods of communication."

36. In relation to W the Respondent concluded:

         "You claim you are the sole carer  for  your  partner  [W]  who  is
         suffering from... CMT.

         You have submitted the following evidence to support these  claims:
         a letter from  her  GP,  a  letter  from  [W]  and  a  letter  from
         University College London Hospital.

         It is considered that there would not be any  serious  irreversible
         harm to [W] during the period it takes to conclude any  appeal  you
         may bring ...

         It is noted there is no specific treatment or cure  for  CMT.   The
         control and management of  CMT  includes  such  things  as  healthy
         eating, physiotherapy and moderate exercise.   Healthy  eating  and
         exercise are lifestyle choices.  Therefore [W] would not  be  in  a
         less favourable position than she is now.

         Furthermore the evidence you have provided confirms  that  you  are
         not  the  sole  carer  for  SH.   It  is  confirmed  that  [W]   is
         employed....  [W]  is  receiving  support  for  her  CMT  from  her
         sister..., and has numerous other support networks, that both  your
         own and her family could offer support to her.

         Notwithstanding this  family  support  network,  even  if  it  were
         accepted that you were the sole carer for [W], she also has  access
         to the welfare system and NHS in the UK whom she could turn to  for
         support."

37. Before leaving this section of my decision, it should also be  observed
    the Respondent rejected the assertion that FP suffers from  depression,
    or that the Applicant's assistance is necessary to enable her  to  care
    for C1 and C2.

Fresh Evidence

38. At the outset of the hearing Mr Sharma, on the instructions of his  lay
    client, handed up documentation that had neither previously been placed
    before the Respondent nor seen by the  Tribunal.   An  application  was
    made for such documentation to be admitted. No explanation was provided
    as to why such documentation was handed up at such a late stage in  the
    proceedings.

39. The documentation consisted of a letter dated 24 November 2016 relating
    to C3, authored by "Place 2 Be", and a letter  dated  1  December  2016
    from the Enfield Council Child and  Adolescent  Mental  Health  Service
    (CAMHS) also relating to C3. Both documents have the common feature  of
    identifying C3's mental health issues, and in particular  there  is  an
    observation in the letter from CAMHS that C3 is "at risk of  deliberate
    self harm on our RIO Risk Assessment.  She  has  continued  to  express
    suicidal ideation linked to her father's  deportation,  which  is  very
    concerning in a child of such a young age."

40. Mr Sharma asserted that admission of the evidence was necessary  so  as
    to ensure the accurate identification  of  the  circumstances  as  they
    pertained as of the date of  the  decision  under  challenge.  For  the
    reasons that follow I refuse to admit such evidence.

41. This is an application for judicial review challenging a decision taken
    by the Respondent  in  May  2016.   Neither  my  consideration  of  the
    lawfulness of the factual  findings  made  by  the  Respondent,  or  my
    assessment of the issue of proportionality, have as a component part  a
    consideration of the circumstances that were prevailing as at the  date
    of the Respondent's decision. Rather, I am  required  to  consider  the
    circumstances that were prevailing at  the  date  of  the  Respondent's
    decision as viewed through the lens of the evidence that was  presented
    to the Respondent.  It is no doubt for this reason that  the  court  in
    Kiarie said as follows at paragraph 99 of its  decision  (applied  more
    recently in JT (Sri Lanka) [2016] EWCA Civ 641)

         "I should make clear at  this  point  that  I  accept  Lord  Keen's
         submission that the lawfulness of the supplementary  decision  must
         be assessed on the basis of the evidence before  the  Secretary  of
         State at the time of that decision. The Secretary of State can give
         consideration in due course to the evidence  produced  subsequently
         by Mr Byndloss. The possibility that this might lead to  a  further
         decision which, if adverse to Mr Byndloss, might trigger a  further
         judicial review claim was viewed with equanimity by  Lord  Keen.  I
         reject a contention by Mr Gill that the  court  should  decide  the
         matter for itself on the basis of all the evidence now  before  the
         court. That would go beyond review  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
         decisions and would involve a usurpation of her role as the  person
         entrusted by Parliament with the power  to  certify  under  section
         94B."

Decision and Discussion

Tribunal's role in Judicial Review proceedings

42. Once again, the Court of Appeal's decision  in  Kiarie  (which  I  have
    applied) provides valuable assistance in this regard:

         "[31] As I have said, there  is  no  dispute  that  a  decision  to
         certify under section  94B  is  amenable  to  judicial  review.  It
         should, however, be stressed that the issue on such a challenge  is
         limited to the section 94B certification and does not extend to the
         deportation decision itself  or  to  the  related  refusal  of  the
         person's  human  rights  claim.  Section   94B   will   arise   for
         consideration only in cases  where  there  is  a  right  of  appeal
         against the refusal of the human rights claim  (see,  for  example,
         the summary of the Secretary of State's guidance at paragraph 8(ii)
         above). The section is concerned with the distinct question whether
         the  person  can  lawfully  be  removed  pending  such  an  appeal.
         Moreover, there is obviously no right of appeal against the section
         94B certification itself.

         [32] It follows from all this that the line of cases to the  effect
         that, where a right of appeal exists against  a  removal  decision,
         judicial review will not lie unless special or exceptional  factors
         are in play (see e.g. R (Lim and Siew) v Secretary of State for the
         Home Department [2007] EWCA Civ 773, [2008] INLR 60, and RK (Nepal)
         v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA  Civ  359,
         [2010] INLR 37) has no direct relevance in this context.

         [33] As to the  applicable  principles  on  judicial  review  of  a
         decision under section 94B, the terms of the  statute  require  the
         Secretary of State to form her own view on whether removal  pending
         an appeal would breach Convention rights (see,  further,  the  next
         section of this judgment). For that purpose, in an Article  8  case
         such as the present, she has to make relevant findings of fact  and
         conduct a proportionality balancing exercise  in  relation  to  the
         facts so found. In my judgment, her findings of fact  are  open  to
         review on normal Wednesbury principles, applied  with  the  anxious
         scrutiny appropriate to the context: compare R (Giri)  v  Secretary
         of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 784, applying R  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department, ex p. Khawaja [1984] AC
         74 and Bugdaycay v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
         [1987] AC 514, and distinguishing between  cases  of  precedent  or
         jurisdictional fact (where the court has to decide  the  facts  for
         itself) and cases where facts have to be  found  by  the  decision-
         maker in the exercise of a discretionary power conferred on him  or
         her (and where those  findings  of  fact  are  open  to  review  on
         Wednesbury   principles).   But   as   to   the    assessment    of
         proportionality, the decision of  the  Supreme  Court  in  R  (Lord
         Carlile of Berriew) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
         [2014] UKSC 60, [2015] AC 945 shows that the court  is  obliged  to
         form its own view, whilst giving  appropriate  weight  (which  will
         depend on context) to any balancing exercise  carried  out  by  the
         primary decision-maker."

Grounds of Claim (as pleaded)

43. The grounds of claim, as pleaded in the notice of application,  can  be
    summarised in the following terms:

      i) The  Respondent  acted  unlawfully  in  her  consideration  of  the
         implications of the  decision  of  the  Court  of  Justice  of  the
         European Union in Ruiz Zambrano (European citizenship) [2011] EUECJ
         C-34/09, given that the Applicant's children are British;

     ii) The Respondent's decision to certify  the  Applicant's  application
         pursuant to Section 94B of the 2002  Act  is  unlawful,  given  the
         strength of the Applicant's family and private life in  the  United
         Kingdom,  and  the  medical  and  emotional   conditions   of   the
         Applicant's family members.

44. For completeness sake I record that Mr Sharma accepted  that  challenge
    was only brought to the section 94B certificate, not to the substantive
    decision on the human rights claim - which would be considered  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal on appeal.  He  also  properly  accepted  that  the
    errors identified by the Court of Appeal in  the  SSHD's  decisions  in
    Kiarie were not present in the instant decision letter.



Ground 1

45. In Mr Turney's submission the terms of the grant of permission  by  UTJ
    Kamara precluded the Applicant from relying upon  this  ground  at  the
    hearing. I reject that contention.  Although Judge  Kamara's  reasoning
    relates only to the matters raised in the second ground, the  terms  of
    the grant of permission do not expressly limit the grounds  that  could
    be  deployed  by  the  Applicant.   In  the  absence  of  such  express
    limitation I am not prepared to conclude  that  the  Applicant  is  not
    entitled to pursue the first of his pleaded grounds.

46. Ground 1 is, however, pleaded with such imprecision  that  it  diverted
    both the Respondent's and the Tribunal's attention in a direction  that
    was not intended.  On its face it appears  that  the  submission  being
    made therein is to the effect that the  Applicant's  temporary  absence
    would result in a breach, in relation to C3, of the  EU  law  principle
    derived from the decision in Zambrano [2011] All ER (EC) 491. Had  this
    been the submission  pursued  by  the  Applicant  it  would  have  been
    entirely misconceived.

47. At the hearing, however, Mr Sharma properly accepted that there was  no
    "EU law ground" in this case, this being the  ultimate  consequence  of
    there being no compulsion on C3 to leave the territory of the EU should
    the Applicant be deported.

48. Mr Sharma, nevertheless, sought to pursue this ground;  asserting  that
    the Respondent had acted unlawfully in proceeding on the basis that  it
    would be reasonable to expect C3 to move to Jamaica to  live  with  the
    Applicant in the event of  the  Applicant's  deportation.  Whilst  this
    articulation of the ground is by no means obvious from the face of  the
    pleadings, the looseness of the drafting in this instance  operates  to
    the Applicant's benefit, because it cannot be said that the  ground  in
    its 're-articulated form' is not to be found  in  the  claim  form.  Mr
    Turney was content to proceed on this basis.

49. There is some substance to the underlying allegation of error,  insofar
    as it relates to the substantive human rights claim, particularly given
    the terms of the Respondent's own policy on such issues.  Nevertheless,
    Mr Sharma is faced with the insuperable difficulty  that  rationale  he
    relies upon as being in error was not in  fact  that  deployed  by  the
    Respondent  in  her  deliberations  as  to  whether  the  certify   the
    Applicant's claim pursuant to Section 94B. It  is  an  approach  to  be
    found only in the Respondent's consideration of the  substantive  human
    rights claim.

50. I reject Mr Sharma's submission that  the  reasoning  provided  by  the
    Respondent in relation to the substantive human rights claim should  be
    read across in its entirely to the decision made in relation to section
    94B.  Whilst  there   are   certain   aspects   of   the   Respondent's
    considerations of the substantive human rights claim that must  clearly
    be be read across into the section 94B deliberations  and  conclusions,
    this aspect of such reasons is not one of them.

51. To read this rationale across in the manner asserted by Mr Sharma would
    defy the plain reading of that part of the decision letter  devoted  to
    section 94B.  When undertaking her assessment as to whether to  certify
    the claim pursuant to section  94B  the  Respondent  specifically,  and
    identifiably, considered the matter on the basis that C3  could  either
    visit Jamaica whilst the Applicant was awaiting the appeal  process  to
    finalise,  or  formulate  a  relationship  through  modern   means   of
    communication.  The decision maker does not countenance the possibility
    anywhere in the consideration of the section 94B  certification  of  C3
    travelling to Jamaica for anything other than a visit. Thus, ground  1,
    even in its re-articulated form, is not made out.

Ground 2

52. At the hearing Mr Sharma sought, once again, to articulate this  ground
    in a form which is not readily apparent from the  pleadings,  asserting
    that in her decision on section 94B the Respondent:

      i) Irrationally relied upon the possibility of  W  receiving  adequate
         support for her CMT from her sister and the NHS, during the  period
         of the Applicant's temporary absence  pending  his  appeal  to  the
         First-tier Tribunal;

     ii) Unlawfully failed to take into account the extent  of  C3's  mental
         health issues; and that,

    iii) In any event, on the factual findings made by  the  Respondent  the
         Applicant's  temporary  deportation  to  Jamaica   would   not   be
         proportionate to the  legitimate  aim  of  maintaining  immigration
         control and would, thus, breach Article 8 ECHR.

53. Mr Turney's primary position in  relation  to  the  first  two  of  the
    aforementioned grounds was that they had not been  pleaded,  permission
    had not been granted to rely upon them and that they should not now  be
    admitted.

54. In response Mr Sharma directed attention to paragraphs 47, 52,  56  and
    57 of the pleaded grounds, which read as follows:

        "[47] It is further submitted that  the  Respondent  has  failed  to
              justify the interference with  the  Applicant's  family  life
              caused  by  certification  of  the  claim   to   revoke   the
              deportation decision. ...

         [52] Further, the Applicant submits that the approach to  be  taken
              is not whether the Respondent's decision to certify was  open
              to her but, as this is a  matter  relating  to  human  rights
              compatibility, whether the decision is arguably unlawful...

         [56] It is submitted that  the  provision  therefore  cannot  apply
              properly in the current case and that it is unlawful for  the
              Respondent to have  made  such  a  decision  in  the  current
              circumstances.

         [57] In relation to the effect of the decision, even in the  short-
              term, the  Applicant  relies  on  the  level  of  support  he
              provides  to  his  family  and  the  medical  and   emotional
              conditions of all those involved  to  argue  that  his  claim
              should not have been certified."

55. He asserted that such grounds, whilst lacking clarity, were capable  of
    being construed in the manner now articulated; explaining that they had
    been drafted at short notice.

56. Having considered the pleaded grounds as a whole I do not  accept  that
    they include those grounds identified in sub-paragraphs 52(i) and  (ii)
    above.  Consequently, Mr Sharma  needs  permission  to  rely  upon  the
    grounds as now put forward.

57. Insofar as an application for permission to amend the grounds was made,
    I refuse it.  Although the  original  grounds  were  drafted  at  short
    notice, and suffered from lack of clarity no doubt  as  a  consequence,
    there has been ample opportunity since the lodging of  the  application
    for judicial review to seek  an  amendment.  No  explanation  has  been
    provided as to why such an amendment  was  not  sought  at  an  earlier
    juncture, in particular prior to the consideration of  the  application
    for permission. To make such  application  orally  at  the  substantive
    hearing  of  the  judicial  review   application   is,   without   good
    explanation, unsatisfactory.

58. Drawing this together, I find that the delay in making the  application
    to amend the grounds is serious and significant. In the  absence  of  a
    good  explanation  for  such  delay  and  having  considered  all   the
    circumstances of the case, I refuse to allow the  Applicant  permission
    to amend the grounds to include those set out  in  paragraphs  52(i)  &
    (ii) above.

59. In any event, had I granted permission to  rely  upon  such  grounds  I
    would not have granted relief in relation to either of them.

60. In considering the relevance of W's illness, and in particular the need
    for, and provision of, the support that W requires  as  a  consequence,
    the Respondent clearly had regard to all of the  evidence  before  her.
    This feature of the  Applicant's  claim  was  addressed  twice  in  the
    decision letter - extracts in relation to which I have set  out  above.
    None of the factual findings of  the  Respondent  in  this  regard  are
    capable of rational dispute, in particular the extent  of  the  support
    networks relied upon by W  whilst  the  Applicant  was  in  immigration
    detention for five months at the end of  2015/beginning  of  2016.  The
    evidence does not disclose that those same support networks  would  not
    be available to W  during  the  period  of  the  Applicant's  temporary
    absence from the United Kingdom, and the conclusion that they would  be
    is not irrational.

61. As to the asserted failure of the Respondent to  take  account  of  the
    extent of C3's mental health issues, once again  this  cannot  be  made
    out. The evidence before the Respondent in this regard was limited but,
    at its zenith, it identified that C3 was distressed at the  Applicant's
    absence, has threatened suicide if he does not  return  to  the  family
    home, cries for the Applicant and finds it difficult to  interact  with
    friends. She was also 'scared' when the Applicant was not living in the
    house because she  heard  noises,  she  lacks  personal  space  in  W's
    sister's house and she was referred to CAMHS in February 2016.

62. There can be no doubt in my view that the Respondent took this evidence
    on board when reaching her conclusions in  relation  to  C3.  There  is
    specific reference to C3 receiving  counselling  as  a  result  of  the
    Applicant's detention and proposed deportation, and identification that
    C3 is also receiving support for  her  distress  from  extended  family
    members, school and health professionals.

63. Turning then to the final ground of challenge,  which  requires  me  to
    form my own view of whether requiring the Applicant's temporary absence
    from  the  United  Kingdom  whilst  he  pursues  his  appeal  would  be
    proportionate. I must though give appropriate weight to  the  balancing
    exercise carried out by the Respondent (see Kiarie).

64. There having been no successful challenge to any finding of  fact  made
    by the Respondent, I must proceed on the basis of the primary facts  as
    found by the Respondent.

65. I need not dwell on whether Article 8 is engaged. It is. The  Applicant
    has both a private and a family life in the  United  Kingdom,  both  of
    which will undoubtedly be the subject of interference by virtue of  his
    removal,  even  though  his  absence  from  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    consequence will only be temporary.  The  extent  of  that  family  and
    private life is set out in the  Respondent's  decision  and  I  do  not
    repeat it again at this stage herein. It is appropriate, therefore,  to
    move  swiftly  on  to  the  issue  at  the   heart   of   the   ground,
    proportionality.

66. This aspect of my consideration  is  impinged  upon  by  those  matters
    identified in Part 5A of the 2002 Act, the material  aspects  of  which
    are set out above. Even if this were not case  I  would,  nevertheless,
    have come to the same conclusion.

67. Although I must take into consideration that  which  is  identified  by
    section 117C(2) when considering the  weight  to  be  attached  to  the
    public interests in play in this case, I also bear well  in  mind,  and
    apply, the guidance provided in paragraph 44 of Kiarie as to the weight
    to be attached to the public interest of removing an Applicant  pending
    appeal in matters concerning deportation.

68. A feature of the  Applicant's  circumstances  which  also  legitimately
    informs the weight to be attached to the public interest is the risk of
    him re-offending if he remains in the United Kingdom,  an  unchallenged
    finding in relation to which was made by the  Respondent  and  which  I
    adopt (and, in any  event,  a  finding  with  which  I  concur  on  the
    evidence, particularly given the Applicant's criminal history  and  the
    timing of his offending when viewed in the context of his  interactions
    with the Respondent).  I have, of course, also born in  mind  that  the
    Applicant's  offending  almost  exclusively,  although  not   entirely,
    belongs to the realm of offences at the very lower end of the scale.

69. Moving on, as already identified Mr Sharma put the Applicant's children
    at the heart of this case, in particular C3. Focus has also been placed
    on the consequences for W should the Applicant be removed.

70. C3 and W share the characteristics of being British, and are  therefore
    a qualifying partner and  child,  respectively,  for  the  purposes  of
    section 117C. They also share the characteristic of  having  a  genuine
    and subsisting relationship with the  Applicant  and,  consequently,  I
    must assess, in relation to  each,  whether  the  consequences  of  the
    Applicant's deportation would be unduly harsh for either.

71. In MK (Sierra Leone) [2015] UKUT 223 a Presidential panel concluded  of
    the phrase "unduly harsh":

         "...does not equate to uncomfortable, inconvenient, undesirable  or
         merely difficult. Rather it  poses  a  considerably  more  elevated
         threshold. 'Harsh' in this context  denotes  something  severe,  or
         bleak.  It  is  the  antithesis   of   pleasant   or   comfortable.
         Furthermore, the addition of the adverb 'unduly' raises an  already
         elevated standard still higher."

72. It is further of significance that the Court of Appeal in MM (Uganda) v
    SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 450 identified that  a  consideration  of  "unduly
    harsh" incorporates of itself a consideration of all the circumstances,
    including a balancing of the public interests. It is plain that  it  is
    particularly informed by the fact that the Applicant's absence from the
    United Kingdom will be limited only to the period during  which  he  is
    pursuing an appeal.

73. Turning to look at C3 first. It is undoubtedly the case that  it  would
    be in her best interests (and indeed the best interests of C1 and C2 as
    well) that she remains in the United Kingdom if the Applicant  were  to
    be removed. In addition, it is also in  her  best  interests  that  the
    Applicant remain in the UK as  well,  a  significant  feature  of  this
    consideration being C3's mental health issues and  the  apparent  cause
    thereof. Nevertheless, the best interests of a child are to be  treated
    as a primary consideration, not a trump card. C3 is  receiving  support
    for her mental health issues in the manner described herein and in  the
    Respondent's refusal decision, and she would continue to do so  if  the
    Applicant were to be removed. The evidence does  not  disclose  that  a
    short-term absence of the Applicant from the family environment, as was
    the case when he was detained for five months,  would  cause  long-term
    difficulties for  C3.  As  the  Respondent  has  identified,  C3  could
    maintain  contact  with  the   Applicant   though   modern   means   of
    communication and she has access to a significant  support  network  if
    this were required. She would  also  be  aware,  because  that  is  the
    premise upon which I must operate, that his absence would be temporary.



74. Having taken into account all  the  relevant  circumstances,  including
    those  identified  above  and  below,  as  well  as   the   Applicant's
    immigration, and criminal, history and the  relevant  public  interest,
    whilst I accept that temporary separation between the Applicant and  C3
    will be harsh I do not accept  it  surpasses  the  threshold  of  being
    'unduly harsh'.

75. Turning to a consideration of W, and whether the Applicant's  temporary
    separation from her will surpass the unduly harsh threshold, once again
    I conclude that it would not. There can be no doubt that the  Applicant
    provides W with a considerable amount of support and  that  W  requires
    support (both personal and in caring for C3) as a  consequence  of  her
    illness.  However, the Respondent has identified W's sister  could,  at
    least for the period of temporary absence whilst the Applicant  pursues
    an appeal, provide support, both to W and C3. There is also  additional
    support available via  "the  welfare  system  and  NHS",  if  required.
    Contact could be maintained between W  and  the  Applicant  during  the
    period of the Applicant's temporary absence, via telephone,  or  video,
    calls.  Once  again,  having  taken  into  account  all  the   relevant
    circumstances,  including  those  identified  above  and   below,   the
    Applicant's immigration and criminal history and  the  relevant  public
    interest,  whilst  I  accept  that  temporary  separation  between  the
    Applicant and C3 will be  harsh  I  do  not  accept  it  surpasses  the
    threshold of being 'unduly harsh'.

76. The Applicant cannot therefore rely on Exception 2  (s.117C(5)  of  the
    2002 Act) to found a conclusion in his favour that his removal for  the
    period of time whilst he pursues an appeal would breach Article 8 ECHR.



77. Finally, I must take into account the relevant  circumstances  weighing
    in the  Applicant's  favour  cumulatively  and  determine  whether  the
    interference with the right to respect  for  private  and  family  life
    guaranteed to the  Applicant  and  his  family  members  that  will  be
    occasioned  by  the  Applicant's  temporary  absence  from  the  United
    Kingdom, is proportionate. I do not repeat all that I have  said  above
    in relation to W and C3, but I have taken it fully into account.

78. Turning to C1 and C2, I have no doubt that it will  be  in  their  best
    interests to remain in the United Kingdom with their mother.  It  will,
    in my conclusion, also be in their best interests for the Applicant  to
    remain here as well, albeit the weight to be attached to  this  feature
    is significantly mitigated by the Respondent's  conclusion  (which  has
    not been the subject of successful challenge) that  their  relationship
    with the Applicant is limited, and that their mother (FP) is  able  and
    willing to provide for all their care and support  needs,  as  she  has
    done thus far.

79. I must also bear in mind, as a discrete matter, that there will not  be
    very significant obstacles to the Applicant  integrating  into  Jamaica
    for the limited period of time he would be required to  live  there  in
    order to pursue an appeal, for the unchallenged reasons  identified  by
    the Respondent in the decision letter.

80. Drawing all of this together, and having taken into account all of  the
    relevant circumstances weighing in the Applicant's favour  cumulatively
    I, nevertheless, conclude that the  public  interest  in  removing  the
    Applicant for the limited period of time necessitated by engagement  in
    the appeal process, is of such weight that the balancing exercise comes
    down in favour  of  the  proportionality  of  his  removal.  I  further
    conclude, if it necessary to do, that  such  removal  would  not  cause
    serious irreversible harm to the Applicant, or indeed  to  any  of  his
    family members.

81. In such circumstances, I find that the Respondent's decision to certify
    the Applicant's claim pursuant to section 94B of the 2002  Act  is  not
    unlawful and this application for judicial review is dismissed.

82. I wish to  conclude  by  emphasising  two  matters.  First,  that  this
    decision is based solely on the evidence that was before the Respondent
    when she made her decision.  It  should  not  be  discounted  that  the
    provision of further evidence in relation to the consequences  (and  in
    particular any long term adverse consequences) for  C3  resulting  from
    the Applicant's removal, even for a limited period,  could  lead  to  a
    different conclusion in relation to the  application  of  section  94B.
    Second, that this decision is concerned only with the lawfulness of the
    Respondent's certification under section 94B. It has no bearing on  the
    merits of the Applicant's substantive human rights claim or as  to  the
    prospects of the Applicant succeeding in any appeal  he  may  bring  in
    that regard. In such an appeal the First-tier  Tribunal  would  not  be
    considering the consequences of the Applicant remaining in Jamaica  for
    only a limited period of time, but for an extended period. In addition,
    the First-tier Tribunal would not be bound to treat  findings  of  fact
    rationally made by the Respondent as the foundation  for  its  decision
    under Article 8, it would be required to determine the relevant factual
    matrix for itself.



                                    ORDER

     1. The application for judicial review is dismissed;

     2. The Applicant shall pay the Respondent's costs, summarily assessed
        in the sum of �5092 - such sum being reasonable and proportionate in
        all the circumstances of the case;

     3. Permission to Appeal is refused, there having been no application
        and, in any event, no error in the Tribunal's judgment or any other
        reason why permission should be granted.
-----------------------
[1] See the unchallenged chronology attached to Detailed Grounds of Defence


