
IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                                                JR/8620/2015

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                                                                  3 May 2016


                                  The QUEEN
                           (ON The application OF)
                                maimuna jawo
                                                                   Applicant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PETER LANE

                        (Hearing date: 1 April 2016)

                               - - - - - - - -

Ms G. Brown, Counsel, instructed by Asylum Aid, appeared on behalf of the
Applicant.

Mr W. Hansen, instructed by the Government Legal Department appeared on
behalf of the Respondent.



                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                                  JUDGMENT
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -


JUDGE PETER LANE: This is an application by Ms Maimuna Jawo for  a  judicial
    review of the respondent's decision on 24 April 2015 to refuse to treat
    her submissions, as referred to in that letter, as a  fresh  asylum  or
    human  rights  claim.   Permission  to  apply   for   judicial   review
    proceedings was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Eshun  on  12  October
    2015.


2. The immigration history of the applicant is essentially as  follows.   On
    16 February 2009, Immigration Judge Holmes (as he then was) allowed the
    applicant's appeal against the refusal of entry clearance to the United
    Kingdom, which she sought in order to attend a family  wedding.   Later
    that year the applicant entered the United Kingdom with  a  visit  visa
    valid until 12 September 2009.  After that date, the applicant remained
    illegally in the United Kingdom.   On  12  January  2012,  she  claimed
    asylum.  On 2 February 2012 she was served with form  IS.151A  and  the
    following day she was detained.  On  7  February  2012  the  respondent
    refused the applicant's  claim  for  asylum.   The  applicant  appealed
    against that decision and on 22 February 2012 her appeal was  dismissed
    by the First-tier  Tribunal,  pursuant  to  the  so-called  Fast  Track
    provisions of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
    2005.


3.   On 27 February 2012 the applicant became appeal rights exhausted.   She
    was released from detention  on  17  July  2012.   Further  submissions
    regarding her claim to international protection were submitted  to  the
    respondent in January 2013.  These were refused by  the  respondent  in
    April 2013.  In March 2014 the applicant made further submissions.   On
    24 April 2015 the respondent refused to treat these further submissions
    as a fresh  claim.   That  decision  is  the  subject  of  the  present
    proceedings.


4.   Paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules provides as follows:-


         "353.    When a human rights or asylum claim has  been  refused  or
                withdrawn or treated as withdrawn under  paragraph  333C  of
                these Rules and any appeal relating  to  that  claim  is  no
                longer pending, the decision maker will consider any further
                submissions and, if rejected, will  then  determine  whether
                they amount to a fresh claim. The submissions will amount to
                a fresh claim if they are significantly different  from  the
                material  that   has   previously   been   considered.   The
                submissions will only  be  significantly  different  if  the
                content:


                (i)    had not already been considered; and


                (ii)    taken  together  with  the   previously   considered
                    material,  created  a  realistic  prospect  of  success,
                    notwithstanding its rejection. This paragraph  does  not
                    apply to claims made overseas."


5.   In WM (DRC) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2006]  EWCA
    Civ 1495, the Court of Appeal held that  the  Secretary  of  State,  in
    effect, was required to demonstrate that  she  had  asked  herself  the
    correct questions, as required by  paragraph  353,  and  that  she  had
    applied anxious scrutiny to the materials before  her.   In  R  (YH)  v
    Secretary of Statea for the Home Department [2010] EWCA  Civ  116,  the
    Court of Appeal  confirmed  that  the  respondent's  conclusion  as  to
    whether the representations amount to a fresh claim can  be  challenged
    only on Wednesbury grounds.


6.   The applicant's claim to be in  need  of  international  protection  is
    based on her assertion that she  would  be  persecuted  by  the  female
    elders of her village in the Gambia because she did not wish to  assume
    the hereditary role (previously carried on by her mother) of being  the
    person responsible for genitally cutting girls in that village.  During
    her time in the United  Kingdom,  the  applicant  had  become  a  vocal
    opponent of FGM, speaking about it at conferences and other meetings.


7.   The Immigration Judge who dismissed the appellant's  asylum  appeal  in
    February 2012 made robust adverse credibility findings.  He noted  that
    the person who was now the applicant's sister-in-law had said she  knew
    the applicant well and that the applicant was employed in a  school  in
    the Gambia as a teacher.  The lady in question described the  applicant
    as married with children and confirmed that she would surely return  at
    the end of her visit.  The judge noted that the sister-in-law  did  not
    appear to be playing any part in  the  subsequent  asylum  claim.   The
    judge was particularly concerned at the fact  that  the  applicant  now
    described herself as not a teacher as such, but as a person who  merely
    helped at the school in a minor capacity.  The applicant asserted  that
    the payslips said to emanate from the school,  provided  in  connection
    with the entry clearance  application,  were  false  "because  she  was
    working only as a volunteer".  The  judge  considered  that  to  be  "a
    disgraceful distortion of the truth".


8.   The judge completely rejected the applicant's claim regarding FGM.   He
    described her chronology of events in the Gambia as  "somewhat  vague",
    noting that although the applicant's mother must have died in 2007, the
    applicant remained in the village until 2009 and that "no pressure  was
    put on her to perform FGM" despite the fact  that  she  had  supposedly
    made it known to the elders  that  she  did  not  intend  to  take  her
    mother's place.  Even if FGM ceremonies in the village took place  only
    every two years, the judge considered that the elders had had at  least
    two years to pressure the applicant; and yet they did not harm  her  at
    all.  Although the applicant said that her teeth had been  knocked  out
    or loosened as a result of being slapped hard on  both  cheeks,  whilst
    present at an FGM procedure, the judge noted that  in  any  event  that
    incident took place whilst the applicant's mother was still alive.  The
    applicant's claim that her children "had been farmed out to people  who
    are not relatives is undermined by her witness who states that they are
    with extended family members".


9.   The judge was also concerned about a letter purportedly written by  the
    elders, dated 24 January 2012, and supposedly faxed to the applicant on
    30 January 2012.  The judge was troubled  that  the  letter  should  be
    written in English to someone who shared the elders'  Fulla  ethnicity.
    Her explanation "that they knew she was in England conflicts  with  her
    reply made in her interview that nobody knew she was in England".   The
    reference in the letter to a ceremony which should have taken place  in
    March 2010 "conflicts with the appellant's claim that the ceremony took
    place every two years.  If her mother died in 2007  the  next  ceremony
    should have taken place in 2009".  The judge took  the  view  that  the
    letter "cannot possibly be genuine.  It has been fabricated to  support
    her claim but instead it undermines it".


10.  The decision letter of 24 April 2015 sets out (bundle, pages 75  -  76)
    a long list of the materials submitted in  connection  with  the  fresh
    claim submissions.  So  far  as  concerns  the  applicant's  sur  place
    activities in the United Kingdom, the respondent did not consider  that
    these showed the applicant to have "a  high  political  profile".   The
    activities were not regarded as such as to bring  her  to  the  adverse
    attention of the authorities.  The respondent noted that, in fact,  the
    claim was that the applicant would be persecuted by the elders  in  her
    village for refusing to carry out "cutting" there.  In this regard, the
    respondent  pointed  to  various  reports,  including  the  U.S.  State
    Department and Sentinel Security country assessments,  which  indicated
    to the respondent that the authorities in the Gambia had the  means  to
    deal with any threat to the applicant from the elders.


11.  The respondent went on to consider the claim  that  the  applicant  had
    spoken about FGM in a short video which may or may not have been  aired
    on CCTV Africa. The respondent considered that if the applicant did not
    wish to return to her village, she could relocate to other areas of the
    Gambia.  The respondent noted the expert report written by  Dr  Kea  of
    the University of Sussex, who believed that the applicant "would be  at
    risk  of  being  actively  tracked  down  by   elders   in   order   to
    encourage/force the client to return to the village to fulfil her  role
    as a cutter".  The respondent  noted  that  this  contrasted  with  the
    finding of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  in  2012.   Furthermore,  the
    respondent did not believe that people in other  areas  of  the  Gambia
    would know about the applicant's claimed background as a trainee cutter
    and that she would not be likely to be open about  this  to  strangers.
    It was not considered that the applicant's profile was high enough that
    the elders of the village would know that she was in the Gambia through
    word of mouth.  Other areas such as  Central  River,  South  and  Lower
    River regions of the Gambia were identified by the respondent as places
    in which the applicant could relocate.


12. The applicant had five children, living in the Gambia, outside the  home
    village.  Although the applicant's ex-husband was said to be trying  to
    marry her daughter to a nephew,  the  respondent  considered  that  the
    applicant had the option to relocate and that any children could easily
    relocate with her.  In this  regard,  the  respondent  noted  that  the
    applicant said that she was concerned about  certain  of  her  children
    being made homeless in the near future; in which case,  the  respondent
    believed that the applicant could return to care for them, without  any
    problems.


13.  So far as concerned alleged problems in understanding  the  interpreter
    in connection with the 2012 asylum claim, the respondent noted that the
    applicant had confirmed that  she  had  no  problems  with  the  asylum
    interview and she also confirmed to the First-tier Judge that she spoke
    English.


14.  Ms Brown, in her detailed and  careful  submissions,  argued  that  the
    respondent had erred in law in relying upon the adverse findings of the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge in 2012.  This  was  particularly  the  case,
    given that the judge made his  decision  pursuant  to  the  Fast  Track
    Rules.  The subsequent set of such Rules,  contained  in  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Rules
    2014, was found to be unlawful in the Detention Action litigation.


15.  I do not consider that the respondent's  decision  can  be  faulted  in
    this regard.  There is nothing in the decision  letter  to  demonstrate
    that the respondent treated the First-tier Tribunal Judge's findings as
    anything other than the starting point for the respondent's  assessment
    of the new submissions and materials.  The 2005 Rules, under which  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge operated, have not been found to be unlawful.
     Furthermore, I am not aware  of  any  pronouncement  from  the  higher
    courts that requires undisturbed judicial decisions, made  under  those
    Rules, to be disregarded, whether in the context of  paragraph  353  or
    otherwise.


16.  In the present case, the respondent had been in the United Kingdom  for
    several years, before making a claim for  asylum,  at  a  time  of  her
    choosing.  Her lawyers did not seek an adjournment of the case, or  its
    removal from the Fast Track.  So far as alleged  language  difficulties
    were concerned, the respondent was, I consider, entitled to  note  that
    no difficulties had been asserted  by  the  applicant  in  speaking  in
    English at her asylum interview or at the appeal hearing.


17.  Accordingly, the First-tier Tribunal Judge's findings  could,  I  find,
    constitute the backdrop or starting point for the respondent's analysis
    of the new submissions made  by  the  applicant.   In  particular,  the
    respondent was entitled to compare what the expert, Dr Kea, had to  say
    about the  applicant's  claim  with  the  findings  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  As Mr  Hansen  points  out,  the  expert's  report  is
    heavily dependent upon the expert's view that certain  claims  made  by
    the  applicant  were  "plausible".   However,  whether   or   not   one
    categorises  the  questions  put  to  the  expert  by  the  applicant's
    solicitors as "leading" in nature, there is little  in  the  report  to
    indicate that the expert appreciated the problems with the  applicant's
    credibility, which the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  found.   As  I  have
    already indicated, those included the applicant's claim (or  admission)
    to  have  used  false  documentation  in  connection  with  a  previous
    immigration application.


18.  I have had regard to what Ms Brown rightly points out is a  problematic
    aspect of the decision letter.  The writer appears to take  issue  with
    the expert report, on the grounds that it contains what is,  in  truth,
    no more than a  standard  paragraph  making  plain  that  the  opinions
    expressed by the expert represent her "true and  complete  professional
    opinion".  Taken on its own, this criticism looks odd; but  read  as  a
    whole the respondent's decision letter plainly was not discounting  the
    expert's views on this basis but, rather, for the reasons I have given.


19.  Both the applicant and her  sister-in-law  have  submitted  statements,
    which attempt to deal with several of the credibility issues that  have
    beset  the  applicant's  claim  for  international   protection.    The
    applicant has not, however, shown that these statements, taken together
    with the other material, render the respondent's decision irrational on
    WM (DRC) terms.  On the contrary, serious problems plainly bedevil  the
    applicant's case;  in  particular,  the  issue  of  letters  supposedly
    written by the village elders.  According to the materials at pages 137
    - 140 of the bundle, the women elders of the village have  now  sent  a
    letter dated 6 May 2012, indirectly  addressed  to  the  applicant,  in
    which they refer to a visit by Marjorie Jawo, following  the  dismissal
    of the applicant's appeal.  This states that the applicant must return


          "to perform our traditional female circumcision of  which  she  is
          the only one unfortunately  conducted.   Our  plans  will  not  be
          change as  what  we  told  you  [sic].   Raining  season  is  fast
          approaching and our traditional practise will  not  be  compromise
          [sic].  She MUST come back and perform this as the only child  who
          was trained in the family.  When  she  return  if  she  refuse  to
          perform the practice we will use force against her to conduct  our
          important traditional (sic) for our children."


20. The letter goes on to say that  the  elders  think  that  the  applicant
    received their earlier letter because her children have  "vacated"  the
    village.  At page 138 there is a letter dated 6 May 2012  from  "Office
    of the Village Alkalo", addressed to the applicant, saying "you will be
    physically assaulted and beaten as punishment dictated by our tradition
    and culture", should she fail to return and carry out FGM.  As  village
    head, the writer says that he would "give my  fullest  support  in  the
    enforcement of the above sanctions".


21.  According to the applicant, despite the length of time  since  she  was
    last in the village, the elders are not making alternative arrangements
    for FGM (bundle page 263).


22.  These letters are, on any view, intensely problematic.   But,  even  if
    they are genuine, they expose a discrete problem with  the  applicant's
    case that the respondent was, I find, amply justified in relying  upon,
    in rejecting the submissions pursuant to paragraph 353.   The  fact  of
    the matter is that (assuming the  letters  are  genuine)  there  is  an
    absence of evidence  to show that the  elders  have  any  intention  of
    seeking out the applicant, in order to harm her, should she relocate to
    some other part of the Gambia.  This problem is underscored by the fact
    that there is no evidence to which  my  attention  has  been  drawn  to
    indicate that the applicant's  children  had  faced  threats  from  the
    elders, once outside the village.


23.  An interesting feature of this case is that, as a result of  her  anti-
    FGM activities in the United Kingdom, the BBC took an interest  in  the
    applicant.  The late Sue Lloyd-Roberts travelled to the Gambia and went
    to the applicant's home village.  According to  the  applicant  (bundle
    page 101) Ms Lloyd-Roberts "spoke to my sister who was  angry  with  me
    for not being a cutter as she wants her own daughter to  be  cut.   She
    thought it would not be safe for me to go  back.   [Sue  Lloyd-Roberts]
    also spoke to the woman who is now caring for my  children  in  another
    village.  It shows that my children cannot safely go back  to  live  in
    [the village] either".


24.  Again, there was no indication that the reach of  the  elders  extended
    as far as the village in which the children were then living, let alone
    to some more distant part of the Gambia.


25.  The Tribunal's country guidance (K  and  others  (FGM)  The  Gambia  CG
    [2013] UKUT 00062 (IAC)), casts doubt on the ability of those  who  are
    at real  risk  of  FGM  to  relocate  elsewhere  in  the  Gambia.   The
    applicant's case is, however, materially different.  She  is  a  mature
    woman who has already undergone FGM.  She comes from  an  ethnic  group
    which, according to the country guidance, contains a significant number
    (indeed, apparently a majority) of  persons  who  do  not  practise  or
    suffer FGM.  Although small in territorial extent,  the  population  of
    the Gambia is around 2,000,000.


26.  Accordingly, I find that the respondent was entitled in  law  to  reach
    the conclusion that the speaking and other activities undertaken by the
    applicant  in  the  United  Kingdom  would  not  preclude  her  ability
    internally to relocate, compatibly with the objectives of  the  Refugee
    Convention.  Although Ms Brown criticised the reference in the decision
    to the applicant not having a "high political profile", the inescapable
    point is that the respondent was entitled  to  conclude  (a)  that  the
    government of the Gambia would  not  be  adversely  interested  in  the
    applicant as a result of her activities; and (b) those activities would
    not have any material bearing on the issue of risk posed by the village
    elders.


27.  In conclusion, I find that the respondent was  entitled  to  refuse  to
    treat the applicant's submissions as a fresh  claim.   The  application
    for judicial review is, accordingly, dismissed.~~~~0~~~~

