
                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                                                JR/8610/2014

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                                                       Heard on: 24 May 2017

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                                  the queen
     (on the application of BF by his litigation friend FRANCESCO JEFF)
                                                                   Applicant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
                               - - - - - - - -

For the Applicant:     Mr C Buttler, Counsel instructed by Scott Moncrieff
                    Solicitors
For the Intervener:    Mr M Chamberlain QC, Equality and Human Rights
                    Commission
For the Respondent:    Mr J Strachan, QC/Ms D Rhee QC instructed by
                    Government Legal Department


           - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                                  JUDGMENT

           - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

JUDGE H H storey:


1.   At the heart of this application for judicial review is a challenge  to
    one specific provision of the respondent's current policy  relating  to
    detention of persons claiming to be a child.  That provision is Chapter
    (sometimes referred to as  "paragraph")  55.9.3.1  of  the  Enforcement
    Instructions and Guidance (EIG) which identifies as one of  four  bases
    or criteria on which the respondent will treat as  an  adult  a  person
    claiming to be a child:


         "C.  Their physical  appearance/demeanour  very  strongly  suggests
             that they are significantly over 18 years of age and no  other
             credible evidence exists to the contrary."

2.   The applicant and Intervener seek a declaration and/or  quashing  order
    in relation to criterion C.

3.   Since Mr  Chamberlain's  grounds  on  behalf  of  the  intervener  were
    primarily aimed at identifying incompatibility of criterion C with  EU,
    ECHR and international human rights law, I shall not always note  where
    he has agreed with wider submissions advanced by Mr Buttler  on  behalf
    of  the  applicant.    I  set  out  a  summary  of  the  parties'  oral
    submissions in an Appendix.

4.   The applicant's case is that criterion C of the respondent's policy  on
    detention   is   unlawful   because   it   is   based    on    physical
    appearance/demeanour which is an inherently unreliable  guide  to  age.
    The policy has been in operation for some  considerable  time  and  has
    undergone some modifications[1], but it is  with  the  current  version
    only that this judicial review is concerned.
5.    The  applicant,  a  national  of  Eritrea,  was  detained  under  this
    criterion of the policy from 11 March to 11 September 2014, when he was
    granted bail by the  First-tier  Tribunal.   He  was  subsequently  re-
    detained from 7 January - 31 March 2015.  His application is brought on
    behalf of BF by his litigation friend, Francesco Jeff  of  the  Refugee
    Council.  It comes before me at this time as a result of a direction by
    the President that it not be listed until the Court  of  Appeal  handed
    down its judgment in Ali, R (on the  application  of)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department & Anor [2017]  EWCA  Civ  138  (hereafter
    "Ali").  This was handed down on 9 March  2017.   In  Ali  the  central
    issue concerned  the  legal  consequences  for  a  claim  for  unlawful
    detention of the amendment made by paragraph 18B of Schedule 2  to  the
    Immigration Act 1971 which prohibits detention of  a  child  beyond  24
    hours in a short-term holding facility.  Inserted  by  the  Immigration
    Act 2014, this paragraph, together with  paragraph  16(2A),  came  into
    force on 28 July 2014.  Paragraph 16(2A) and 18B of Schedule 2  to  the
    Immigration Act 1971 provide:-

         "16(2A)  But the detention of an  unaccompanied  child  under  sub-
                  paragraph (2) is subject to paragraph 18B."


         "18B (1)  Where a person  detained  under  paragraph  16(2)  is  an
                  unaccompanied child, the only place where the child may be
                  detained is a short-term holding facility, except where-


                  (a)  E+W+S+N.I.the child is being transferred to or from a
                      short-term holding facility, or


                  (b)  sub-paragraph (3) of paragraph 18 applies.


             (2)  An unaccompanied child may be  detained  under  paragraph
                  16(2) in a  short-term  holding  facility  for  a  maximum
                  period of 24 hours, and only for so long as the  following
                  two conditions are met.


             (3)  The first condition is that-


                  (a)  directions are in force that require the child to  be
                      removed from the short-term holding  facility  within
                      the relevant 24 hour period, or


                  (b)  a decision on whether or not to  give  directions  is
                      likely to result in such directions.


             (4)  The second condition  is  that  the  immigration  officer
                  under  whose  authority  the  child  is   being   detained
                  reasonably believes that the child will  be  removed  from
                  the short-term holding facility within  the  relevant  24-
                  hour period in accordance with those directions.


             (5)  An unaccompanied child detained under paragraph 16(2) who
                  has been removed from a short-term  holding  facility  and
                  detained elsewhere may be detained again in  a  short-term
                  holding facility but only if, and  for  as  long  as,  the
                  relevant 24-hour period has not ended.


             (6)  An unaccompanied child who has  been  released  following
                  detention under paragraph 16(2) may be detained again in a
                  short-term  holding  facility  in  accordance  with   this
                  paragraph.


             (7)  In this paragraph-
                      'relevant  24-hour  period',  in  relation   to   the
                      detention  of  a  child  in  a   short-term   holding
                      facility, means the period of 24 hours starting  when
                      the child was detained (or, in a case falling  within
                      sub-paragraph (5), first detained)  in  a  short-term
                      holding facility;


                      'short-term holding facility' has the same meaning as
                      in Part 8 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999;


                      'unaccompanied child' means a person-


                      (a)  who is under the age of 18, and


                      (b)  who is not accompanied (whilst in detention)  by
                           his or her parent or another individual  who  has
                           care of him or her."


    Rregarding this amendment the Court of Appeal in Ali [29] held that:


      "...the  plain  language  of  the  amended  provisions   compels   the
         conclusion that where,  in  point  of  fact,  the  detainee  is  an
         (unaccompanied) child then detention beyond what is  sanctioned  in
         paragraph 18B(1) and (2) is unlawful.  It  does  not  suffice  that
         there were reasonable grounds for believing or  suspecting  at  the
         time of detention that the individual was  an  adult"  (per  Davis,
         LJ).

6.   The applicant's challenge is expressed as being to the  policy  because
    he does not dispute that it was applied to him as it  was  intended  to
    apply.  Nevertheless, Mr Buttler seeks  to  rely  on  the  way  it  was
    applied to the applicant as an illustration of  its  inherent  defects.
    In particular, he seeks to rely on the fact that although the applicant
    was found to be an adult in the first  two  local  authority  ('Merton-
    compliant') age assessments (on 6 January 2015 and 24  January  2015  -
    the latter confirmed by way of an addendum report of  12  March  2015),
    the conclusion of a third age assessment carried out in September  2015
    was that he was a child.  Proceedings between the applicant and Newport
    City Council were resolved on 23 September  2015  by  a  consent  order
    concluding that the applicant was a child born  on  15  February  1998.
    Such age assessments are referred to as "Merton-  compliant"  following
    the judgment of Stanley Burnton J in  R(on  the  application  of  B)  v
    Merton London Borough Council [2003] EWHC 1689 (Admin).

7.   It will be apparent from the above that, whilst the applicant has  been
    involved in litigation regarding his age for  some  considerable  time,
    the only application with which I am concerned is  that  lodged  on  20
    June  2014  challenging  his  detention  on  the  ground  that  it  was
    irrational for the respondent's officials  to  have  thought  that  the
    applicant's physical appearance /demeanour very strongly suggested that
    he was  significantly  over  18.   By  way  of  amended  grounds,  this
    challenge now materialises as a challenge to the policy only.

Procedural history

8.   The procedural history of the application is complex.

9.   On 26 June 2014 Supperstone J  dismissed  the  applicant's  application
    for release, concluding that the Immigration  Officer's  assessment  of
    the applicant's physical appearance was not irrational.  On 9 July 2014
    the applicant applied  to  rely  on  amended  grounds  challenging  the
    lawfulness of the respondent's policy.   On  the  same  day  Ouseley  J
    transferred the application to the Upper Tribunal.  On  10  July  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Kopieczek granted a  stay  on  the  applicant's  removal
    pending determination of the judicial review or further  order.   On  6
    August 2014 Upper Tribunal  Judge  Peter  Lane  refused  the  applicant
    permission to apply for judicial review.   Permission  to  appeal  this
    refusal was initially refused on the papers by Fulford LJ on 5 November
    2014, but on 8 May 2015 Janet Smith LJ granted  permission  to  appeal.
    On 11 October 2016 the Court of Appeal held that  the  application  was
    arguable and granted permission to apply for judicial review.  By order
    dated 4 November 2016 the Court of Appeal remitted the  application  to
    the Upper Tribunal. Since transfer to the Upper Tribunal the  case  has
    been subject to considerable case  management  designed  to  ready  the
    parties to address all pertinent issues.

The applicant

10.  The background to the applicant's challenge is as follows.   He  claims
    to have entered the UK on 11 March 2014 concealed  in  the  back  of  a
    lorry.  On the same day he presented himself  to  police  at  Tunbridge
    Wells Police Station explaining that he had come  to  the  UK  to  seek
    asylum.  He gave his date  of  birth  as  15  February  1998.   He  was
    arrested  as  an  illegal  entrant.   On  the  same  day  an  Assistant
    Immigration Officer (AIO) conducted an initial interview,  and  carried
    out an age assessment on the strength of which he considered  that  the
    applicant was significantly older than  he  claimed.   The  applicant's
    case was referred to a Chief Immigration Officer (CIO) who, having also
    "age-assessed" him, took the  same  view.   The  CIO's  assessment  was
    recorded as follows:

     "I have age assessed this subject as over 18, his  physical  appearance
         is that of an adult in his mid twenties, with receding hairline and
         well defined jawline, Adam[s] apple etc.  His physique also appears
         to be well developed.  I am satisfied that he is not 16 years old".



    The applicant was then informed of this decision.  In Form BP7 the  two
    officers concerned recorded his response as being "I cannot argue  with
    you".  The officers then amended the applicant's date of  birth  to  15
    February 1996 so as to reflect their decision that he was to be treated
    as an adult.  He was then fingerprinted and his identity was checked.


11.  Results indicated that he had been apprehended  in  Italy  on  17  June
    2013 (in Lampedusa) and 21 June (Cagliari)  and  that  he  had  claimed
    asylum  in  that  country.   The  next  day  (12  March  2014)  he  was
    interviewed and detained at Dover Immigration Removal  Centre.   During
    that interview he gave his date of birth as 15 February 1996, confirmed
    he had been fingerprinted twice in Italy and had claimed asylum  there,
    and said he had no documentary evidence relevant to his  claim,  family
    life or other circumstances.

12.  The  respondent  then  made  a  'take  back'  request  to  the  Italian
    authorities under Article 18(1)(b) of the Dublin III  Regulation.   The
    Italian authorities accepted this  request  on  17  April  2014,  their
    records stating the applicant's date of birth as 15 February 1988.   In
    response to a subsequent inquiry,  the  Italian  authorities  confirmed
    that this date  of  birth  was  based  on  the  applicant's  own  self-
    declaration.  On 3 April 2016 the respondent certified the  applicant's
    claim for asylum on third country grounds; removal directions were  set
    for 6 May 2014; and his  detention  was  maintained.  The  periods  the
    applicant was in detention between 11 March 2014 to 11  September  2014
    and 7 January 2015 to 31 March  2015,  amount  in  total  to  nearly  9
    months.

13.  Following the third age assessment (which unlike the  first  two  found
    him to be a child) and the consent order  of  23  September  2015,  the
    third country certificate was withdrawn on 16 May 2016. Since May  2016
    the respondent's records and the ARC  (Application  Registration  Card)
    issued by the respondent have recorded the applicant's date of birth as
    15 February 1998.

The grounds

14.  In the course  of  the  present  proceedings  the  parties  have  filed
    several skeleton arguments. In the latest one  the  applicant  contends
    that criterion C is unlawful on three grounds. First, it is said that a
    policy which by its nature permits the detention of individuals who are
    children is, in light of the statutory provisions on  child  detention,
    unlawful:  "Given  that  some  children  do   'very   strongly   appear
    significantly over 18', this criterion will necessarily lead  to  child
    detention. It will permit the detention of a child like  the  applicant
    and the large number of other cases identified by the  Refugee  Council
    (and indeed in the respondent's own evidence)". Second it is said  that
    illegality is inherent in the system operated by the respondent because
    the physical appearance/demeanour criterion  is  inherently  unreliable
    and will inevitably lead to child detention in breach of  the  statute.
    Third it is submitted that no rational policy-maker could maintain  the
    physical appearance/demeanour criterion as a means of securing the  end
    of child detention.

My assessment

15.  As advanced by the applicant  the  aforementioned  grounds  traverse  a
    number of discrete issues, some pertaining to each of them. In  keeping
    with the method employed by the parties in their submissions,  I  shall
    give my assessment by reference to the various issues they have raised.



16.  As the parties acknowledged, it is for the courts (and Upper  Tribunal)
    to determine the meaning of a policy: see R  (Raissi)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home  Department  [2008]  QB  836  paragraphs  123-4  per
    Hooper, LJ.

17.  The respondent has urged  that  I  attach  significant  weight  to  the
    observations on Chapter 55.9.3.1 of the EIGs made by  Lord  Toulson  in
    R(AA(Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2013]
    UKSC 49 [2013] 1 WLR 2224 (hereafter  "AA(Afghanistan")  in  particular
    the passage at [48] where, having set out the policy, he  describes  it
    as "detailed and useful" and its reasoning as "persuasive". However, as
    Mr Strachan conceded, these observations were  obiter.  Whilst  clearly
    conveying that this policy was viewed positively, they do not assist as
    to the meaning  of  the  policy  nor  was  the  Court  considering  any
    arguments directed at its public law efficacy. This case would  not  be
    before me if it had.

18.  A challenge to policy can only succeed if a high threshold  requirement
    is met - see R (Detention Action) v First-tier Tribunal Judge [2015]  1
    WLR at [27]; R(Tabbakh) v Staffordshire Probation Trust (QBD) [2014]  1
    WLR at [52].

19.  I am not persuaded that the challenge brought by  the  applicant  meets
    the necessary threshold.

Criterion C

20.  First of all, the specific provision under challenge - criterion  C  of
    Chapter 55.9.3.1 of the EIG - cannot be  reduced  to  a  mere  test  of
    physical appearance based on visual observation. From its  wording,  it
    is clear that this criterion is based on physical  appearance/demeanour
    coupled with the absence of any other credible evidence  ("...  and  no
    other credible evidence exists to the contrary"). It is unfortunate  in
    my view that a number witness statements and other  materials  produced
    on behalf of the applicant treat this criterion simply as  a  "physical
    appearance" criterion.

21.  The terms of criterion C also clearly demarcate it from a  binary  test
    based on whether or not an applicant falls above or below  the  age  of
    18.   It  is   only   to   be   applied   to   those   whose   physical
    appearance/demeanour "very strongly suggests" they are  "significantly"
    over 18.  Such phraseology affords a considerable margin of error to an
    applicant, one relating to the strength of the evidence, the  other  to
    the age threshold itself.

22.  Another pertinent feature is that, even leaving aside the "...no  other
    credible evidence" limb,  the  test  is  not  purely  one  of  physical
    appearance.  It  also  requires  the  case  owner  to  have  regard  to
    demeanour.  It is helpful in this regard  to  note  the  definition  of
    demeanour offered by Lord Bingham in his book The Business  of  Judging
    O.U.P., 2000 at p. 8:

      "the  sum  of  a  witness's  conduct,  manner,  behaviour,   delivery,
         inflexion ... [in short] anything which characterises his  mode  of
         giving evidence but does not appear in  a  transcript  of  what  he
         actually said".

23.  This broadly drawn definition, albeit formulated in the context  of  an
    oral hearing, helps make  clear  that  demeanour  extends  beyond  mere
    observation of an applicant's physique and encompasses body language, a
    person's manner of  speaking  and  would  include  auditory  responses.
    Hence, even in terms  of  this  component,  the  test  is  inaccurately
    described (as  it  was  in  some  of  the  submissions)  as  a  "visual
    assessment" test.

Chapter 55.9.3.1

24.  Second, criterion C cannot be considered in  isolation.  The  paragraph
    in which criterion C is set out is headed 'Individuals claiming  to  be
    under 18" and it states:

         "...

         The Home Office  will  [not]  accept  an  individual  as  under  18
         (including those who have previously  presented  themselves  as  an
         adult) unless one or more of the following categories apply (please
         note this does not apply to individuals previously sentenced by the
         criminal courts as an adult):

         A.   There is credible and clear documentary evidence that they are
             18 or over.

         B.   A Merton compliant age assessment  by  a  local  authority  is
             available stating that they are 18 years of age or over.

         C.   Their physical appearance / demeanour very  strongly  suggests
             that they are significantly over 18  year[s]  of  age  and  no
             other credible evidence exists to the contrary.

         D.   The individual:

                . Prior to detention, gave a date of birth that  would  make
                  them an adult and/or stated they were an adult; and

                . Only claimed to be a child after a decision had been taken
                  on their asylum claim; and

                . Only claimed to be a child after they had  been  detained;
                  and

                . Has not provided credible and clear  documentary  evidence
                  proving their claimed age; and

                . Does not have a Merton compliant  age  assessment  stating
                  they are a child; and

                . Does not have an  unchallenged  court  finding  indicating
                  that they are a child; and

                . Physical appearance /  demeanour  very  strongly  suggests
                  that they are 18 years of age or over.

         (all seven criteria within category D must apply).

         If an individual claim to be a child in detention the  decision  on
         whether to maintain detention or release should be made as promptly
         as possible."

25.  Three particular features of Chapter 55.9.3.1 stand out.  One  is  that
    from its second paragraph (the first in the above quote)  it  is  clear
    that the policy operates a presumption in  favour  of  a  finding  that
    applicants will be treated as a child and so not subject to detention -
    it is based on a presumption that an individual is  under  18  and  one
    that is only to be displaced in four specified circumstances.

26.  Another marked feature -  one  I  have  already  noted  -  is  that  so
    formulated the policy is not based on a simple  child/adult  dichotomy.
    The four-fold criteria are not concerned with those whose claims to  be
    children are merely doubted: the latter are treated separately as 'age-
    disputed' cases who "should be afforded the benefit of  the  doubt  and
    treated as children ... until  a  careful  assessment  of  ...  age  is
    completed". Put another way, the  four-fold  criteria  are  exclusively
    concerned with "non-borderline" cases.

27.  A third feature, although not one stated in the above passage, is  that
    the policy is plainly intended to operate in the context of a screening
    interview or examination one of  whose  purposes  is  to  undertake  an
    initial age-assessment. The test set out in criterion  C,  of  physical
    appearance/demeanour together with "...no other credible evidence",  is
    clearly understood not  to  be  the  same  thing  as  a  full  (Merton-
    compliant) age assessment.  Indeed, the references in criteria B and  D
    of 55.9.3.1 make clear that if there is an available  Merton  compliant
    age assessment, criterion C is inapplicable.

Interrelated policy (Assessing Age Asylum Instruction)

28.  Further, it is apparent that this guidance document  must  be  read  in
    conjunction with another, the Assessing  Age  Asylum  Instruction.  The
    opening paragraph of Chapter 55.9.3.1 states:

         "The guidance in this section must be read in conjunction with  the
         Assessing Age Asylum Instruction (even in non-asylum  cases).   You
         may also find it useful to consult Detention Services Order 14/2012
         on managing age dispute cases in the detention estate."

29.  Paragraph 2 of the Assessing Age Asylum Instruction emphasises that:

         "[A]ll available  sources  of  relevant  information  and  evidence
         should be considered  since  no  single  assessment  technique,  or
         combination of techniques is likely to  determine  the  applicant's
         age with precision".

30.  Under 2.1. "Initial age assessment", having stated that criterion C  is
    to be applied where there is little  or  no  evidence  to  support  the
    applicant's claimed age, this Instruction proceeds to identify a number
    of safeguards which are to inform criterion  C's  application.   It  is
    stated that "[c]areful consideration must be given to assessing whether
    an applicant falls into this category as they would be considered under
    adult processes and could be liable for detention".  At 2.2.1. this  is
    described as an "in-built safeguard"  to  ensure  compliance  with  the
    Section 55 duty [Section 55 of the Border Citizenship  and  Immigration
    Act 2009].  This Instruction then sets out the requirement of a 'second
    pair of eyes':

         "Before a decision is taken to assess an applicant as significantly
         over 18, the assessing officer's countersigning officer (who is  at
         least a Chief Immigration Officer  (CIO)/Higher  Executive  Officer
         (HEO)) must be consulted as a 'second pair  of  eyes'.   They  must
         make their own assessment of the applicant's age."

31.  This Instruction also sets out a further requirement of notice:

     "If the countersigning officer also agrees to assess the  applicant  as
         significantly over 18, the applicant should be informed that  their
         claimed age is not accepted and that their  asylum  claim  will  be
         processed under adult procedures".

32.  There is also an obligation of ongoing review: it  is  said  that  case
    owners "must review decisions to treat applicants as  adults,  if  they
    receive relevant new evidence".

33.  These interrelated Instructions underline the fact that criterion C  is
    not intended to be applied  in  a  free-standing  manner,  but  in  the
    context of an initial examination which seeks to establish all relevant
    evidence available as regards an applicant's age.  In making a decision
    under the policy the officials concerned  also  have  to  adhere  to  a
    number of safeguards.

Physical appearance: an inherently flawed criterion?

34.  Even if it is right that criterion C  cannot  be  reduced  to  physical
    appearance/demeanour and has to be considered in  the  context  of  the
    respondent's detention policy/ices as a whole, it is still necessary to
    assess whether criterion C's  physical  appearance/demeanour  component
    constitutes an inherently flawed component that has no place in such  a
    detention policy.  Buttressed by criticisms levelled at  the  criterion
    by a number of reputable bodies, including the Children's Commissioner,
    Mr Buttler describes it as "inherently subjective and impressionistic";
    Mr Chamberlain says it is  "arbitrary".  Both  argue  that  the  higher
    courts have impugned it.

35.  Mr Buttler and Mr Chamberlain are entirely right to highlight  that  on
    several occasions the higher courts, echoing wider learning, have found
    physical appearance to be  an  unreliable  criterion  for  a  full  age
    assessment.  However, there are at least two important caveats to that.
    First, even in the context of a full (Merton compliant) assessment they
    have never said that physical appearance is  an  irrelevant  criterion.
    Their dicta have been  confined  to  its  application  to  'borderline'
    cases: see e.g. Stanley Burnton J in Merton at [36].

36.  The second caveat is that the higher courts have  never  said  that  it
    must always be wrong to rely solely on physical  appearance.   Thus  in
    R(B) v London Borough of Merton [2003] EWHC 1689 (Admin) it  was  noted
    at [38] that "In an obvious case, the appearance of the applicant alone
    will require him to be accepted as a child; or, conversely, justify his
    being determined to be an adult, in the absence of compelling  evidence
    to the contrary"; and at [50] that: "[c]ases will vary  from  those  in
    which the answer is obvious to those in which it is far from being  so,
    and the level of inquiry unnecessary  in  one  type  of  case  will  be
    necessary in another." These observations articulate well the fact that
    physical appearance/demeanour is used as  a  component  when  assessing
    persons claiming to be children whether they are thought to  be  adults
    or children. It is because physical appearance is regarded as having  a
    valid role in the latter cases, that it is  considered  unnecessary  to
    subject such children to specific age assessment procedures  which  are
    potentially intrusive of their right to respect for private life.

37.  Indeed, the fact that reliance on the criterion of physical  appearance
    will not always be unlawful was conceded by  both  Mr  Buttler  and  Mr
    Chamberlain during the hearing.  Both accepted that in "obvious" cases,
    e.g. someone over 40 claiming  s/he  was  a  minor,  the  criterion  of
    physical appearance would suffice to determine he was  not.   Moreover,
    in an early skeleton argument dated 27 February 2015  Mr  Buttler  said
    that if the policy had stated (as  it  apparently  did  in  an  earlier
    incarnation) that it  applied  to  persons  over  30,  his  rationality
    challenge could not prosper[2].

    Reliance on a criterion of physical appearance is also to be  found  in
    other parts of the respondent's policy on  detention.  That  of  course
    does not serve  as  a  reason  in  itself  for  considering  it  has  a
    legitimate role. Silber J's admonition in The Queen (on the application
    of Medical Justice)  [2010]  EWHC  1925  (Admin)  (that  "there  is  no
    presumption that if a claimant  does  not  dispute  that  a  particular
    previous policy or that other parts of a particular  policy  are  valid
    but only challenges the exceptions to that policy, the claimant thereby
    accepts that the unchallenged parts are valid") resonates  here.   And,
    of course, as Mr Buttler highlighted, it remains possible  a  challenge
    could be brought against these other parts. Nonetheless, the fact  that
    they have been in operation for  some  time,  without  apparent  demur,
    might be thought to indicate that criteria of this kind have a role  in
    limited contexts. Chapter 55B, Adults at risk in immigration detention,
    Version v2.0, 6 December 2016, concerns assessment  of  whether,  if  a
    person is being considered for immigration detention, he or she  is  an
    'adult at risk' under the terms of this policy. It is  stated  that  in
    cases in which an undocumented individual claims to be aged 70 or over,
    but in which there is no documentary confirmation, the processs  to  be
    followed should be:

         "Age

         For the purposes of this policy  an  individual  aged  70  or  over
         should be (regardless of  any  other  considerations)  regarded  as
         being at risk and the fact of their age alone,  will  automatically
         be regarded as amounting  to,  at  least,  level  2  evidence  (see
         evidence levels[3]).  In the cases of documented individuals, their
         age will be apparent from the documentation.  When  the  individual
         is undocumented, however, and there is  no  definitive  information
         available that indicates their age, a judgement may need to be made
         on the basis of a visual assessment.


         In cases in which an undocumented individual claims to be  aged  70
         or over, but in which there is  no  documentary  confirmation,  the
         following process should be followed:

         .    the decision maker (or an  officer  acting  on  their  behalf)
             should carry out a visual assessment of the individual
         .    on the basis of this visual assessment, if the  individual  is
             clearly, or is in all  probability,  aged  70  or  over,  they
             should be treated accordingly for the purposes of this policy
         .    if there is doubt about whether the individual is in fact aged
             70 or over:
             ?    all existing documentation should  be  double-checked  to
                  ensure that there is no information  which  indicates  the
                  individual's age
              ?   the individual should be  asked  whether  they  have  any
                  additional information
             ?    the decision maker should reach a view on whether or  not
                  the individual is 70 or over
             ?    if the view is taken that the individual is likely to  be
                  under 70, and that the individual is to  be  detained  (or
                  their detention continued), this assessment of age must be
                  corroborated by the decision  maker's  line  manager,  who
                  should be of at least the grade of HEO."


38.  It is also pertinent that the guidance applied by  social  workers  for
    the purposes of age  assessment,  the  ADCS  Age  Assessment  Guidance,
    October 2015, does not regard Merton compliant age  assessment  as  the
    criterion that must be used in all cases. In Chapter 1, "Do you need to
    undertake this age assessment?" the question is  posed  whether  it  is
    "'absolutely necessary" to undertake an age assessment and it  is  then
    stated:

         "Statutory  guidance  [Department  of  Education  (2014)  Care   of
         Unaccompanied and Trafficked Children) on the care of unaccompanied
         children states that:

             'Age assessment should only be carried out whether there is  a
             significant reason to doubt that the claimant is a child.  Age
             assessment should not be a routine part of a local authority's
             assessment of unaccompanied or trafficked children.'"

39.  The ADCS guidance notes further on in this chapter that:

         "The authors acknowledge and accept that some adults do claim to be
         children, In some rare circumstances, it will be  very  clear  that
         the individual is an adult well over the age of  18,  so  prolonged
         inquiry may not be required,  as  stated  in  the  Merton  judgment
         [citing para 45]. Even in these rare  circumstances  when  you  are
         making a relatively quick decision, you are  still  undertaking  an
         assessment, albeit a brief one, and you must record  the  rationale
         for  your  decision  as  well  as  share  your  decision  with  the
         individual being assessed. ..."

40.  In Chapter 5 ("Making the decision") this guidance notes that:

         "Physical appearance and demeanour should not be the sole basis  on
         which age is assessed. However, there may be rare  occasions  where
         the individual does not provide any  substantial  information  that
         can assist you. If your  assessment  is  based  on  appearance  and
         demeanour, and you are not accepting their claim  to  be  a  child,
         then you must have no doubt that they are an adult and you must  be
         prepared to state this in court if necessary."

    The above formulation of the physical appearance test is not in exactly
    the same  terms  as  contained  in  criterion  C,  but  it  is  broadly
    comparable.

Guidance to immigration officers

  41.    One of the points marshalled by Mr Buttler was that despite  making
    physical appearance a central criterion in claims to be minors made  by
    persons appearing to be adults, the  case  owners  and  other  officers
    whose job it is to apply this policy receive no training or instruction
    in how to apply it. The importance of assessment being carried  out  by
    staff who  are  properly  trained  is  that  application  of  detention
    policies go hand in hand with assessment of  claims  for  international
    protection and the Asylum Procedures Directive (2005/85/EC)  stipulates
    at Article 13(3)(a) that Member States shall "ensure  that  the  person
    who conducts the [personal interview] is sufficiently competent to take
    account of  the  general  circumstances  surrounding  the  application,
    including the applicant's cultural origin or vulnerability  insofar  as
    it is possible to do so." (This guarantee has  been  fortified  by  the
    Asylum Procedures Directive (recast) which  requires  those  conducting
    the interview  are  not  only  competent  but  are  "properly  trained"
    (Article 3(3)). As the  UK  has  not  opted  in  to  this  recast,  its
    provisions only afford guidance on best practice).

42.  On this point the evidence is somewhat  mixed.  On  the  one  hand,  Mr
    Buttler  is  right  in  pointing  out  that  nothing  in   the   policy
    instructions  advises  case  owners  about  what  aspects  of  physical
    appearance and demeanour might  be  salient  (how  to  assess  physical
    appearance/demeanour). The AIO who interviewed  the  applicant  clearly
    thought it relevant to  highlight  development  of  his  Adam's  apple,
    jawline and his physique, but  no  published  Instructions  cover  this
    level of detail. On the other hand, it would be quite wrong to  portray
    the case owners as having no instructions  about  age  assessment.  The
    interrelated policy document already  referred  to,  on  Assessing  Age
    Asylum Instruction, is replete with advice on the  state  of  knowledge
    about age assessments. I have already quoted  from  paragraph  2  which
    states that "...no  single  assessment  technique,  or  combination  of
    techniques is likely to determine the applicant's age with  precision".
    Chapter 5 ("Local authority age  assessments")  summarises  the  Merton
    judgment noting that "[t]here is  no  prescribed  way  in  which  local
    authorities are obliged to carry out age assessments; the courts  have,
    however, provided some general guide to local authorities in cases such
    as  [Merton]...".  And  at  5.2.  that  "[c]ase  owners   should   give
    considerable weight to the findings of age made by  local  authorities,
    recognising the particular expertise they  have  through  working  with
    children. In cases where the local authority's assessment is  the  only
    source of information about the applicant's age - their assessment will
    normally be accepted as  decisive  evidence".   Chapter  6  deals  with
    "Other  evidence  of  age".  Chapter  8  is  devoted  to  "Weighing  up
    conflicting evidence of age". Michael Gallagher of  Asylum  and  Family
    Policy, Immigration and  Border  Policy  Directorate,  in  his  witness
    statement of 23 January 2017 avers  that  "Home  Office  staff  receive
    training in dealing with children, and on the processes to be  followed
    when assessing age". In her fourth  witness  statement,  Helen  Johnson
    Operations Manager for the Children's Section of the  Refugee  Council,
    avows that to the best of her knowledge such training does not  include
    any treatment on how to assess whether a person "very strongly  appears
    significantly over 18".

43.  Considering the evidence in the round, I  conclude  that  it  would  be
    wrong to suggest that case owners lack instructions on the  subject  of
    age assessment, but Mr Buttler is right they lack instructions  on  how
    to analyse the physical  appearance  and  demeanour  criterion  in  any
    detail. That is a failure but I do not consider it is one that  renders
    the policy unlawful and the challenge before  me  is  confined  to  the
    policy rather than its application.

44.  One other aspect to Mr Buttler's submission as regards instruction,  is
    that the policy does not spell out what meaning is to be given  to  the
    terms "very strongly suggests" and "significantly over 18". That  again
    is true but I do not think this feature undermines it, since such terms
    are ones that the higher courts have said many times  over  in  a  wide
    range of contexts are to be given their natural and  ordinary  meaning.
    It might be argued that  the  policy  could  have  made  mention  of  a
    specific age, e.g. 23 or 25 (to reflect the 5 to 7-year margin of error
    identified by medical bodies). As already noted, Mr Buttler in an early
    skeleton argument suggested the policy would not be  irrational  if  it
    referred (as it had in a previous  version,  according  to  MacDonald's
    Immigration Law and Practice) to applicants who look over 30.  However,
    since the objective of the policy is to identify by way of  an  initial
    "'screening"  assessment  cases  that  are  outside  the  category   of
    "borderline cases" it is not apparent that there would be any value  in
    greater precision than such an assessment can deliver.

Paragraph 18B of Schedule 2

45.  I turn next to consider the contention in the applicant's grounds  that
    the policy has been rendered unlawful as a result of the amendment made
    to the law by the inserting of a new paragraph 18B of Schedule 2 to the
    Immigration Act 1971 in force from 28 July 2014.

46.  It is true that this provision prohibits detention  of  children  under
    18 except for a period of 24 hours in  a  short-term  holding  facility
    subject to certain conditions.  Paragraph 18B qualifies  the  statutory
    power to detain set out in paragraph 16(2).  Paragraph 18B provides:

         "18B (1) Where a  person  detained  under  paragraph  16(2)  is  an
                  unaccompanied child, the only place where the child may be
                  detained is a short-term holding facility, except where -

                  (a)  the child is being transferred to or  from  a  short-
                      term holding facility, or

                  (b)  sub-paragraph (3) of paragraph 18 applies.

              (2) An unaccompanied child may  be  detained  under  paragraph
                  16(2) in a  short-term  holding  facility  for  a  maximum
                  period of 24 hours, and only for so long as the  following
                  two conditions are met.

              (3) The first condition is that -

                  (a)  directions are in force that require the child to  be
                      removed from the short-term holding  facility  within
                      the relevant 24-hour period, or

                  (b)  a decision on whether or not to  give  directions  is
                      likely to result in such directions.

              (4) The second condition is that the immigration officer under
                  whose authority the child  is  being  detained  reasonably
                  believes that the child will be removed  from  the  short-
                  term holding facility within the relevant 24  hour  period
                  in accordance with those directions.

              (5) An unaccompanied child detained under paragraph 16(2)  who
                  has been removed from a short-term  holding  facility  and
                  detained elsewhere may be detained again in  a  short-term
                  holding facility but only if, and  for  as  long  as,  the
                  relevant 24 hour period has not ended.

              (6) An unaccompanied child who  has  been  released  following
                  detention under paragraph 16(2) may be detained again in a
                  short-term  holding  facility  in  accordance  with   this
                  paragraph.

              (7) In this paragraph -

              'relevant 24 hour period', in relation to the detention  of  a
             child in a short-term holding facility, means the period of 24
             hours starting when the child was  detained  (or,  in  a  case
             falling within sub-paragraph (5), first detained) in a  short-
             term holding facility;

              'short-term holding facility' has the same meaning as in  Part
             8 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999;

              'unaccompanied child' means a person -

             (a)  who is under the age of 18, and

             (b)  who is not accompanied (whilst in detention)  by  his  or
                  her parent or another individual who has care  of  him  or
                  her."

47.  It is also true that in Ali the Court of Appeal  expressly  rejected  a
    submission made by the Secretary  of  State  seeking  to  rely  on  the
    decision  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  AA  (Afghanistan)   (which   had
    disapproved the  proposition  that  detention  under  paragraph  16  of
    Schedule 2 made in the reasonable but mistaken belief that the detainee
    was an adult would of itself involve a breach of Section 55 of the 2009
    Act).  In Ali Davis LJ considered  that  the  outcome  reached  by  the
    Supreme Court in AA (Afghanistan) had been superseded  by  the  amended
    legislation.  However, the latter decision was concerned  with  whether
    there was strict liability for the detention of persons later found  to
    be children and the concrete effect of the Ali decision was to  confirm
    that Parliament has now amended the relevant law so as to ensure strict
    liability.  The challenge in Ali  related  to  the  decision  that  his
    period of detention in February 2015 was unlawful.

48.  Further, the Ali decision does not  address  the  issue  of  whether  a
    policy based in part on a  criterion  of  physical  appearance  can  or
    cannot lawfully be applied in the context of an initial age assessment.
     Mr Buttler submits  that  the  logic  of  the  Ali  decision  is  that
    detention of adults claiming to be minors can only lawfully take  place
    if it has already been established as  an  "objective  fact"  that  the
    applicant is a child.  He and  Mr  Chamberlain  highlighted  that  this
    approach was  also  consonant  with  Strasbourg  jurisprudence  on  age
    assessment which also requires that such assessment be "objective".

49.  The need for an objective assessment of age is a  well-settled  matter.
    However, establishment of age as  an  objective  fact  must  surely  be
    dependent on context.  In the context of a full age assessment,  it  is
    well-established that assessment of age as an "objective fact" is to be
    made by social workers conducting  a  Merton-compliant  age  assessment
    and, in the event of a  legal  challenge,  by  judges  considering  the
    evidence (I gloss over  here  the  apparent  paradox  that  a  form  of
    assessment  widely  accepted  as  an  "inexact  science"  is  currently
    regarded as determining an objective or scientific fact).  But that  is
    not the context  here.   Here  the  context  concerns  an  initial  age
    assessment, typically made on the same day as an applicant applies  for
    or expresses an intention to apply for asylum.  Objective assessment in
    that context has practical limits.  It is accepted on  all  sides  that
    such assessment cannot be made  in  light  of  a  Merton-compliant  age
    assessment unless (by happenstance) one is already  available.  As  was
    noted by Lord Toulson  in  AA(Afghanistan)  at  [34]  -  a  proposition
    unaffected in my judgement by the  amendments  to  Schedule  2  of  the
    Immigration  Act  1971  -one  cannot  "make  a  Merton  compliant   age
    assessment a precondition of a valid decision under para 55.9.3.1..."

50.  Likewise, if paragraph 18B of Schedule 2  was  considered  to  bear  on
    initial age assessment it would mean that there could be  no  detention
    of anyone claiming to be a minor no  matter  how  preposterous  such  a
    claim might be unless  and  until  there  was  a  Merton-compliant  age
    assessment (or if legally challenged, a finding of fact made  in  light
    of it by a court or Tribunal).  In effect applicants of any  age  would
    be able to avoid detention simply by pointing out that  there  was  not
    yet a full age assessment available.  Typically, that would  mean  that
    all persons who claimed to be minors would  be  immune  from  detention
    until such time as a full age assessment was made.  Such an  assessment
    takes time - inevitably. It  is  stated  in  the  ADCS  Age  Assessment
    Guidance, October 2015 that "[m]ost age assessments should be completed
    within 28 days..." (p .21). It is also said that it is  important  that
    the age assessment is not rushed (p. 10) and that it should take  place
    in a location or venue conducive to helping the child or  young  person
    feel safe, comfortable and able to participate to  the  best  of  their
    ability in their  interview(s)  and  that  facilities  such  as  police
    stations  would  not  be  considered  appropriate  for  conducting  age
    assessments (p.15).

51.  If paragraph 18B was considered to  bear  on  initial  age  assessment,
    prohibition of detention would have to apply even for  "obvious"  cases
    involving adults who are obviously adults.  A 30+ year old could  avoid
    possible  detention  by  simply  claiming  he  or  she  was  under  18.
    Applicants of all ages could insist on a full age assessment as a  pre-
    requisite for any decision to detain them as adults.  Such a rule would
    not simply be impracticable or absurd.  It would defy common sense.

52.  On Mr Buttler's argument the reasoning I adopt here is contrary to  the
    strong rejection by Davis LJ in Ali of what he  termed  at  [45]  "[i]n
    terrorem arguments". However,  in  Ali  the  explicit  wording  of  the
    relevant provisions  of  Schedule  2  to  the  1971  Act  was  properly
    considered to have a direct bearing on the claim in hand, which was  an
    application for a declaration that past detention was unlawful pursuant
    to these provisions. In that context, the start point is that there  is
    a clear contradiction between an established objective fact (based on a
    Merton-compliant aged assessment) and a detention. In the context of an
    initial age assessment, either the position is that there cannot as yet
    be any established objective fact or there is but it  is  one  that  is
    confined to its context - an 'initial' not a 'full' age assessment.

53.  I would reiterate that my conclusion on this issue  does  not  seek  to
    construe paragraph 18B differently from the way it has been interpreted
    by the Court of Appeal  in  Ali.   Rather  it  is  to  deny  that  this
    provision has application to the context  of  initial  age  assessments
    made by  immigration  officials.   Paragraph  18B  most  certainly  has
    application when it comes to remedies for  detention  of  an  applicant
    later established to be a minor by a full age assessment.  That is  the
    ratio of Ali. If there are passages in Ali which appear to go wider,  I
    cannot see that they bite on initial age assessment in the  context  of
    Chapter 55.

Policy rationale

54.   Another  important  strand  of  Mr  Buttler's  submissions  was   that
    criterion C lacked a legitimate policy rationale. In  this  regard,  he
    highlighted that there were strong considerations  of  policy  pointing
    against detention and against detention of persons who could be minors.
    Reference was made to the fact that criterion C has been criticised  by
    a number of reputable bodies including the Children's Commissioner (who
    has described visual assessment of age as "unsafe and unhelpful"),  the
    Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health  Practitioners  (RCPCHP),
    the Migrant Children's Project, the Coram Children's Legal Centre  (see
    e.g. its 2013 report, Happy Birthday? Disputing the age of children  in
    the immigration system), the Refugee Council and the Refugee Children's
    Consortium. In its Intercollegiate Briefing Paper, the RCPCHP  observes
    that: "[a]lmost all detained children suffer injury to their mental and
    physical health as a result of their  detention,  sometimes  seriously.
    Many children experience the actual process of being detained as a  new
    traumatising experience."

55.  Mr Strachan's counter-submissions highlighted the fact that a  workable
    detention policy was an essential part of the government's  immigration
    policy and served the public interest in effective immigration control.
     Adults who are liable to removal from the UK should  not  be  able  to
    obtain  release  from  detention  and  therefore  frustrate  legitimate
    immigration  control  by  simply  asserting  that  they  are  a  child.
    Referring individuals that are clearly adults to local authorities  was
    very likely to stretch their already limited resources.  He  said  that
    there was a significant problem of fraudulent claims which burdened the
    system. He also pointed to the significant  adverse  consequences  that
    could flow from the failure to detain persons thought to be adults  but
    claiming to be minors: in the respondent's skeleton  arguments  it  was
    asserted that "[t]he consequences of giving  too  much  leeway  are  as
    serious as giving too little: the consequences would be that  an  adult
    would  be  placed  in  local  authority  accommodation,  possibly  with
    vulnerable children, posing a risk to them,  and  taking  up  resources
    which local  authorities  could  otherwise  devote  to  those  who  are
    genuinely children". By choosing to treat even age-disputed  applicants
    as children the policy embodied a protective function.

56.  In response to these submissions Mr Buttler pointed  out  that  whether
    persons who are actually adults are  mistakenly  accommodated  together
    with minors  is  the  responsibility  of  local  authorities,  not  the
    immigration service. That is largely correct, but not wholly  since  in
    the case of challenges  brought  by  persons  detained  by  immigration
    officials as a result of applying  Chapter  55,  such  persons  may  be
    accommodated by local authorities with other minors pending a full  age
    assessment. (It is also the case that if a person's  age  is  disputed,
    the immigration service processes them together with other minors.)

57.  Weighing up these competing arguments,  it  seems  to  me  that  whilst
    criticisms can be made and will doubtless continue to be  made  of  the
    respondent's detention policy set out in Chapter 55.9.3.1, it cannot be
    said either to lack a sufficient  policy  rationale  or  to  place  the
    respondent in conflict with the legislation. What I say  next  provides
    further reasons for the above conclusion.

Unreasonable exercise of power

58.  One of Mr Buttler's key submissions is that the policy under  challenge
    should be held to be unlawful because it is an unreasonable exercise of
    power to issue guidance that permits or encourages unlawful conduct. In
    support he cited  Gillick  v  West  Norfolk  and  Wisbech  Area  Health
    Authority [1986] AC  112,  181F  which  concerned  guidance  on  family
    planning services for children; R (Tabbakh) v  Staffordshire  and  West
    Midlands Probation Trust [2014] 1 WLR  1022,  which  concerned  licence
    conditions for offenders; and R(Letts) v Lord Chancellor [2015]  1  WLR
    4497, [118] which concerned granting legal aid for representation at an
    inquest and in which Green J stated that "[t]he test  is  hence:  Would
    the Guidance if followed (i) lead to unlawful acts (ii) permit unlawful
    acts or (iii) encourage such unlawful acts?". In R(Tabbakh) Cranston  J
    noted at [42[- [52] that the authorities recognise three bases on which
    a court can conclude that a government policy is unlawful. The first of
    these was whether a policy if followed would lead to unlawful  acts  or
    decision or which permits or encourages such acts - the Gillick line of
    cases. The second concerned Article 3 ECHR cases where a policy exposes
    a person to a significant risk of ill treatment (not relevant  in  this
    application). The third basis was inherent  unfairness.  I  shall  deal
    with the first basis before turning to the third.

59.  I am not persuaded that the  Gillick  line  of  cases  impacts  on  the
    policy under challenge. For one thing there is nothing on the  face  of
    Chapter 55.9.3.1 that  suggests  that  case  owners  are  permitted  or
    encouraged to undertake unlawful  acts.  In  contrast  to  cases  where
    unlawfulness has been found on this first basis, e.g.  by  Green  J  in
    R(Letts) v  Lord  Chancellor  (Equality  and  Human  Rights  Commission
    intervening) QBD [2015] 1 WLR, 4497-4533,  neither  the  applicant  nor
    intervener have been able to identify  any  specific  passages  of  the
    policy that inscribe unlawfulness. The  policy  does  not  assert  that
    minors are to be detained contrary to  any  statutory  provisions.  For
    another, the safeguards set out in the policy are  surely  designed  to
    ensure that unlawful acts are avoided so  far  as  is  consistent  with
    objective knowledge at the relevant time  (I  have  already  identified
    these safeguards and why I consider them sufficient).

60.  In respect of Mr Buttler's submission  that  I  should  find  that  the
    policy implicitly endorses unlawfulness, I pay heed to what was said by
    Lord Bridge of Harwich in Gillick at p.194 about the need for caution:

             "In  cases  where  any  proposition  of  law  implicit  in   a
         departmental advisory document  is  interwoven  with  questions  of
         social and ethical controversy, the court should,  in  my  opinion,
         exercise its jurisdiction with the utmost restraint, confine itself
         to deciding whether the proposition of law is erroneous  and  avoid
         either expressing ex cathedra  opinions  in  areas  of  social  and
         ethical controversy  in  which  it  has  no  claim  to  speak  with
         authority or proffering answers to hypothetical  questions  of  law
         which do not strictly arise for decision."

Inherent unfairness

61.  I turn next to the contention  advanced  by  both  Mr  Buttler  and  Mr
    Chamberlain that the policy under challenge is inherently unfair.

          In this context, I first of all reiterate that  any  issue  as  to
    the inherent unfairness of criterion C must be decided on the basis  of
    the policy as a whole.  Seen in this context  (as  already  noted)  the
    policy has a number of built-in safeguards. In my judgment their effect
    is to prevent unfairness.

62.  Mr Buttler submits that criterion C is so  prone  to  error  as  to  be
    inherently unfair.  He accepts, however, that in order to show inherent
    unfairness the focus must be on the structure of the scheme and whether
    there is  something  inherent  that  gives  rise  to  a  real  risk  of
    injustice: The Lord Chancellor v Detention Action [2015]  1  WLR  5341.
    It is necessary to show not just a susceptibility to significant error,
    but a systematic unfairness (or  systemic  deficiency).   Mr  Buttler's
    acceptance was based on a realistic recognition of the rejection by the
    higher courts of claims based on the  mere  occurrence  of  significant
    error.

63.  Mr Buttler's submissions on inherent unfairness were twofold: first  he
    submitted that he did not  need  to  show  any  specific  instances  as
    inherent unfairness could be established by  reference  to  the  scheme
    considered as a whole; second, he could in any event demonstrate it  by
    reference to  empirical  data.  As  regards  his  first  submission,  I
    consider that it fails for much the same reasons as his challenge based
    on unreasonable  exercise  of  power  fails:  there  is  no  structural
    unfairness on the face of the policy. His second submission leads me to
    give specific  consideration  to  the  data  which  the  applicant  and
    respondent have produced for these proceedings.

The data

64.  The requirement to show systematic  unfairness  by  way  of  data  puts
    difficulty in the way of any submissions based on sketchy or incomplete
    data.  There has been much  argument  about  the  precise  meaning  and
    significance of the data respectively provided  by  the  applicant  and
    respondent in this case. That produced by the respondent is set out  in
    several witness  statements  from  Michael  Gallagher;  that  from  the
    respondent is set out in four  witness  statements  of  Helen  Johnson,
    Operations Manager for the Children's Section of the Refugee Council.

65.  Based on some of their propositions about data  made  in  the  parties'
    respective  submissions,  they  are  poles  apart  -   the   respondent
    suggesting theirs show an  error  rate  of  around  5%,  the  applicant
    suggesting theirs shows an error rate of between 34%-100%.   Both  also
    sought to reinterpret each other's statistics to different  effect.  To
    my mind, the extent of the disagreement only serves to  illustrate  the
    problem that the data submitted by both parties  is  extremely  limited
    and suffers from a number of evidential and methodological problems.

66.  At the case management stage the parties indicated that they wished  to
    call evidence from the individuals who were in a  position  to  explain
    the relevant  data.   In  the  event  neither  the  applicant  nor  the
    respondent chose to call these individuals, even though  it  must  have
    been apparent to both parties that there was a significant variance.

67.  Turning to the data produced by the respondent, the starting point  (as
    confirmed by Michael Gallagher in his January 2017  witness  statement)
    is that there is no central  recording  of  cases  dealing  with  under
    criterion C.  The Secretary of State holds statistics for age  disputed
    cases (or "'borderline" cases) as a whole and the  outcome  from  those
    cases[4], but not for non-borderline cases.   That is to be  regretted;
    but I accept that the respondent, albeit somewhat belatedly,  has  used
    her best endeavours to provide relevant data by  undertaking  a  manual
    review of individual records and that there has not  been  a  wholesale
    failure to monitor a policy (which can of course  constitute  a  public
    law error: see R(European Roma Rights)  v  Prague  Immigration  Officer
    [2005] 2 AC 1 62 [91]).

68.  As regards published statistics on age disputed cases as  a  whole,  Mr
    Gallagher's witness statement of January 2017 states that for a twelve-
    month period ending September 2016, these show that  1,000  individuals
    who claimed asylum were treated as age disputed cases. Of the 933 cases
    that were resolved in that period (principally through local  authority
    age assessments), 67% were assessed to be over  18  despite  originally
    claiming to be a child. Mr Gallagher states that this indicates the way
    in which giving the benefit of the doubt to individuals who fall within
    the age dispute process "already provides a precautionary approach".  I
    would accept that this case analysis shows that Chapter 55, through its
    provision for  an  intermediary  "age-disputed"  category  to  which  a
    benefit of the doubt is given, affords a significant margin of error in
    favour of applicants claiming to be children. However, as Helen Johnson
    has pointed out, this cohort refers to those in  respect  of  whom  the
    Home Office has not decided that  the  person  is  an  adult  based  on
    physical appearance/demeanour; hence it does not directly  assist  with
    the working of criterion C itself.

69.  As regards cases in which individuals are assessed as adults using  the
    significantly over 18 criterion, there appears to have  been  at  least
    one pilot - that  conducted in the Asylum Screening Unit  (ASU)  for  3
    months from 2 April-1  July  2013  to  record  cases  where  an  asylum
    applicant's claim to be a child is doubted and there is  little  or  no
    evidence to support their claimed  age  and  the  individual  is  being
    treated as an  adult  on  the  basis  that  there  appearance/demeanour
    strongly suggest that they are significantly  over  18.   There  is  no
    mention of any of the ten being subsequently assessed as a child by the
    local authority.

70.  In order to assist the Tribunal,  the  respondent  undertook  a  manual
    case file analysis in December 2016  of  39  cases  from  her  casework
    information database (CID). This showed that in only 5 confirmed  cases
    was there a subsequent local authority age assessment establishing that
    they were in fact minors (Mr Gallagher's witness  statement  of  8  May
    2017 states that there is one other case in  which  a  local  authority
    assessment in pending; he also clarifies that it appears that only  two
    of the six claimed to be children prior to  detention).  However,  this
    data set is extremely small, especially bearing in mind  that,  of  the
    39, Mr Gallagher's witness statement records that in  13  of  them  the
    individuals were granted temporary admission very quickly  and  of  the
    remainder one person was in police custody and deemed an adult  by  the
    court and no further assessment of age was carried out on 11 of those.

71.  In order to provide the Tribunal  with  an  additional  data  set,  the
    respondent also analysed a group of 1,409 people who were processed  in
    the Kent Asylum Intake Unit in the period 16 May 2016  to  20  November
    2016. Mr Gallagher's witness statement of 8 May 2017 states that he had
    requested six months' data from this unit from the most  recent  period
    "because we believed it would give a good indication of practice.  Kent
    Intake Unit is one of the main units processing clandestine and illegal
    entrants in the UK".  Of these, 76 were assessed as significantly  over
    18 and of these seven had  had  further  assessment  or  have  provided
    further information about their age. "Of those seven cases, three  have
    had Merton compliant assessment concluding they  are  adults  and  four
    have been found to be children without a Merton compliant  assessment."
    It is stated that a further three cases are recorded on CID  as  having
    been referred by the Home Office to a local authority for a further age
    assessment and as at 8 May one had gone  missing  and  two  assessments
    were still awaited. Four were subsequently  found  to  be  children  by
    Merton-compliant age assessments.  However, it is not explained why  of
    these 76 only seven had further assessments.  The fact that 69 of  them
    did not have further assessments does not necessarily  mean  they  were
    significantly over 18 in fact.  The fact that of the seven who did have
    further assessments, five were found to be children is far too small  a
    sample from which to draw a meaningful conclusion.

72.  As regards the data produced by  the  applicant,  the  principal  study
    relied on was carried out  by  the  Refugee  Council.   In  her  second
    witness statement of 22 September 2014 Helen Johnson stated that:

              "our records show that we have  received  15  referrals  this
         year in total of age disputed young people who are being treated as
         adults and detained purely because of  their  physical  appearance.
         Out of the 15 cases which were referred to the Refugee Council,  we
         supported nine young people who we believed to be children. Out  of
         these nine cases four cases have now  been  accepted  as  children.
         Four cases are outstanding in that the process of resolving the age
         of the individual is ongoing..."

73.  In her third witness statement of 3  October  2016  Ms  Johnson  stated
    that "from 1 October 2014 to 29 December 2015 her organisation received
    37 referrals from individuals who claimed to be children but  who  were
    being treated as adults based on the physical appearance  policy".  She
    avers that of these 37 referrals, the Refugee Council supported  25  of
    the young people, 12 were  not  supported  for  a  variety  of  reasons
    including lack of capacity. "Of the  25  we  supported,  13  have  been
    assessed and accepted as children by  a  local  authority.  Seven  were
    released into the care of the local authority  pending  assessment,  of
    whom two absconded, two were assessed to be  adults,  one  was  removed
    from the country before the age assessment had been completed  and  two
    are being looked  after  as  children  pending  the  outcome  of  court
    proceedings". She concludes that "at least 13 of those  37  individuals
    (just over one-third) were in fact children and the physical appearance
    policy failed to protect them".

74.  Her same statement  goes  on  to  state  that  from  1  January  to  30
    September 2016 her organisation received 21 referrals of  age  disputed
    young people in detention. "We supported 18 of  these  individuals.  Of
    those 18, nine were assessed by local authorities and  accepted  to  be
    children. Six of the 18 have been released into  local  authority  care
    pending an assessment of their age by the local authority. One  of  the
    18 was released and absconded. Two of the 18 are  still  detained  with
    proceedings pending. She concludes: "[t]hus on  fuller  assessment,  it
    appears that at least nine of those  21  individuals  (just  over  two-
    fifths) were in fact children and that the physical  appearance  policy
    failed to protect them".

75.  A further witness statement from Ms Johnson stated that  from  1  April
    2016 to 30 March l 2017  her  organisation  received  98  referrals  of
    persons assessed by the Secretary of State to be significantly over 18.
     It is stated that the Refugee Council accepted 62 of these and of this
    number  27  were  subsequently  assessed  to  be  children   by   local
    authorities.

76.  The difficulties with Ms Johnson's figures are first of  all  that  the
    details of the cases were not provided even in redacted form.   Without
    those it is impossible to be sure that application of criterion  C  was
    the sole or relevant criterion in issue.  It appears that some  in  her
    cohorts were not detained in any event.  Second, there is  no  adequate
    identification of  the  basis  on  which  some  significant  number  of
    referrals were not accepted.

77.  Given the evidential  and  methodological  difficulties  identified  in
    both the respondent's and applicant's data sets, I do  not  consider  I
    have a sufficient evidential  basis  on  which  to  draw  any  definite
    conclusions as regards whether there is a significant  risk  of  error,
    let alone a risk that is systematic.

European and international norms

78.  The thrust of Mr Chamberlain's submission  was  that  criterion  C  was
    incompatible with European and international human rights norms.  I  am
    not persuaded that this is so.  In terms of EU asylum  law,  (as  noted
    earlier) the UK has not opted into the Asylum Procedures Directive(APD)
    (recast), although it remains bound  by  Council  Directive  2005/85/EC
    (Asylum Procedures (APD)).

79.  There are no provisions either of the former or the latter  which  shed
    light on the policy criterion at issue in this case.  Member States are
    permitted  to  use  medical  examinations  to  determine  the  age   of
    unaccompanied minors subject to procedural safeguards (Article 17, APD,
    Article 25, APD (recast)).  Article 25(5) of the  APD(recast)  requires
    the benefit of the doubt to be given in age-disputed cases, but Chapter
    55 achieves that in any event. Mr Chamberlain has  suggested  that  the
    objective  behind  both  instruments  can  be  informed  by  Resolution
    97/C221/03 adopted by the European Council on 26 June 1997 stating that
    "[a]ge assessment should be carried out  objectively",  but  this  says
    nothing about what is or is not to be considered an objective  approach
    to assessment.  In any event, for reasons elaborated earlier I consider
    that the initial age assessment policy applied  by  the  respondent  is
    sufficiently objective.

80.  Article 6 of the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights (and  indeed  Article
    5, ECHR) confers a right not to be detained arbitrarily  and  the  case
    law of the European Council of Human Rights (ECtHR) considers that  the
    prohibition on arbitrary detention imposes special  restrictions,  both
    substantive and procedural, in relation to the detention  of  children.
    The case law of the ECtHR is material because  of  Article  52  of  the
    Charter.

81.  However, insofar as this case law relates to the issue  in  this  case,
    the most it shows is that the detention of a person who is  in  fact  a
    child would be arbitrary if not based on an objective  assessment:  see
    e.g. Winterwerp v United Kingdom (1983) 5 EHRR CD 305; Mohamed  Jama  v
    Malta (App.no.10290/13,  judgment  26  November  2015);  see  also  the
    September 2005 report of the UN Committee on the Rights of the Child on
    the Treatment of Unaccompanied and  Separated  Children  Outside  their
    Country of Origin (CRC/GC/2005/6), which  states  that  age  assessment
    must be conducted in a "scientific, safe,  child  and  gender-sensitive
    and fair manner".  Mr Chamberlain argues that the policy  in  issue  is
    arbitrary and non-objective because it  is  based  on  "a  demonstrably
    unreliable age assessment", but that ignores that the test  of  whether
    an assessment is objective must be considered  in  the  context  of  an
    initial age assessment, not a full age assessment and that this  policy
    is not exclusively based on physical appearance/demeanour and  contains
    a number of built-in safeguards.  It  is  common  ground  that  (absent
    unusual circumstances) it is not possible for a full (Merton-compliant)
    age assessment to be done at the stage when an applicant who claims  to
    be a child is first  being  considered  for  detention.   As  explained
    earlier, it is most certainly not possible to do it within the  24-hour
    period identified as the outer limit for detention of children  by  the
    amended 1971 Act.

82.  Mr Chamberlain submitted that  the  decision  in  Mohamed  Jama,  which
    concerned the detention  of  asylum  seekers  claiming  to  be  minors,
    demonstrates that Article 5(1) ECHR imposes not  only  substantive  but
    also procedural constraints on the detention of minors claiming  to  be
    children. I concur, but in this case the Court first  of  all  did  not
    consider that detention of a minor per se was contrary to Article 5(1),
    but rather that "detention of minors should be no longer than  what  is
    absolutely necessary  to  determine  their  identification  and  health
    status"; and secondly the Court  said  nothing  to  indicate  that  the
    adoption by a State party of a policy such as the one in issue in  this
    case  would  be  contrary  to  substantive  or  procedural   safeguards
    contained in Article 5.

The applicant

83.  The basic particulars relating to  the  applicant  have  been  set  out
    earlier at paragraphs 10-13. Given that Mr Buttler sought  to  use  the
    applicant's case as an illustration of why the policy  applied  to  him
    was unlawful, it is necessary to comment on some particular aspects  of
    what happened in his case and what light  the  treatment  of  his  case
    sheds on the policy at large.

84.  As regards his initial age assessment, it  has  already  been  observed
    that the applicant was interviewed on 11 March 2014 and  that  the  AIO
    note states simply that: "I have age assessed this subject as over  18,
    his physical appearance is that of an adult in his  mid-twenties,  with
    receding hairline and  well  defined  jawline,  Adams  apple  etc.  His
    physique also appears to be well developed. I am satisfied that  he  is
    not 16 yrs of age." The CIO note was in the  exact  same  terms.  These
    minutes  strongly  suggests  that  not  just  physical  appearance  but
    demeanour also was assessed by the AIO.

85.  There is nothing in the  above  statement  to  the  effect  that  their
    assessment had regard to whether  there  was  other  credible  evidence
    available. At the same time, it can safely be inferred that the AOI had
    in mind that the only  other  relevant  evidence  before  him  was  the
    applicant's statement that he was born on 15 February  1998.   The  AIO
    interview note records the applicant as stating that he had  no  ID  or
    passport.  Unarguably the AIO must have been satisfied that  there  was
    no other credible evidence (and indeed, as is agreed, there was  none).
    The CIO decision would also appear to have had regard to the  state  of
    the surrounding evidence. In her witness  statement,  she  stated  that
    "[i]n the absence of any documentary or any other evidence provided  by
    the applicant, I authorised that the applicant should be treated as  an
    adult based on his physical appearance."

86.  In any event, when on  11  March  2014,  the  respondent  prepared  and
    served her decision letter, the latter made explicit that her  decision
    regarding   his   age   was    not    based    purely    on    physical
    appearance/demeanour. Its conclusion was stated as being that:

            "In the absence of any credible  documentary  evidence  to  the
         contrary, the Secretary of State does not accept  that  you  are  a
         child and from this point therefore you will be treated as an adult
         applicant for asylum".

87.  The same  letter  also  informed  the  applicant  of  his  remedies  if
    dissatisfied:

         "The Home Office's determination of your age does not  prevent  you
         from  approaching  your   local   authority   Children's   Services
         department with a view to them undertaking their own  assessment  t
         of your age."

88.  There is also a commitment to review in the  light  of  any  Children's
    Service assessment concluding he is a child. It is stated that if  such
    an assessment  is  provided  and  the  Home  Office  is  provided  with
    sufficient evidence of this, "the Home Office's determination  of  your
    age will be reviewed". We  know  that  is  indeed  what  happened:  see
    paragraphs 12-13 above.

89.  On 12 March the applicant was served with a Screening Officer's  report
    in which it is stated that he is being  treated  as  an  adult  because
    "[h]is physical appearance/demeanour very strongly suggests  he/she  is
    significantly over 18 and no other  credible  evidence  exists  to  the
    contrary". I note that by this report the AIO does here include in  the
    assessment the fact that "no other  credible  evidence  exists  to  the
    contrary". The applicant is recorded as replying "I cannot  argue  with
    you".

90.  Following a request for clarification of  the  EURODAC  search  results
    sent on 12 March  2014,  the  UKVI's  Asylum  and  Immigration  Liaison
    Officer in Italy, stationed within the Italian  Ministry  of  Interior,
    Italian authorities, confirmed on 7 December 2016 that the  age  stated
    in their records (15 February 1998) was that given  by  the  applicant.
    The applicant has addressed this event in his witness statement  of  16
    July 2014 in which he stated that "I do not know why they [the  Italian
    authorities] have recorded 1998 instead of my  correct  date  of  birth
    which is 1998" (I will assume that that the applicant meant to say here
    his correct date of birth was 1996).

91.  To my mind the EURODAC search results are only of relevance in  showing
    that the respondent's decision to detain the applicant beyond the first
    day was further supported by her own inquiries.  I do not consider that
    what is stated about what happened to him in Italy in  the  applicant's
    witness statement signed several months later  was  clear  or  specific
    enough to warrant a decision to release him from detention.

92.   As  noted  earlier,  the  applicant  initially  presented  at  Newport
    Children's Services on 8 January 2015 when he was assessed as being  an
    adult over the age of 18 years. The first age assessment  conducted  on
    the applicant was dated 24 February 2015. The social worker signing the
    report concluded that his  age  was  "19-21  years".   The  second  age
    assessment was carried out by Newport Children's Service on  6  January
    2015, two different social workers concluding  that  he  was  "over  18
    years of age". This assessment was  confirmed  in  an  addendum  report
    prepared following an interview on 12 March 2015 to go through the  age
    assessment  in  detail  with  him.  On  2  September  2015  two  (again
    different) social workers instructed by Newport City Council  to  carry
    out an independent age  assessment  on  the  applicant  produced  their
    report. Despite observing in their analysis  that  "[B's]  interaction,
    body  language  together  with  his  verbal,  written   and   pictorial
    communication demonstrated traits and characteristics  associated  with
    the expected developmental stage of an older young person", the  social
    workers' conclusions was "we believe [BF] is his stated age of  17  and
    his claimed date of birth is probably correct".

93.  Even though the above brief history of age assessment of the  applicant
    might be thought to afford a vivid  illustration  of  how  "inexact"  a
    science such assessment continues  to  be,  it  remains  that  applying
    established case law the current position  is  that  the  applicant  is
    entitled to argue that  during  the  periods  of  his  detention  under
    Chapter 55.9.3.1 he was a minor and that such detention, at least  from
    the date on which paragraph 18B came  into  force,  he  was  unlawfully
    detained. However, I am not seized of any claim for unlawful detention.
    As will be evident from my  earlier  analysis,  the  current  state  of
    objective assessment of his age does not impugn the lawfulness  of  the
    policy set out in Chapter 55.9.3.1. It simply means that he can  pursue
    a claim for unlawful detention for the relevant periods - on the  basis
    of strict liability.

Conclusion

94.  For the reasons set out in the course of identifying and analysing  the
    principal  issues  addressed  by  the  parties,  I  conclude  that  the
    applicant's application for judicial review,  based  exclusively  on  a
    challenge to Chapter 55.9.3.1. must fail.

95.  Whilst I have  concluded  that  the  challenge  to  the  lawfulness  of
    Chapter 55 fails, I have observed in the course  of  my  judgment  that
    failure to monitor  a  policy  can  constitute  unlawfulness:  see  the
    remarks  of  Baroness  Hale  in  R(European  Roma  Rights)   v   Prague
    Immigration Officer [2005] 2 AC1 62 [91]).  I have also  observed  that
    whilst the respondent has taken some steps to monitor this policy,  she
    had done so belatedly and largely as a result of  directions  from  the
    Court of Appeal and this Tribunal. Further, the existing data  she  has
    produced regarding the operation of this policy is  deficient  in  more
    than one respect. It seems to me, therefore, that the respondent should
    give  consideration  to  putting  in  place  a  centralised  monitoring
    mechanism from which it can be clearly seen what  are  the  numbers  of
    persons claiming to be minors assessed  as  being  significantly  older
    than 18 who  are  detained  for  that  reason  but  later  conclusively
    established to have been minors at the time of detention.

APPENDIX

Oral submissions

96.  Mr Buttler confirmed that the  challenge  brought  was  solely  to  the
    Respondent's policy, not to its application in  this  case,  since  the
    policy was applied to the Applicant as it was intended to apply.

97.  In procedural terms,  it  was  important  to  bear  in  mind,  said  Mr
    Buttler, that the Applicant had submitted evidence that the policy  was
    not working lawfully and the Respondent had been put on  notice  as  to
    the need to explain and file evidence showing the policy was  operating
    lawfully.  He referred to the order made by the Court of Appeal for the
    Respondent to submit detailed grounds of  defence  and  evidence  by  6
    December 2016.

98.  Mr Buttler then addressed the evidence relating to  the  harm  done  to
    children  by  detention,  which  was  he  submitted   incontrovertible.
    Logically such harm would affect persons who looked older than  18  but
    were in fact minors.

99.  As regards the policy, Mr Buttler said it was well-established that  it
    was for the court or Tribunal to construe the meaning  of  any  policy.
    The focus of the challenge was confined to criterion  'C'  set  out  in
    chapter 55.9.3.1.  That criterion had been part  of  the  policy  since
    2006, notwithstanding changes in the statutory  framework,  the  coming
    into force in 2009 of s.55  of  the  2009  Act  and  the  amendment  to
    Schedule 2 of the 1971 Act prohibiting detention of children beyond  24
    hours.  Those  screened  out  under  'C'  were  denied  the  safeguards
    afforded  to  age-disputed  cases  -  they  would  receive  no  further
    assessment unless they arranged it for themselves.  It was no answer to
    say to a person affected "you are free  to  go  and  obtain  a  Merton-
    compliant assessment" because by that time they would already have been
    detained beyond 24 hours.  They were  also  liable  to  rapid  removal.
    Significantly, submitted Mr Buttler, the policy gave no guidance on how
    criterion C was to be applied, in terms of what  "significantly"  meant
    in terms  of  numbers  of  persons  or  what  physical  characteristics
    officers should be looking to check.  There was  no  proper  system  of
    monitoring through central recording.

100. Mr Buttler took issue with the nature of the visual  assessment  method
    relied on in criterion 'C'.  Whilst there was no scientific  equivalent
    to DNA when it came to age assessment, Merton-compliant age  assessment
    was the best method available and it regarded visual  assessment  as  a
    thoroughly unreliable method.   Visual  assessment  was  an  inherently
    subjective and impressionistic exercise.  The Respondent's own evidence
    (given by Mr  Gallagher)  confirmed  that  none  of  the  officers  who
    implement this policy have any training on how they  are  to  go  about
    visual  assessment  or  on  how  to  apply  the   "very   strong"   and
    "significant" thresholds.  The Respondent's position in defending  this
    challenge (in which she claims  the  policy  is  'workable')  was  also
    inconsistent with the position she took in the AA  (Sudan)  case  where
    she said it was not workable.

101. As regards the correct legal tests to be applied, Mr Buttler  submitted
    that criterion C of the policy permitted unlawful action, since because
    of para 18(b) of Schedule 2 there was a statutory  prohibition  on  the
    detention of children.   Criterion  C  wrongly  permitted  officers  to
    consider they could lawfully detain persons if they  had  a  reasonable
    belief they were  significantly  older  than  18.   Parliament's  clear
    intention by this amendment was to stop children  being  detained,  not
    simply to ensure compensation if they were detained.

102. Mr Buttler submitted  that  the  screening  procedure  under  challenge
    generated an unacceptable level of risk and a "serious possibility"  or
    a proven risk of injustice.  There  was  evidence  of  the  policy  not
    working in a very significant number of cases.  He pointed out that  in
    order to identify an inherent flow in the visual assessment system,  it
    was not necessary he provide  individual  instances,  but  in  fact  he
    could.

103. Mr Buttler contended that  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  well-equipped  to
    conduct an objective assessment of the policy.  Such assessment had  to
    be made in the context of the policy and the wider statutory framework.
     If the Upper Tribunal considered it was not possible for the officials
    applying this policy to make a Merton-compliant  assessment  within  24
    hours,  then  that  simply  meant  the  visual  assessment  policy  was
    unavailable and it was for the Respondent (and if necessary Parliament)
    to come up with a policy that was workable.

104. Mr Buttler sought to evaluate the evidence provided by the  parties  in
    this case.  On the one hand the Respondent had not produced evidence to
    show the policy effectively avoids child detention; on the other  hand,
    the Applicant had produced evidence  from  a  range  of  expert  bodies
    stating that visual assessment is a flawed  method.   If  a  consultant
    paediatrician or a social worker with years of training  cannot  assess
    whether anyone is certainly over 18, how possibly  could  an  untrained
    Immigration Officer?  The data produced by the Home Office was  from  a
    small sample and was flawed in a number of respects.  Even on their own
    figures the error rates were in the region of  28-100%.   On  any  view
    these were troublingly high margins of error.

105. Mr Chamberlain for  the  Intervenor,  the  Equality  and  Human  Rights
    Commission, submitted that the visual assessment policy was capable  of
    causing serious harm to people who are in fact children.  It  was  true
    that neither the visual  assessment  method  nor  the  Merton-compliant
    method of assessment were scientific, but the latter was the  only  one
    that on the state of current  learning,  was  objectively  based.   The
    visual assessment method, by contrast, was  inherently  unreliable;  it
    could never be a major reason for age assessment.  Expert  opinion  was
    agreed that something more than visual assessment  was  always  needed.
    The policy failed to apply a Merton-compliant assessment at any  point.
    It did not even, for example, state that detention would be limited  in
    time so that a Merton-compliant assessment could  be  carried  out  'as
    soon as possible'.  The policy did not even warn officials that  visual
    assessment was notoriously unreliable.

106. Mr Chamberlain submitted that the policy could be  demonstrated  to  be
    unlawful purely by reference to case law since that made clear that  to
    establish inherent unfairness it  was  not  necessary  to  show  actual
    breaches (Medical Justice Council, para 41).   Yet  evidence  had  been
    provided and that from the Refugee Council was striking.  Applying  the
    test of 'inherent unfairness', the Respondent's policy  clearly  failed
    that test, as the system established by the policy had no  capacity  to
    react to error.  It was not based on objective  medical  evidence.   As
    such criterion 'C' was an arbitrary criterion,  particularly  now  that
    domestic law through para 18(b) imposed a statutory  bar  on  detaining
    minors.

107. Mr Chamberlain submitted that the Upper  Tribunal  should  be  cautious
    about speculating what other policies could be put in place of the  one
    under challenge; it was not for judicial bodies  to  try  and  redesign
    Secretary of State's policy.  Whatever policy was applied,  it  had  to
    incorporate an objective method of assessment sufficiently reliable  to
    avoid detention of minors.

108. Mr Strachan for the Respondent  averred  that  a  challenge  to  policy
    could only  proceed  on  well-established  grounds  of  error  of  law,
    inherent  unfairness  or  rationality.   The  Applicant  confined   his
    challenge just to criterion 'C' but that criterion was just one of four
    very limited circumstances creating exceptions to  the  presumption  in
    favour of liberty of the subject.  Contrary to the submissions  of  the
    Applicant  and  Interviewer  about  lack  of  safeguards,  the   policy
    incorporated several.  It was predicated on the presumption of  liberty
    save in exceptional circumstances.   There  was  an  inbuilt  threshold
    designed to allow for a considerable margin of error.  Lord Toulson had
    described the policy in AA (Afghanistan) as "detailed and useful".  The
    policy required the decision to be reviewed by a  more  senior  officer
    acting as a 'second pair of eyes'.   The  statistics  provided  by  the
    Respondent showed that in as many as 69% of cases within  the  category
    of age disputed cases were later assessed by  Merton-compliant  methods
    to be adults.  Any policy needed to balance  these  difficulties.   The
    fact that the  Supreme  Court  had  established  strict  liability  for
    unlawful detention of minors in AA (Afghanistan)  did  not  render  the
    policy unlawful.  The SC were not seeking to address how officials make
    decisions, only the consequences for getting it wrong nor did the  fact
    that para 18(b) of Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act  prohibits  detention  of
    minors beyond 24 hours.  The mere fact an official gets it wrong  under
    the policy does not render it unlawful.  Indeed, the change in the  law
    fortified the policy because officials now knew that  if  they  got  it
    wrong there would be an additional disbenefit  to  the  SSHD,  in  that
    compensation would have to be paid on a strict liability basis.

109. Mr Strachan argued that the Applicant  had  sought  to  mischaracterise
    the policy.  In relying on visual assessment it was not seeking to deny
    that visual assessment was not the objective method to  be  applied  in
    the general run of cases.  Mr Strachan  said  he  did  not  accept  the
    Respondent has been inconsistent in how she  had  defended  the  policy
    under challenge as between this case and Ali.

110. Mr Strachan strongly disavowed  the  Applicant's  submission  that  the
    SSHD was hesitant to providing evidence in defence to  this  challenge.
    The witness statements from Mr Gallagher explained the difficulties  in
    obtaining relevant statistics and that  the  SSHD  had  commissioned  a
    manual collation of data.

111. Mr Strachan said it was wrong  to  portray  the  immigration  officials
    administering the policy as having no guidance as  regards  methods  of
    age assessment and he referred in this context  to  passages  from  the
    Asylum Instructions on Assessing Age.

112. In terms of case law, Mr Strachan contended that on a  proper  analysis
    the  policy  under  challenge  was  not  dislodged  by   any   relevant
    principles: the Applicant and Interviewer both accepted that  they  had
    to overcome a high threshold.  The Gillick line of cases did  not  help
    as with them the policy misstated the law.  It was unfortunate as  well
    that the Applicant had  sought  to  characterise  the  legal  error  as
    unacceptable risk of wrong outcome, since the higher courts in a series
    of cases had made abundantly  clear  that  unacceptable  risk  was  not
    enough; there had to be inherent unfairness.   Given  that  Mr  Buttler
    accepted the challenge was one to procedural  fairness,  that  entailed
    that one has to look at the policy as a whole and not take criterion  C
    in isolation.  That meant accepting it  arose  in  the  context  of  an
    initial interview  and  that  it  contained  a  number  of  significant
    safeguards.  The policy patently did  not  deny  applicants  access  to
    justice.  That also meant accepting that had to be shown  was  systemic
    deficiency in the system.  Inherent flaws did not necessarily  need  to
    be established by individual cases, but  the  data  provided  for  this
    hearing fell well short of  establishing  systemic  deficiency  in  any
    event.  The criteria voiced in the case law  as  regards  using  visual
    identification as a method of age  assessment  were  all  made  in  the
    context of borderline cases, whereas the  policy  under  challenge  was
    concerned with non-borderline cases. There was no deprecation of visual
    assessment as such.

113. In response to questions  I  raised  regarding  the  'Adults  at  risk'
    policy forming 55b of the Respondent's policy on detention, Mr Strachan
    accepted  that  it  did  adopt  a  visual  assessment  based  on  self-
    certification in certain contexts, but so he submitted did  the  policy
    under challenge, in applying a presumption that  individuals  would  be
    accepted as minors except in four limited circumstances.   Compared  to
    the treatment of the position of adults at risk and pregnant women, the
    policy under challenge was even more cautionary.

114. Dealing  with  the  Applicant's  three  main  heads  of  challenge,  Mr
    Strachan said that the challenge  based  on  rationality  had  to  fail
    because what had to be considered was the overall system and  the  mere
    fact some detained people might turn out to be  minors  (by  virtue  of
    Merton-compliant age assessments) did not invalidate  the  policy.   As
    regards the attempt to deploy a challenge based on 'unacceptable risk',
    that was simply the wrong test.  There was no Gillick-type error of law
    stated in the policy.

115. Turning to the  data  produced  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  Mr  Strachan
    submitted that the error rate based on subsequent Merton-compliant  age
    assessments  was  only  5%.   As  regards  the  data  produced  by  the
    Applicant, he said it contained inbuilt biases and it did  not  explain
    the basis of the 98 referrals and the it did not  safely  identify  the
    reasons why 47 of that cohort those not detained.

116. Mr Strachan said that the Respondent had not failed to respond  to  the
    arguments advanced by the Intervener; it was simply that she considered
    those arguments not to  apply  against  the  Respondent.   Neither  the
    international cases nor the ECHR jurisprudence told against the  policy
    under challenge.

117. In response Mr Chamberlain considered that whilst it was  accepted  the
    Applicant and Intervener had to show inherent unfairness in the context
    of the policy and statutory framework, the data provided to  the  Upper
    Tribunal demonstrated "systemic failure".

118. Mr Buttler submitted in response that  the  Applicant  had  established
    the policy had inherent flaws in procedural terms.  Even leaving  aside
    that Mr Gallagher's latest witness statement was inconsistent with  his
    first as regards the relevant figures, the Home Office figures showed 5
    out of 14 or 40 out of 135 detained adults were later assessed to  have
    been children.  Mr Buttler said Mr Strachan was wrong to seek to invoke
    obiter comments made by Lord Toulson in AA (Afghanistan); there was  no
    challenge  in  that  case  to  the  visual  assessment  criterion.   By
    contrast, the recent Court of Appeal decision in AA (Sudan) did  assist
    because it addressed  the  implication  of  the  changes  made  to  the
    statutory framework by para 18(b) of Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act and  it
    sets out an express rejection of the notion that immigration  officials
    can any longer rely on reasonable belief in applying detention  policy.
    In light of para 18(b)  and  the  Court  of  Appeal  clarification  the
    Respondent could not carry on regardless as if these  developments  had
    not occurred.  If a significant number of persons  detained  as  adults
    were children, that amounted to systemic failure of  the  system.   The
    Gillick  line  of  cases  was  applicable  because  whilst  the  policy
    contained no express misstatement of the  law,  such  misstatement  was
    implicit in the policy since it implicitly says detention is lawful  if
    based on reasonable belief.  The visual assessment method  endorsed  by
    the policy was inherently unfair because it was  well-established  that
    age assessment had to be holistic.

119. In  response  to  Mr  Strachan's  point  that  the  policy  had  to  be
    understood in the context of an initial interview, Mr Buttler said that
    the interview record of the Applicant did not deal with age at all.  Mr
    Buttler said he was well aware the policy  contained  various  passages
    informing immigration officials  about  age  assessment,  but  it  said
    nothing about how to apply visual assessment; it was  not  relevant  to
    consider what policies could be  operated  instead  of  the  one  under
    challenge, but it would be wrong  to  assume  that  there  was  nothing
    better that could be done in  the  first  24  hours  absent  a  Merton-
    compliant assessment, e.g. a trained social worker could be asked to do
    a  same  day  assessment,  even  if  not  complying  with  full  Merton
    requirements.

120. Mr Buttler urged  the  Upper  Tribunal  not  to  overlook  the  serious
    consequences of error involved in application of  a  visual  assessment
    criterion as demonstrated by the expert evidence on the harm  detention
    causes children.  Whilst there was no challenge to the  application  of
    the policy to the applicant,  it  was  significant  that  a  later  age
    assessment showed he was a child when detained.   The  Applicant's  was
    clearly, therefore, a borderline case.  The Refugee Council data showed
    that 40 out of 42 cases  of  adult  detention  reviewed  by  the  local
    authority were found to involve children.

121. Mr Buttler took issue with the Respondent's argument  that  the  policy
    had to weigh in the balance public interest considerations arising from
    the fact that there are a  significant  number  of  cases  where  those
    treated as minors are found to be adults.  The policy  under  challenge
    did not impose any obligations  on  local  authorities.   If  the  Home
    Office detention policy led to adults who  claim  to  be  minors  being
    spared detention, that did not in any way oblige local  authorities  to
    accept such persons as minors



Signed:

               [pic]

Dr H H Storey, Judge of the Upper Tribunal



Date: 31 July 2017


    .~~~~0~~~~

-----------------------
[1] Macdonald's Immigration Law and Practice, 9th Ed, para 18.32, n.8
states that "[a] statement accompanying the announcement of the change in
policy on 30 November 2005, referring to cases falling within the third
bullet point above [ the equivalent of criterion C], stated that 'category
3 cases is intended for the fairly exceptional case - for claimants
appearing to be in their 30s or older'". The witness statement of Michael
Gallagher of the Asylum and Family Policy, Immigration and Border Policy
Directorate of 23 January 2017 does not fully accept the accuracy of this
account.
[2] Paragraph 18 of this skeleton states: "[t]he [applicant [ accepts that
the policy as it used to be applied (viz. does the person look to be in
their 30s or older?) would ensure that the risk of children being treated
as adults was acceptably low. However, allowing the Respondent to detain
persons on the basis that they look 25 carries an unacceptable risk of
child detention".
         [3] The evidence levels are set out in a later part of  the  policy
         under the  heading  "Assessing  risk:  weighing  the  evidence"  as
         follows:


         "Assessing risk: weighing the evidence
         Evidence levels
         Once an individual has been identified as being at risk, by  virtue
         of them exhibiting an indicator of risk,  consideration  should  be
         given to the level of evidence available in support, and the weight
         that should be afforded to the evidence, in  order  to  assess  the
         likely risk of harm to the individual if detained  for  the  period
         identified as necessary to effect their removal.
         Level 1
         A self-declaration of being an adult at risk - should  be  afforded
         limited weight, even the issues raised cannot be readily confirmed.
         Level 2
         Professional evidence (for example from a  social  worker,  medical
         practitioner or  NGO),  or  official  documentary  evidence,  which
         indicates that the individual is (or might be) an adult at  risk  -
         should be afforded greater weight.  Such evidence  should  normally
         be accepted and consideration given as to how this may be  impacted
         by  detention.   Representations  from   the   individual's   legal
         representative acting on their behalf in their  immigration  matter
         would not be regarded as professional evidence in this context.
         Level 3
         Professional evidence (for example from a  social  worker,  medical
         practitioner or NGO) stating that the individual  is  at  risk  and
         that a period of detention would be likely  to  cause  harm  -  for
         example, increase the severity of the symptoms  or  condition  that
         have led to the individual being regarded  as  an  adult  at  risk,
         should  be  afforded  significant  weight.   Such  evidence  should
         normally be accepted and any detention justified in  light  of  the
         accepted evidence.  Representations  from  the  individual's  legal
         representative acting on their behalf in their  immigration  matter
         would not be regarded as professional evidence in this context.

         When considering the likely risk of harm for the period identified,
         caseworkers are entitled not to place decisive weight on assertions
         that are unsupported by medical  evidence.   Given  the  difficulty
         involved in validating cases in which the only  evidence  available
         is  the  self-declaration  of   the   individual   concerned,   the
         distinction between such cases and those who are not considered  to
         be at risk may not be great.  However, the expectation,  where  the
         weight of the evidence is at level 1, is that this will  act  as  a
         flag  to  all  those  involved  in  managing  the  case,  and  that
         particular attention will be  paid  to  pursuing  voluntary  return
         options and progressing the case.  The flag should also act  as  an
         alarm should additional risk issues emerge as the case  progresses,
         particularly  if  the  person  is  already  detained  or,  if  not,
         following their detention.


         However, caseworkers  should  not  usually  disagree  with  medical
         evidence unless there are very strong reasons for doing  so  -  for
         example, a finding by an independent tribunal that rejects the same
         evidence or  credibility  concerns  arisin-#%&(VWXhimovw~" g  from
         other sources.  Such matters may be taken into account in  deciding
         the weight that should be afforded to evidence and could result  in
         a reconsideration of the weight of the evidence.


         Caseworkers should note that evidence  that  immigration  detention
         for an undefined period would cause harm does not demonstrate  that
         immigration detention for a very short period will cause harm.   It
         will be a rare case where detention for a very  short  period  will
         cause serious harm  to  an  individual  and  medico-legal  evidence
         specifying that detention, even for a very short period, will cause
         serious harm will generally be required before a risk of such  harm
         is accepted."






