
                                    [pic]

IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)     JR/5284/2019

IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW


|Heard at: Field House                        |
|On: 12 and 13 February 2020                  |
|                                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA

                                   Between

                                     AY
                                                                   Applicant
                                     And

                          LONDON BOROUGH OF BARNET
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Applicant:     Ms S Davies, Counsel instructed by Bindmans LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr A Campbell, Counsel instructed by London Borough
of Barnet


 1. The applicant has been granted permission for a judicial review of  the
    respondent's decision dated 10 August 2019. That is the outcome  of  an
    age assessment by which the respondent assessed  the  applicant  to  be
    aged 20 and estimated the applicant's date of birth to be  21  February
    1998.


 2. The issue for resolution in these proceedings is the  applicant's  age,
    which is in dispute between the parties. The applicant, a  national  of
    Eritrea, claims that he was born on 21 October 2001. He has  maintained
    throughout, that he knows his age and date of birth  in  the  Gregorian
    calendar. He has no documents to support his claimed age.


 3. The applicant's case is that he left Eritrea at the age of 4, with  his
    mother. His father died two years earlier. Thereafter the applicant and
    his mother lived in Ethiopia until 2011 when they left for Sudan.   The
    applicant and his mother travelled to Libya, however his mother died in
    the Sahara Desert. The applicant was taken to Libya by other Eritreans,
    however he was abducted and  ill-treated  in  Tripoli  and  subject  to
    forced labour. The applicant travelled to Italy by sea. The boat he was
    in capsized. Thereafter he travelled to Germany, arriving at some stage
    during 2015. He remained there until 2018, when he left for Belgium and
    thereafter, the United Kingdom.


 4. The applicant arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  on  16  June  2018  and
    presented himself to a police officer, who considered that he  appeared
    to be around 16 or 17 years old. The  applicant  was  referred  to  the
    London Borough of Haringey who took no issue with  his  age  and  noted
    that he appeared to look around 16 years old.


 5. On 2 July 2018, the applicant claimed asylum. He was  fingerprinted  as
    part of that claim. On 3 July 2018, the applicant was referred  to  the
    London Borough of Barnet owing to a lack of capacity  at  Haringey  for
    unaccompanied asylum-seeking children.  The applicant was recognised as
    a refugee on 21 December 2018, owing to his  fear  of  forced  military
    service in Eritrea. No issue was raised as to his age.  Prior  to  that
    decision, the Competent Authority concluded, on 5 November  2018,  that
    there were reasonable grounds to believe that the applicant had been  a
    victim of modern slavery.


 6. On 23 July 2018, the respondent decided to carry out an age assessment.
    The explanation initially given in Barnet Social Services  records  was
    that this decision was made, not because his age was disputed,  but  so
    he could  have  the  "most  appropriate  support."  The  applicant  was
    interviewed on 19 August 2018, 17 December 2018 and 18  December  2018.
    The age assessment was concluded on 28  January  2019.  Thereafter  the
    applicant's support under the Children  Act  1989  ceased  and  he  was
    referred to the housing  department  and  accommodated  as  a  homeless
    adult.


 7. The social workers concluded that the applicant was an adult  based  on
    information received from the German authorities which  indicated  that
    he was born on 21 February 1998. In addition,  the  German  authorities
    stated  that  the  applicant  had  given  a  different  name  (AG)  and
    nationality (Ethiopian) in the context  of  an  asylum  claim.  Despite
    efforts by the applicant's representatives to  bring  evidence  of  the
    applicant's poor mental  health  to  the  respondent's  attention,  the
    latter was unwilling to reassess the applicant's age.


 8. Provided in the hearing bundle was a typed copy of the age  assessment.
    If any contemporaneous manuscript notes were made by the social workers
    during the assessment, they have not been made available.


 9. Thus, the applicant says that when he arrived in the United Kingdom, he
    was aged 16 years and 8 months old.  He has maintained throughout  that
    he was born on 21 October 2001 and was therefore 17 years and 3  months
    old when he was served with the completed age assessment. On the  other
    hand, the respondent claims that the applicant is over 18 years of  age
    and was aged nearly twenty-one years old as of 28  January  2019.   The
    parties are therefore, three years apart, as to the applicant's age.


10. In reaching this decision I have had the benefit of the totality of the
    evidence upon which the  parties  seek  to  rely,  including  the  oral
    evidence that I have heard. I also have the benefit of a  copy  of  the
    records maintained by Haringey and Barnet Social Service recording  its
    interactions with, and decisions taken in respect of the applicant, and
    information disclosed by the Home Office under the Data Protection Act.
     In reaching my decision I have also had regard to the matters set  out
    in the correspondence from Mr Stewart Mc Cafferty, a  family  therapist
    who  was  involved  in  the  applicant's  treatment  under  Child   and
    Adolescent Mental Health Services (CAMHS) as well as  documents  relied
    upon by the respondent which  resulted  from  its  enquiries  with  the
    German authorities.


11. For the avoidance of any doubt, I have addressed the question as to the
    applicant's age and date of birth, without any predisposition that  the
    applicant is or is not a child.


12. Before descending into a detailed analysis of the evidence, I note  the
    conclusion of Mr McCafferty that the  applicant  is  suffering  from  a
    complex and chronic form of PTSD.


13. The applicant's account is set out in six witness statements that  have
    been prepared with the assistance of his representatives. Each of those
    witness statements have been  read  over  to  the  applicant  with  the
    assistance of an Amharic interpreter. In reaching my decision,  I  have
    carefully considered the content of each of those statements.


The applicant's case


14. The applicant explains that he was taken to Germany by  other  Eritrean
    asylum-seekers and that he was encountered by  the  authorities  there,
    who  fingerprinted  him.  The  applicant  states  that  there  was   no
    interpreter provided when he gave his personal details and that he  was
    not age assessed in Germany.


15. The applicant says that an incorrect identity was assigned to him, that
    of [AG] born in 1998 and his attempt to persuade the police officer  to
    amend the record was fruitless. The applicant is unable  to  state  for
    how long he remained in Germany. He maintains that his identity  is  AY
    born in 2001.


16. I have also had regard to the witness statements made by Mr Mc Cafferty
    as well as Mr Daniel Smith, a senior  caseworker  at  Young  Roots.   I
    shall consider  the  evidence  of  the  applicant  and  each  of  these
    witnesses, who gave oral evidence before  me  in  my  analysis  of  the
    evidence that follows.








The respondent's case


17. The respondent relies upon  the  age  assessment  carried  out  between
    August 2018 and December 2018 and signed off  by  two  social  workers,
    during January 2019; a witness statement from a social  worker,  Nicola
    Kell, as well as other material, including documents received from  the
    German authorities and extracts from Facebook.


    The hearing


18. Mr Campbell made an application to admit further evidence in  the  form
    of an additional witness statement from Ms  Kell,  the  social  worker,
    dated 10 February 2020; social media material; German  court  documents
    regarding AG and a photograph provided by the  German  authorities.  He
    advised me that the judgment had previously been  disclosed,  evidenced
    by the applicant's response to it in his fifth  witness  statement.  Mr
    Campbell argued that the opposition  of  the  applicant  went  only  to
    weight and not to admission.


19. Ms Davies confirmed that the judgment was disclosed previously and that
    there was no objection to its admission. Other exhibits  to  Ms  Kell's
    statement had previously been seen and responded to. The objection  was
    owing to the late production of a photograph (NK5), a series of  social
    media comments and Ms Kell's  additional  witness  statement,  none  of
    which was previously disclosed.


20. While noting that Ms Kell sought documents from the German  authorities
    after the advocates meeting on 29  January  2020,  I  nonetheless  gave
    permission for the additional documents to be admitted as I was of  the
    view that their omission would be prejudicial to the respondent's  case
    and that the Tribunal could be assisted by their consideration.


21. Ms Davies mentioned that she had met the applicant for the  first  time
    on 12 February 2020 and because  she  would  not  be  sure  if  he  was
    becoming distressed, Mr Smith had agreed to alert her  if  he  saw  any
    such signs. While noting Mr Campbell's preference that  Mr  Smith  give
    his evidence first, I agreed that the applicant  should  be  the  first
    witness, with Mr Smith remaining in the  hearing  room  throughout  and
    that this amounted  to  a  reasonable  adjustment,  given  the  medical
    evidence provided.


22. The applicant gave evidence over the course of  the  two  days  of  the
    hearing, with the assistance of an interpreter. It  was  apparent  that
    the applicant was experiencing significant distress during the  hearing
    and Mr Campbell is to be commended for the patient and sensitive way he
    carried out his cross-examination.


23. The interventions of Mr Smith were also  of  great  assistance  to  the
    Tribunal, which led to frequent breaks for the applicant's  benefit.  I
    also heard evidence from Mr McCafferty and Mr Smith on the  second  day
    of the hearing as well as submissions from the representatives.  I have
    considered all the evidence taken, the submissions as well as  all  the
    evidence before me in coming to my conclusion  as  to  the  applicant's
    age.





The legal framework


24. Where the age assessment of the local authority is in  dispute,  it  is
    for the Tribunal or Court to reach its  own  assessment  of  age  as  a
    matter of fact. It was recognised by Lady Hale in R (A) -v- Croydon LBC
    [2009] UKSC 8 that this was not a task without difficulty:


         "But the question whether a person is a "child" is a different kind
         of question. There is  a  right  or  a  wrong  answer.  It  may  be
         difficult to determine what that answer is. The decision-makers may
         have to do their  best  on  the  basis  of  less  than  perfect  or
         conclusive evidence. But that is true of  many  questions  of  fact
         which regularly come before the courts. That does not prevent  them
         from being questions for the courts rather than for other kinds  of
         decision-makers.".


25. In R (B) -v- Merton LBC [2003] EHHC 1689, the  following  guidance  was
    given by Stanley Burnton J, as to the correct approach to that task:


         "the assessment of age in borderline cases is a  difficult  matter,
         but it is not complex. It is not an issue which  requires  anything
         approaching a trial, and judicialisation of the process  is  in  my
         judgement to be avoided. It is a matter  which  may  be  determined
         informally, provided safeguards of minimum standards of enquiry and
         of fairness are adhered to."


          "I do not think it is helpful to apply concepts of onus  of  proof
         to the assessment of age by local authorities. Unlike  cases  under
         section 55 of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,
         there is in the present context no legislative provision placing an
         onus of proof on the applicant. The local authority must  make  its
         assessment on the material available to and obtained  by  it.  This
         should be no predisposition,  divorced  from  the  information  and
         evidence available to  the  local  authority,  to  assume  that  an
         applicant is an adult, or conversely that he is a child..."


26. In determining the applicant's age, the Tribunal  is  not  confined  to
    choose between the positions of the parties; R (W) v London Borough  of
    Croydon [2012] EWHC 1130 [� 3].  The nature of the  Tribunal's  inquiry
    under the Children Act 1989 is inquisitorial, R  (CJ)  v  Cardiff  City
    Council [2011] EWCA Civ 1590 [� 21].  As for as how it goes about  this
    inquiry, the Tribunal must decide the applicant's age on the balance of
    probability:

           "Where the issue is whether the Applicant is  a  child  for  the
           purposes of the Children Act it seems to me that the application
           of a legal burden is not the  correct  approach.   There  is  no
           hurdle which the Applicant must overcome.  The court will decide
           whether, on the balance of probability, the Applicant was or was
           not at the material time  a  child.   The  court  will  not  ask
           whether the local authority has established on  the  balance  of
           probabilities that the Applicant was an adult; nor will  it  ask
           whether  the  Applicant  has  established  on  the  balance   of
           probabilities that he is a child."

Analysis of the evidence


27.  As  emphasised  from  the  outset,  when  assessing  the   applicant's
    credibility, I have been particularly  mindful  of  the  report  of  Mr
    McCafferty and the diagnoses made. I  have  had  regard  to  the  Joint
    Presidential Guidance Note No.2 of 2010: Child,  Vulnerable  Adult  and
    Sensitive Applicant Guidance, and  my  assessment  of  the  applicant's
    credibility has been considered in the round, taking due account of the
    medical evidence.


28. In determining the applicant's age and date of birth, I have considered
    all the evidence before me and submissions  made  in  the  round,  even
    where not referred to directly.


29. It is convenient to begin with an examination  of  the  age  assessment
    report prepared by the two social workers employed by  the  respondent.
    In reaching their decision, the social  workers  drew  upon  their  own
    observations  of  the  applicant  during  the   age   assessment,   the
    information he was able to provide to them, information from notes  and
    information  obtained  from  other   sources   including   the   German
    authorities.


30. From the analysis of the information provided,  the  reasoning  of  the
    social workers that led them to conclude that the applicant  is  likely
    to be over the age he  has  claimed,  is  founded  upon  the  following
    factors;


            i) A discrepancy regarding the applicant's age at the  time  his
               father died;


           ii) An inconsistency as to whether  the  applicant  travelled  to
               Sudan by car or lorry;


          iii) The applicant's lack of knowledge of his age  on  arrival  in
               Italy or Austria


           iv) A failure to mention events in Germany


            v) Issues raised by Facebook accounts


           vi) That the applicant is an adult  Ethiopian  national,  whom  I
               refer to as "AG."


31. The social workers concluded that the information  from  German  Social
    Care Services showed that the applicant was cared for by  them  between
    specific dates in 2015 and 2018 and that he used the name AG  and  said
    that he was an Ethiopian national with a date of birth of  21  February
    1998.


32. The applicant, during his oral evidence, disagreed with  a  significant
    amount of what was attributed to him in the Age Assessment document and
    stated that he was prevented from speaking by the interpreter, that  he
    was rendered very little in  the  way  of  assistance  by  the  Refugee
    Council observer, that he  was  asked  questions  in  a  confusing  and
    unstructured manner and that he was distressed throughout.


33. Mr Campbell made the following submission regarding the Age  Assessment
    document. He recognised that it was not a verbatim record of  what  was
    said and that there were no contemporaneous notes. He contended that it
    was   natural   there   would   be   an   element   of    paraphrasing,
    misinterpretation and mis-recording. Nonetheless, he argued that it was
    not credible that what has been recorded was so  wrong.   Acknowledging
    the applicant's written and oral evidence that the interpreter was  not
    listening, was on Barnet's side  and  no-one  was  supporting  him,  Mr
    Campbell argued that the Age Assessment was  conducted  by  experienced
    social workers and there was nothing to suggest that it was  oppressive
    or that the applicant raised concerns  regarding  the  conduct  of  the
    interpreter.  He  contended  that  the  age  assessment  recorded   the
    opposite, describing the applicant as energetic and happy; that he  was
    offered breaks,  water  and  supported  by  someone  from  the  Refugee
    Council.


34. Mr Campbell acknowledged that the alleged inconsistency  regarding  the
    applicant's age when he left Eritrea was relatively minor and could  be
    explained away by misinterpretation, the applicant's error or that  his
    response had been wrongly recorded. He focused his  submission  on  the
    applicant not initially being forthcoming about having lived in Germany
    and providing varying accounts of how long he lived there.


35. I have carefully considered the content of the age assessment however I
    am prepared to attach very  little  weight  to  it  for  the  following
    reasons. The  applicant  attended  three  interviews  with  the  social
    workers, however there is no attempt within the age assessment document
    to attribute any of the responses he is said to have  provided  to  any
    particular date or indeed event. The compiler  of  the  age  assessment
    used varying tenses throughout. At many points the  phrase  "had  said"
    was used yet nowhere is it stated when the applicant  was  supposed  to
    have said something  and  in  what  context.  At  other  times  in  the
    assessment, the present tense  was  used,  and  comparisons  were  made
    between differing responses made by the applicant at  different  times,
    yet there is no indication whether the applicant made these  statements
    during  the  various  age  assessment  interviews   or   during   other
    interactions with the local authority.


36. I am not assisted by the fact that the age assessment is unsupported by
    any contemporaneous notes and no explanation has been provided for this
    omission. The statements of Ms Kell do not assist. The  age  assessment
    provides no narrative as to questions and answers  and  therefore  even
    were the  respondent  correct  in  its  recording  of  the  applicant's
    responses, it would have been helpful to know precisely what  questions
    were put to him and when. There is also no  indication  that  the  ADCS
    guidance was observed regarding the taking of detailed  written  notes,
    the retention of those notes  and  their  production  for  age  dispute
    hearings.


37. There is no indication in the  respondent's  records  of  any  concerns
    regarding the applicant's age. It was only as a  result  of  commencing
    the age assessment process, that evidence  came  to  light  as  to  the
    applicant's residence in Germany. Yet, in the age assessment  document,
    a  substantial  amount  of  adverse  comment  is  made  regarding   the
    applicant's physical appearance and demeanour, with the social  workers
    concluding he looked much older than his claimed age.  It  appears  odd
    that this point was never taken previously, if it was  considered  that
    the applicant resembled a young adult. In any event, the ADCS  guidance
    is that physical appearance is an unreliable indicator of age.


38. The assessing social  workers  did  not  provide  their  experience  of
    conducting age assessments. It is the case that Ms Kell mentions in her
    witness statement that she achieved a first-class degree  in  2016  and
    that she started work at  Barnet  in  June  2018,  shortly  before  the
    respondent began working with the applicant.  I  find  that  this  very
    employment is unlikely to be sufficient that it  could  be  classed  as
    "experience  of  working  with  children  and  young  people,  and   of
    undertaking assessments of children in need" as recommended in page  12
    of the ADCS guidance. No information is provided at  all  regarding  Ms
    O'Neill, the other assessor.


39. The respondent's failure  to  provide  the  written  notes,  which  the
    applicant believed were being taken, has prevented him from being  able
    to fully address the concerns raised in the age assessment.


40. It is a matter of concern that the respondent,  according  to  the  CLA
    review of 31 July 2018, elected to carry  out  the  age  assessment  as
    "standard good practice procedure" and for no other  reason.  The  ADCS
    guidance states that they should be carried out  only  where  there  is
    reason to doubt the claimed age.


41. There are indications in the  body  of  the  age  assessment  that  the
    applicant was distressed, when traumatic events were  being  discussed,
    particularly regarding the death of his mother. In the respondent's CLA
    records it is noted that the applicant cried, fell to the floor, struck
    himself and ran out of the room during the age  assessment.  Yet  these
    observations, the applicant's mental  health  and  traumatic  incidents
    were  disregarded  in  the  conclusions  of  the  age  assessment.  The
    applicant was diagnosed with PTSD shortly after the age assessment  was
    concluded, it being recorded that the most distressing  event  was  the
    death of the applicant's mother. It is worth mentioning that the  first
    witness statement of Mr McCafferty, who  first  saw  the  applicant  in
    March 2019, remarks that the applicant was avoidant of difficult topics
    which caused flashbacks or other traumatic responses.


42. Mr Campbell argued that the applicant was supported by  an  appropriate
    adult from the Refugee Council during the age  assessment,  yet  it  is
    notable that there is no evidence from that organisation  at  all,  let
    alone to show that the applicant was adequately  supported  during  the
    interviews.


43. The first  three  of  the  specific  reasons  concerns  raised  in  the
    conclusion of the age assessment are woefully insufficient to undermine
    the applicant's account as to his age and history. Owing to the lack of
    notes, there is no reliable evidence that the applicant said any of the
    statements attributed to him.  Even  if  there  were  discrepancies  or
    omissions, his age when he left Eritrea, the type of motor  vehicle  he
    used to travel to Sudan and his age on arrival  in  Italy  and  Austria
    relate to matters, all of which occurred when he was  a  child  by  all
    accounts; and in relation to Italy, is a source of trauma.


44. The applicant's suggestion that he  was  misunderstood  either  by  the
    interpreter or the assessors is not an unreasonable one in the light of
    the poor records available.


45. A further issue raised in the age assessment relates to the applicant's
    account of his time in Germany. In that document it  is  asserted  that
    the applicant attempted to deny that he had been  in  Germany  and  had
    given discrepant responses when pressed on the  subject.  As  indicated
    above, there are no notes as to  what  questions  were  asked  or  what
    responses were given on any of the occasions  when  the  applicant  was
    interviewed. By contrast, there is documentary  evidence  showing  that
    the applicant voluntarily informed the Home Office in his Unaccompanied
    Minor Statement of Evidence Form, submitted in September 2018  that  he
    had been fingerprinted in Germany and that he had lived there for  some
    time. In addition,  it  can  be  seen  from  the  applicant's  SEF  and
    interview, that he provided a wholly consistent  account  including  of
    his age, family and nationality.


46. There  is  no  indication  that  the  respondent  sought,  obtained  or
    considered the Home Office evidence prior to a conclusion being reached
    on the applicant's age.  On the contrary,  the  respondent  erroneously
    informed the Independent Reviewing Officer on 22 January 2019, that the
    Home Office were not aware that the applicant  had  claimed  asylum  in
    Germany prior to  granting  him  status.  Furthermore,  in  her  second
    witness statement Ms Kell repeated that the applicant failed to  notify
    the Home Office of the same  during  his  "screening  interview."   The
    applicant did not undergo a screening interview because he was accepted
    to be an unaccompanied minor and the questions  typically  asked  at  a
    screening interview formed part of the Unaccompanied Minor  SEF,  which
    he answered in full, as well as providing a detailed witness statement.
    In any event, the applicant was fingerprinted by the Home  Office  when
    he sought asylum and the Eurodac search carried out prior to a decision
    being made established that the applicant  had  been  fingerprinted  in
    Germany on 20 April 2015. Therefore it cannot be  said  that  the  Home
    Office was misled or ill-informed.


47. It is the case that the applicant is unable to state when he arrived in
    or how long he had remained in Germany, this is also the case for other
    countries he has either  transited  or  remained  in.  Given  that  the
    applicant was bereaved, subject to forced labour in Libya and the  boat
    he was in capsized in Italy, it is perhaps unsurprising that  owing  to
    these traumatic events, he is unable to recall dates and  durations  of
    his journey to the UK. The age assessment amounts to poor evidence that
    the applicant has attempted to conceal his time in Germany.


48. I have carefully considered the extracts from Facebook, in the name AG,
    which  are  relied  upon  by  the  respondent.  I  have  considered  Mr
    Campbell's submission that the photographs show  the  applicant  having
    friends and a social life in Germany, which contradicts his account  of
    being seriously unhappy. This is not a particularly strong point.


49. I find that I am able to place very limited weight  upon  the  Facebook
    material for the following reasons.  Firstly, there is  no  account  by
    the respondent as to how the photographs and comments relied upon  were
    identified  and  obtained.  Secondly,  the  majority  of   posts   were
    translated from a different language, yet the original posts  have  not
    been provided and thus  those  representing  the  applicant  have  been
    unable to verify the accuracy of the translation.


50. Thirdly, there are inconsistencies  between  the  "likes"  and  "loves"
    shown on the  photographs  and  the  posts  said  to  relate  to  those
    photographs and as such I am not satisfied that the posts relate to the
    photographs provided.  Fourthly, the  applicant  was  not  shown  these
    items during the age assessment process. Fifthly,  the  information  is
    far from complete, in that the photograph albums have not been produced
    and there is no evidence as to when the posts, some of which are  years
    old, were extracted. Sixthly, the  applicant  has  consistently  stated
    that the AG Facebook account was set up on his behalf because he had no
    telephone or computer when he was in Germany and that he has since  set
    up his own Facebook account in a different name.


51. Mr Campbell argued that if the applicant was assigned an incorrect name
    and age, it was unlikely  that  others  would  refer  to  him  by  that
    identity. I do not accept that submission.  The  only  reliable  social
    media evidence that the applicant was referred to as AG in  Germany  by
    anyone other than the German authorities is the  photograph  posted  by
    the Jean Paul charity. I consider  it  more  likely  than  not  that  a
    charity would record the applicant by the identity assigned to  him  by
    the German authorities and therefore this evidence does  not  undermine
    the applicant's claim as to his identity. I am not satisfied  that  the
    remaining Facebook evidence establishes that  the  applicant  was  also
    referred to as AG by his peers in Germany.


52. The respondent has made strenuous efforts to obtain  evidence  relating
    to the applicant's time in Germany, right up until close to the eve  of
    the hearing. Having considered all that material,  I  accept  that  the
    applicant was resident in Germany  for  a  protracted  period  of  time
    between 2015 and  2018  and  that  he  was  registered  by  the  German
    authorities in the name of AG with a date of birth of 21 February 1998.
    Nonetheless, for reasons set out below, I accept that the applicant has
    provided his correct details to the UK authorities.


53. The respondent relies on a transcript dated 27 March 2018 and  judgment
    from the Bavarian Administrative Court of Bayreuth dated 6  April  2018
    as evidence that the applicant is an  Ethiopian  national  aged  nearly
    twenty-one. I am not  satisfied  that  this  material  relates  to  the
    applicant for the following reasons.


54. Firstly, the evidence of the  complainant,  AG,  was  that  he  entered
    Germany on 8 March 2015  and  was  apprehended  the  same  day  by  the
    authorities, whereas the applicant was apprehended and fingerprinted in
    Germany on 20 April 2015. While the asylum claims of the  claimant  and
    the applicant were both lodged on 21 April 2015, I find  this  evidence
    does no more than add some credence to the applicant's claim  that  his
    case was confused with that of AG.


55. Secondly, the complainant in the German proceedings gave an account  of
    turning 18 years old in March 2017, which would give him  a  month  and
    year of birth of March 1999. It has been the respondent's case that the
    applicant was born in February 1998, over a year earlier. There  is  no
    reference to the latter date of birth in the transcript or judgment.


56. Thirdly, the findings of the German court demonstrate that there are no
    similarities  and  numerous  differences  between  the  facts  of   the
    applicant's case and that of AG. In particular, AG is  Ethiopian,  with
    three siblings including one in the UK and his parents were alive  with
    his father being active in politics. The judge  accepted  that  AG  was
    active, at a low level,  in  Ethiopian  politics  during  his  time  in
    Germany, albeit it was not  accepted  that  he  had  been  arrested  in
    Ethiopia as claimed. I would add that the oral evidence of Mr Smith was
    that the applicant had showed no interest in politics in the UK, unlike
    many  Eritrean  and  Ethiopian  young  people  who  used  Young  Roots'
    services. In the case of AG there was no reference to an age assessment
    being carried out, a fear of military service nor mention of  traumatic
    events during the journey to Europe or mental health problems.


57.  I  also  take  into  account  Ms  Davies'  submissions  regarding  the
    respondent's treatment of the  German  material,  including  that  this
    material was not shown to  the  applicant  during  the  age  assessment
    process and that it was not verified with the Home Office  as  required
    by the 2015  ADCS  and  Home  Office  Joint  Working  Guidance  on  Age
    Assessment. In addition, it can  be  seen  from  the  asylum  interview
    record that the applicant was tested in depth regarding  his  knowledge
    of Eritrea.  The  Home  Office  were  satisfied  with  the  applicant's
    responses,  when  compared  to  country  information  as  to   culture,
    geography and language and concluded that he was a national of  Eritrea
    and recognised him as a refugee on that basis. That much is clear  from
    the Asylum Grant Minute. The conclusion in the age assessment that  the
    applicant was an Ethiopian national was reached in the absence  of  the
    Home Office records or reference to country material.


58. The respondent's position as to the  applicant's  identity  has  varied
    during  these  proceedings.  The  age  assessment  concluded  that  the
    applicant was an Ethiopian national aged twenty at the  time.  Yet  the
    respondent's Summary Grounds of  Resistance  stated  as  follows,  "The
    claimant is a national of  Eritrea."  Whereas  in  her  second  witness
    statement dated 10 February 2020, Ms Kell concludes, "in the  light  of
    the  differing  information  he  has  provided  it  is  felt  that  the
    Applicants (sic) true identity is unknown."


59. I have had regard to the fact that the applicant  received  a  decision
    from the Competent  Authority,  accepting  that  there  are  reasonable
    grounds to believe that he has been a  victim  of  modern  slavery,  in
    relation to events in Libya. A conclusive grounds decision was not made
    because, according to his representative, the applicant was  recognised
    as a refugee and there was no benefit to him of  proceeding  with  this
    aspect of the claim.


60. I now consider the evidence relating to the  applicant's  mental  state
    which dates back to 30 June 2018, when he met with a social  worker  at
    Haringey Council. The notes of that meeting record that  the  applicant
    was having difficulty sleeping, was experiencing flashbacks related  to
    the death of his mother and was in pain  because  of  being  physically
    abused in Libya. The social worker recorded that they  were  "concerned
    about (the applicant's) emotional wellbeing and mental health" as  well
    as the impact of trauma.     A Child and Family Assessment was  carried
    out on the applicant on 2 July 2018 by Haringey  council  who  recorded
    that the applicant was "a vulnerable  young  person  and  will  require
    ongoing support not only to settle in the UK but to  also  address  the
    emotional and psychological issues as a result of his past."


61. The applicant was referred to Barnet Council on 3  July  2018.  In  its
    Child and Family Assessment, Barnet record that the applicant found  it
    difficult to discuss his journey and the death of  his  mother,  noting
    that the applicant "can get tearful and  is  finding  it  difficult  to
    sleep." It was also noted that he may have  an  underlying  trauma  for
    which he would require support.  The  said  assessment  further  stated
    that the applicant's age was not  disputed,  that  he  was  of  average
    height for a person of his age and that he required support with  self-
    care skills such as cooking and budgeting, which he had yet to learn.


62. On 25  July  2018,  the  applicant  was  seen  for  an  initial  health
    assessment by the Oak Lodge Medical  Centre.  The  applicant  told  the
    doctor who examined him that he was suffering  from  poor  sleep,  poor
    appetite,  palpitations,  headaches,  sweating  and   flashbacks.   The
    applicant  also  told  the  assessing  doctor  that  he  did  not  like
    discussing his experiences  and  would  prefer  it  if  they  were  not
    mentioned. The doctor further recorded that  the  applicant's  physical
    appearance, including pubertal was appropriate for his age.


63. The applicant mentioned his experiences in Libya to his GP on 29 August
    2019. The following is recorded in the GP's notes, the applicant stated
    that he "was often hit and also exposed to the death of  others  around
    him. Have left  him  with  depression/anxiety  (especially  in  crowded
    places). Keyworker with him states he has been  known  to  hit  himself
    during outbreak of anxiety..."


64. The respondent referred the  applicant  to  the  Child  and  Adolescent
    Mental Health Service (CAMHS) on 5 September 2018. The  referral  form,
    completed by Ms Kell, stated that the applicant  "is  an  unaccompanied
    minor...showing signs of emotional trauma he cannot  sleep  and  breaks
    down when talking about his mother dying in the  Sahara  Desert  during
    their journey. (the applicant) reports being imprisoned  in  Libya  and
    beaten, he has deep scars on his legs from this...during age assessment
    had slapped his face hard and then run out of the room.  He  was  found
    slouched on the floor crying...behaviour can be erratic i.e he presents
    as not being able to concentrate, fidgeting..."


65. The applicant attended his first appointment with  CAMHS  on  12  March
    2019.  A  letter  from  Stewart  McCafferty,  the  applicant's   Family
    Therapist, dated 28 March 2019  states  that  the  applicant  has  been
    diagnosed with PTSD and that he  has  experienced  "multiple  traumatic
    events"  which  are  "highly  arousing  and  disturbing  for  him."  Mr
    McCafferty mentioned that he planned to treat  the  applicant  for  the
    following 3 months, in the first instance. On 9 May 2019, Mr McCafferty
    wrote to state that the applicant's treatment was ongoing, in  that  he
    was being seen on a weekly basis. In addition, reference  was  made  to
    the therapeutic work being done to "help (the applicant) integrate  his
    fragmented recall of traumatic events..." The applicant continued to be
    treated by CAMHS until October 2019, when he ceased to become  eligible
    for services.  There have been delays in transferring  the  applicant's
    case to adult services and as of the date of the hearing, the applicant
    was still waiting to be seen.


66. Mr McCafferty attended the hearing  and  gave  evidence.  He  has  also
    provided a witness statement for these proceedings, dated  21  November
    2019. In that statement, he states that he originally  qualified  as  a
    social worker but ceased practising in 1995 and that he is a  qualified
    systemic psychotherapist. He has taught extensively in his  field,  has
    worked in multi-disciplinary mental health teams  since  1987  and  has
    assessed over 1,000 children and young people. He has never prepared or
    given evidence in a disputed age case previously.


67. Mr McCafferty confirmed in his  statement  that  the  applicant  has  a
    "complex and chronic form" of PTSD as well as non-organic insomnia  and
    clarifies that he always discusses cases and diagnoses with the  team's
    consultant psychiatrist. Mr McCafferty considers that the applicant  is
    aged eighteen and gives several reasons in his statement, which include
    that the applicant was referred as he was considered to be a child, his
    reactions to information and events, his presentation and the  time  it
    took for him to be able to engage  in  therapy.  It  is  recorded  that
    between  March  and  September  2019,  the  applicant  received  weekly
    treatment for PTSD in the form of trauma-focused Cognitive  Behavioural
    Therapy (CBT) and Eye Movement Desensitisation and Reprocessing (EMDR).
    The insomnia, described as longstanding, was to be treated with tuition
    of good sleep hygiene and a melatonin prescription.


68.  The  applicant's  symptoms  were  summarised  by  Mr   McCafferty   as
    forgetfulness owing to trauma and  exhaustion  owing  to  insomnia.  He
    described the applicant's recall as  initially  "non-chronological  and
    fragmentary," but that he was eventually able to recount his story in a
    "somewhat chronological" order.  Mr McCafferty expected those  symptoms
    to resolve over the course of  the  following  year  if  treatment  was
    continued. His  statement  was  supported  by  the  discharge  summary,
    referral letters to adult mental health services  and  the  applicant's
    clinical notes.


69. Mr McCafferty  expanded  on  his  witness  statement,  in  response  to
    questions from both counsel and his evidence including  the  following.
    The applicant had never given any indication that his mother was alive;
    and he was unable to talk about her to begin  with,  without  distress.
    The applicant had not indicated that he was older than his claimed  age
    or that he had siblings whose whereabouts were known. The applicant had
    been seen by one of Mr McCafferty's colleagues who was also of the view
    that the applicant was an adolescent and suitable for their service. He
    explained  that  if  the  service  had  concerns   that   someone   was
    masquerading as a child, as had happened once or twice, they  would  be
    advised to restrict the service. In the applicant's case, as there  was
    a dispute over  his  age,  Mr  McCafferty  had  to  discuss  that  with
    management. The conclusion of those discussions was that the  applicant
    was not a risk to children because  of  his  age  on  the  "NHS  Spine"
    considered with his demeanour.


70. Mr McCafferty said that he had worked with many  unaccompanied  asylum-
    seeking children as well as  large  numbers  of  teenagers  of  various
    ethnicities.  The applicant had not mentioned political activities  and
    all the discussion had surrounded his traumatic experiences. During one
    session, the applicant had listed his experiences in order of distress,
    the greatest being the death of his mother.  Each  of  the  applicant's
    traumatic experiences elicited the necessary  features  of  PTSD,  that
    there were three sources of trauma resulted in the diagnosis of Complex
    PTSD.


71. It was put to Mr McCafferty that the respondent's  case  was  that  the
    applicant's mother was alive. In response, he  explained  that  in  the
    early days of therapy, the mere mention of the applicant's mother  made
    him "freeze" preventing progress and therefore Mr McCafferty  initially
    avoided the topic until through the course of work, the  applicant  was
    able to talk about that experience. He considered that it was  unlikely
    that the  applicant  could  have  had  the  ability  to  portray  these
    circumstances if they were not true.


72. When asked by Ms Davies if consideration had been given as  to  whether
    the account was fabricated, Mr McCafferty said that that the team  also
    looked  at  arousal,  physiological  change,  posture,  demeanour   and
    hypervigilance which can take  different  forms,  a  common  one  being
    insomnia  like  in  the  applicant's  case.  In  addition,  there   was
    intrusiveness observed during the first discussion of  the  mother,  in
    that he was observed to be fighting back against overwhelming recall.


73. Mr McCafferty also spoke of the impact on the  applicant's  daily  life
    which seemed to be considerable. He said  that  such  impact  was  more
    prevalent in  young  people  and  in  the  applicant's  case,  included
    terrifying flashbacks, going completely blank or forgetting everything,
    which had happened in some sessions. Mr McCafferty  confirmed  that  he
    discussed all his sessions with the senior consultant.


74. When asked whether he could comment on what was said by the  respondent
    about the applicant's presentation during the series of age  assessment
    interviews, with particular regard to his varying recall of  detail  of
    some events and not others, Mr McCafferty replied that the  applicant's
    recall was "quite limited" at first and that  he  entered  a  state  of
    distress regarding a variety of topics. Owing  to  that,  other  issues
    were  discussed  and  at  first  the  applicant's  recall   was   "non-
    chronological, partial and  fragmented."  The  applicant's  ability  to
    recall events came and went and varied from week to week. Mr McCafferty
    considered it unhelpful for young people to be asked too many questions
    at a time as the process could be confused and they might  disassociate
    and push matters back into their minds. There was a need to  work  with
    them and ask one or two questions and process them instead  of  pushing
    on.


75. Mr McCafferty became aware at the hearing on 13 February 2020, that  no
    adult services had been provided and he was concerned.  His  experience
    of working with young people and adults was that if they were only part
    of the way through the work, things unravel because the person  is  not
    inoculated from trauma.  Mr  McCafferty  had  been  hoping  that  adult
    services would pick up the applicant's case rapidly and if they had, he
    considered  that  his  mental  state  would  be   much   improved.   Mr
    McCafferty's understanding was that things had  reverted  to  how  they
    were, and he thought  that  daily  life  was  very  difficult  for  the
    applicant, particularly in terms of giving evidence. The applicant  had
    told Mr McCafferty outside of the hearing that  his  sleeplessness  had
    deteriorated. I should add that Mr McCafferty was not present when  the
    applicant was giving evidence.


76. When asked by Mr Campbell whether the impact of trauma  could  lead  to
    loss of recall of events subsequent to the trauma, Mr  McCafferty  said
    that it was his experience that part  of  the  process  of  suppressing
    unwanted memories had the effect of  suppressing  wanted  memories  and
    could  lead  to  a  person  becoming   forgetful,   particularly   when
    accompanied by  nightmares  and  flashbacks.  In  general,  there  were
    different forms of amnesia and it was  likely  that  there  were  other
    things forgotten. Mr McCafferty had worked with other  people  who  had
    forgotten things which appeared benign. Otherwise Mr  McCafferty  stood
    by his written evidence including the examples he gave  as  to  why  he
    considered that the applicant was aged seventeen at  the  time  of  his
    treatment by CAMHS.  Mr Campbell's sole submission on  Mr  McCafferty's
    evidence was that the examples given of the applicant's behaviour being
    of someone much younger could equally show immaturity.


77. I have considered all the medical evidence in the  round.  I  attach  a
    substantial amount of weight to that evidence and find that it provides
    a reliable account of the applicant's mental state between the time  of
    his arrival in the United Kingdom in July 2018 and  October  2019  when
    his CAMHS treatment ceased. There was no challenge to  the  suitability
    of Mr McCafferty as an expert witness nor to the content of his written
    or oral evidence. I further found the evidence of Mr McCafferty  to  be
    detailed, plausible and consistent with the medical records. It was not
    disputed by Mr Campbell that the applicant's traumatic experiences were
    sources of distress, however it is notable  that  no  such  experiences
    were raised in the claim of AG according to  the  German  documents.  I
    therefore take  this  evidence  into  consideration  in  terms  of  the
    applicant's likely mental state at  the  time  of  the  age  assessment
    interviews and during his oral evidence before me.


78. The applicant's claim to currently be 18 years old is supported by  the
    evidence of Daniel Smith, a Senior Caseworker at Young  Roots,  who  is
    the applicant's Advocate.  Mr Smith provided a witness statement  dated
    18 November 2019, in which he stated that he first met the applicant on
    15 April 2019 and since then has seen him on at least a  weekly  basis.
    Mr Smith accompanies the applicant to appointments,  assists  him  with
    practical tasks and has observed the applicant take part in  activities
    organised by Young Roots  such  as  youth  club  parties  and  football
    matches. Mr Smith's opinion of the applicant's age is based on his  own
    experience, of more than two years' duration,  of  working  with  young
    people from East Africa in his current and previous  roles  undertaking
    refugee  casework.  His  view  is  that  the  applicant's  "appearance,
    demeanour and behaviour" are consistent with an age of 18. He  gives  a
    number  of  examples  in  relation  to  the  applicant's  response   to
    situations to support his view.


79. In addition, Mr Smith comments that to his knowledge and  according  to
    the records of Young Roots, the applicant's friends and associates  are
    all aged 17 or 18 and from East Africa.  Mr Smith has prepared evidence
    for use in only one other age dispute case. The records of the majority
    of the applicant's contact with Young Roots were annexed to Mr  Smith's
    statement.


80. During his oral evidence, Mr Smith stated that the applicant had  never
    given any indication that he had a mother who was  alive,  siblings,  a
    brother in the UK, that he was not Eritrean or that he  was  misleading
    the authorities about his age. Nor was Mr Smith aware of the  applicant
    having an interest in Ethiopian politics. By contrast he was aware that
    a lot of Young Roots' clients were Ethiopians with political protection
    claims, however the applicant was never involved in those discussions.


81. Mr Smith explained that Young Roots mostly worked with  16  to  19-year
    olds and that the available activities were targeted at that age range.
    Examples of activities being board games and cooking. Most of the young
    people disengaged from these activities from 19 or  20  years  old.  Mr
    Smith was of the view that the applicant was  a  good  fit  with  these
    activities, in that he was a longstanding attendant who attended  youth
    club activities and parties. Mr Smith also assisted the  Tribunal  with
    understanding the Facebook documents relied upon by the respondent.


82. In response to questions posed in cross-examination, Mr Smith confirmed
    that he had a passion in working with refugees. He stated that  he  was
    still working with the applicant as at the time of the hearing and  had
    probably met with him on more than 50 occasions. Mr Smith was  able  to
    expand on the examples he had given  in  his  statement  regarding  the
    applicant's ability to undertake tasks for  himself  and  he  explained
    that a lot of the support he provided  was  reassurance  and  providing
    emotional support to him.


83. Generally, Mr Smith assisted the applicant with his first attendance at
    various appointments, such as at  the  GP  or  attending  his  hearing,
    following which the applicant could go alone on the next  occasion.  In
    terms   of   the   applicant's   concerns   regarding   his   temporary
    accommodation, Mr Smith explained that he had visited it and noted that
    the applicant's room was grim and bare. The applicant had told Mr Smith
    that he was fearful of the other residents because they were much older
    and had been aggressive to him. Mr Smith felt that  the  applicant  was
    seen as an easy target and was vulnerable living there. He  had  raised
    these issues regularly with the council. Mr Smith confirmed that he was
    currently working with four or five people who were being age  assessed
    and had worked with around ten in total.


84. When it was suggested that he would always  support  young  people  and
    take their side, Mr Smith responded that he would not be able to  write
    a witness statement if he did not believe that the person  was  of  the
    age claimed. While Young Roots would support their service users,  they
    would not provide a witness statement.  He  had  not  spoken  in  court
    before for an age disputed service user. There were other cases,  where
    Mr Smith did not know if he would be confident to speak  for  them.  He
    denied that he would find it hard to take a  neutral  view,  explaining
    that his opinion was based on the work he did with the applicant  in  a
    variety of environments on a regular basis over a long time.  Mr  Smith
    added that the applicant's age assessment case was the one he was  most
    confident about and that the applicant had never given  any  indication
    other than he was credible regarding his age and history.


85. Having had the opportunity of hearing the evidence of Mr Smith and that
    evidence having been tested in cross examination, I find that he  is  a
    truthful witness and that I can attach a moderate degree of  weight  to
    the view expressed by him as to the applicant's age and date of  birth.
    He has had the most contact as well the most recent  contact  with  the
    applicant compared to any other witness. That contact has been at least
    weekly over a period of around ten months and  Mr  Smith  has  provided
    detailed examples to support his evidence as to the applicant's age.  I
    accept his evidence that he would not be comfortable to support a  case
    where he had doubts as to a service user's age. Furthermore,  there  is
    no indication that the applicant has misled Mr Smith  and  indeed  this
    would be difficult to achieve given the extent of contact they have had
    over a protracted period of time and in a variety of circumstances.


86. I now consider the evidence of the applicant.  His presentation was not
    incongruent with the description of his mental  state  in  the  medical
    evidence from Mr McCafferty. He required many  breaks  because  he  was
    becoming distressed while giving his testimony. Mr Smith was  of  great
    assistance in helping to identify when the applicant required a  break.
    That distress exhibited  itself  by  the  applicant  becoming  tearful,
    disturbed and distractible throughout his evidence. I have  taken  into
    consideration the entirety of the applicant's written evidence  as  set
    out in his six witness statements as  well  as  his  oral  evidence  in
    considering whether there is anything within it, which  enables  me  to
    reach an informed view as to the applicant's age.


87. During examination-in-chief, the applicant's  evidence  was  consistent
    with his witness statements. His responses to questions posed in cross-
    examination including the following. The applicant agreed that  he  was
    apprehended in Germany by the police, but he could not recall the  date
    or location. He said that it was not until perhaps a year or 8  months'
    later that he understood that he had been registered with the  name  of
    AG and that he had argued that it was not his name. He had attended  an
    educational institution in Germany but unsure whether it was  a  school
    or a college.


88. The applicant said that he had been distressed and unhappy and that  he
    had not received the same assistance, including medical, in Germany  as
    he had in the UK. The applicant denied  saying  that  he  was  only  in
    Germany for  a  week  during  the  age  assessment.  He  described  the
    interview as very rushed, that he did not know what he was  saying  and
    that the assessors wanted to confuse him. Nor had he told the assessors
    that he had leave to remain refused in Germany.  The  applicant  denied
    that he had been provided water during the assessments, stating that he
    had to go outside to a water fountain.


89. When it was put to the applicant  that  he  became  angry  in  the  age
    assessment when he realised that the assessors knew  he  had  Facebook,
    the applicant denied this and said he was angry because  he  was  being
    asked about his  mother.  The  applicant  had  shown  them  his  mobile
    telephone when he was asked if he had Facebook and they  had  seen  his
    account in which he used the name  of  a  footballer  he  admired.  The
    applicant maintained that he told the assessors that he  had  lived  in
    Germany, that he had already told the Home Office  this  and  he  would
    have no reason to hide this information. The applicant  said  that  the
    name AG had been mistakenly used by everyone in  Germany  to  refer  to
    him.


90. The applicant became distressed during the hearing when describing  the
    age assessment interviews, stating that  they  were  going  "round  and
    round about my mum and I was  crying."  In  relation  to  the  Facebook
    accounts, the applicant clarified that the AG account was opened  by  a
    worker in Germany and that the applicant had set up an account  in  the
    name of 'AM', subsequently changed to the name of  the  footballer.  He
    had not changed the name to hide his  account  and  he  had  shown  the
    account to the social workers when they asked. The applicant could  not
    remember running for the Jean  Paul  charity  and  was  unsure  if  the
    picture was of him. At this point Ms Davies pointed out that comment on
    the post relating to that race had been translated and the post in  the
    original language had not been made available.


91. The applicant denied that he was trying to conceal his time in  Germany
    and added that the Home Office had not asked  him  about  his  time  in
    Germany when he was interviewed. The  applicant  was  shown  the  seven
    photographs said to have been taken from social media and it was put to
    him that these photos showed that he did not have an  unhappy  time  in
    Germany. The applicant  maintained  that  he  was  depressed  but  that
    nonetheless, he wanted to be among people.  He complained that  he  was
    unsupported during the age assessment  and  that  the  interpreter  was
    telling him to just listen. He did not get on with the interpreter  and
    was not offered water apart from on the first day out of three or  four
    interviews. The applicant described the person from the Refugee Council
    as elderly and silent. He could not recall attending a court hearing in
    Germany and nor could he recall the court judgment.


92. The applicant did  not  accept  that  he  had  a  brother  and  that  a
    photograph of the applicant with  another  male  was  of  him  and  his
    brother. He did not know who this person  was.  He  explained  that  he
    would not have been homeless or had to borrow money from an interpreter
    for food if he had a relative in the UK to help him.


93. During re-examination the applicant stated that he did  not  know  what
    leave to remain meant, that he had not had an age assessment in Germany
    and that he had a mobile telephone for the first time when he  came  to
    the UK. He had never used the  internet  to  contact  people  prior  to
    arriving in Germany and when he was in  Germany,  he  would  use  other
    people's devices to do so. Regarding the age assessment interviews, the
    applicant recalled that one of the assessors  was  making  notes  on  a
    "small paper." He was not shown the social media material and only  saw
    it via his solicitor. The  social  workers  had  never  shown  him  the
    documents from the German court.


94. The applicant was asked if he understood the difference between central
    government in the form of the Home Office and local government  in  the
    form  of  the  respondent.  He  replied  that  he  did  not,  and   his
    understanding was that the Home Office would look after him and he  had
    not realised that he would be passed elsewhere. The applicant  expanded
    on  the  reasons  why  he  had  been  upset  with  the  age  assessment
    interviews, stating that he felt like the  interpreter  was  supporting
    the local authority and was preventing him from speaking.


95. The applicant said that he had become confused after the interview  and
    taken the wrong bus because he was preoccupied with the interpreter not
    explaining what he was  saying.  He  described  the  social  worker,  a
    manager and the interpreter upsetting him "one on top of the other" and
    that he did not know what he was saying. He felt  very  bad  after  the
    interview, he had cried and could not eat when he  returned  home.  The
    social workers had not read over to the applicant what they had written
    apart  from  on  the  day  they  rejected  his  age  and  came  to  his
    accommodation.


96. The applicant presented in  a  distressed  manner  during  the  hearing
    despite being accompanied by his lawyers,  their  interpreter  and  his
    support worker as well  as  having  received  therapeutic  intervention
    until October  2019.  Despite  the  lengthy  cross-examination  of  the
    applicant, which took place over both days over  the  hearing,  no  new
    information emerged and his evidence was overwhelmingly consistent with
    that set out in his witness statements and Home  Office  documents.  He
    gave his evidence in a forthcoming  manner,  without  any  attempts  at
    hesitation or evasion. I am satisfied that his  evidence  was  credibly
    given, to the best of his ability.


97. I accept  that  it  is  likely  that  the  applicant  was  particularly
    vulnerable at the time of the age assessment  and  that  his  condition
    could well have been worse than currently, given the absence of support
    and that the assessment took place at a time  when  the  applicant  was
    still awaiting his first appointment with CAMHS.


98. As indicated above, there are no contemporaneous notes as to  what  was
    said at the age assessment and therefore it has  not  been  established
    that the applicant attempted to hide  information  or  gave  discrepant
    answers.


99. Should the comments  made  in  the  age  assessment  reflect  what  the
    applicant said, I  find  that  his  vulnerability,  together  with  his
    impression that he was unsupported and pressurised puts those  comments
    in context. Mr McCafferty's  description  of  the  applicant  having  a
    "fragmented recall of traumatic events" when  his  treatment  commenced
    and having forgotten issues including non-traumatic events,  approaches
    a  complete  answer  to  any  difficulties  the  applicant   may   have
    experienced in answering questions during the age assessment process.


100. In summary, the applicant has provided a  strongly  consistent  account
    regarding his history, since his arrival in  the  United  Kingdom.  His
    circumstances including his account of being an Eritrean national  were
    accepted  by  the  Home  Office,  having  been  tested  in   interview.
    Furthermore, he was  considered  to  be  a  minor  by  the  police  who
    encountered him, by Haringey social services, the  Home  Office,  CAMHS
    and Mr Smith, his key worker.  Even  the  respondent  had  no  concerns
    regarding the applicant's age and recorded that an age  assessment  was
    carried out only owing to a flawed understanding that  this  was  "good
    practice." As indicated above, I place very little weight  on  the  age
    assessment document or on the German court documents.


101.  Drawing  all  the  evidence  and  submissions  together  I  reach  the
    following conclusions.


        a. I am satisfied that the applicant is suffering  from  a  complex
           and chronic form of PTSD owing to multiple traumatic  events  as
           well as longstanding insomnia.


        b. I am satisfied that  the  applicant  presents  as  a  vulnerable
           person with a psychological profile and clinical history that is
           highly consistent with a person who has suffered different types
           of trauma


        c. I find that at the time the applicant arrived in the  UK  on  16
           June 2018, he was aged 16 years and 8 months.


        d. I conclude that the applicant is aged 18 years and 4  months  at
           the time of this hearing.


SUMMARY OF DECISION


102. It is determined that the applicant's date of birth is 21 October  2001
    and that he is currently aged 18.


Costs

    1. The applicant has been found to be the age  he  claims  and  he  has
       therefore been entirely successful in this judicial review.

    2. The respondent is to pay the applicant's  reasonable  costs,  to  be
       assessed if not agreed.




    Signed                                  Date: 20 March 2020


    Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara




