
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/00921/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 19 May 2014                                |On 17th June 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

                             mr sanjog kumar rai

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Nathan instructed by Howe & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
INTRODUCTION

 1. In my decision dated 2 April 2014 I set aside the determination of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing the appeal against the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer's decision dated 5 December 2012 to refuse the appellant  entry
    clearance to settle in the United Kingdom with his father as follows:

          1. "The appellant is a national of Nepal where he was born on  12
             December 1988.  He appeals with  permission  the  decision  of
             First-tier Tribunal Judge Mozolowski  who  had  dismissed  his
             appeal on Article 8  grounds  (the  only  grounds  relied  on)
             against the decision of the Entry Clearance  Officer  dated  5
             December 2012 refusing his application to settle in the United
             Kingdom as the adult dependent relative of his parents who now
             live here.

          2. The judge found that the family life between the appellant and
             his parents was not family life protected by Article 8 of  the
             Human Rights  Convention.   She  nevertheless  considered  the
             issue of proportionality on a hypothetical basis but  did  not
             consider in the circumstances that  the  "historic  injustice"
             done to  Gurkhas  was  sufficient  to  counteract  the  public
             interest argument in respect of "the maintenance of  fair  but
             firm immigration control".

          3. The grounds of challenge which led to the grant of  permission
             asserted that the judge had  erred  in  its  approach  to  the
             Article 8 considerations. Taking account  of  the  appellant's
             dependency it is argued the judge had erred in her approach to
             the  consideration  of  "historic  injustice"  when  assessing
             proportionality.  Permission to amend the grounds of appeal at
             the hearing was granted in the face of no opposition  from  Mr
             Saunders.  That amendment was in  terms  that  the  judge  had
             failed to consider as a starting point that  protected  family
             rights had been held to exist  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
             consideration of the appellant's appeal in  its  determination
             dated 4 October 2010.  Reliance  is  placed  on  the  Tribunal
             decision in Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702; [2003]  Imm  AR  1.
             It was further argued  that  the  appellant  continued  to  be
             financially dependent upon his sponsor in the United Kingdom.

          4. Mr Saunders acknowledged that the judge may have been in error
             in not following the approach set out in Devaseelan but he did
             not accept that the error was material having  regard  to  the
             time that  has  passed  since  the  earlier  decision.   After
             hearing argument on this aspect, I gave my decision  that  the
             judge had erred in her approach in not taking the  finding  of
             family life by  Judge  Adio  as  her  starting  point.   As  a
             consequence the evidence would need to be heard again in order
             to distil what was before Judge Adio  and  what  had  occurred
             since in the two years between the Tribunal's earlier decision
             and the decision under appeal dated December 2012.

          5. Mr Saunders accepted with reference to the decision in Ghising
             and Others (Gurkhas/BOCs: historic wrong; weight) [2013]  UKUT
             00567 (IAC) that the Secretary of State relied only  upon  the
             public interest as justification  for  interference  with  any
             family life that is established.  He was correct to do  so  as
             there is no indication otherwise in the reasons given  by  the
             Entry Clearance Officer  for  refusing  the  application.   It
             follows therefore that in the event that the appellant is able
             to establish that his family life remains as previously found,
             there is a real possibility that the appellant  could  succeed
             particularly in the light of the  observation  in  Ghising  at
             [60]:

                  "But, if the respondent is only relying  upon  the  public
                  interest described by the Court of Appeal at paragraph  41
                  of Gurung, then the weight to be  given  to  the  historic
                  injustice  will  normally  require  a  decision   in   the
                  appellant's favour".

          6. For these reasons I am satisfied that the determination of the
             First-tier Tribunal Judge requires to be set aside and remade.
              That remaking will be in the Upper Tribunal on 22 April  next
             when it is envisaged four witnesses will give evidence on  the
             appellant's behalf.

          7. Directions were given at  the  hearing  that  the  appellant's
             representative is to file a detailed skeleton  argument  which
             should detail the evidence that was before First-tier Tribunal
             Judge Adio, the factual matters he took into account in coming
             to his conclusion that family life existed  and  finally,  any
             change in the appellant's circumstances since that decision."

REMAKING THE DECISION- THE EVIDENCE

 2. At the resumed hearing of the  appeal  on  22  April,  the  appellant's
    uncle, Badri Rai gave evidence.  The  hearing  was  then  adjourned  as
    there was no interpreter.   At  the  resumed  hearing  on  19  May  the
    appellant's father Madan Bahadur Rai and  his  sister  Laxmi  Rai  gave
    evidence through  interpreters.   I  reserved  my  determination  after
    hearing oral submissions supplementing the helpful  skeleton  arguments
    which had been provided by both representatives.

 3. The paperwork before me comprises:

     a) the respondent's bundle which includes a copy of  the  application,
        the record of a telephone interview of the appellant and  documents
        that he relied on in support of  his  application  dated  8  August
        2012;

     b) a bundle of documents provided by the  appellant's  representatives
        including statements of the  above  witnesses  and  their  identity
        documents, a statement  by  Basanta  Rai,  the  appellant's  second
        cousin who was not called and a statement by Laxmi  Rai's  husband,
        Dilip Subba who was present at the hearing but for whom  Mr  Melvin
        had  no  cross-examination.   In  addition  that  bundle  comprises
        documents relating to the appellant's  father's  circumstances  but
        also paperwork regarding his schooling and remittances;

     c) a statement by Laxmi Rai provided separately.

 4. In the course of cross-examination of Laxmi Rai, Mr Melvin  produced  a
    copy of her entry clearance application.  Mr Nathan objected to this on
    the basis that Mr Melvin had the opportunity of producing this document
    at the outset of the hearing and it was not possible for  him  to  take
    instructions from the witness in the middle of  her  cross-examination.
    Mr Melvin  explained  that  during  the  lunch  adjournment  (after  my
    completion of the morning list) he had looked at the application on the
    file.  It had been clear  to  him  from  the  start  that  evidence  in
    relation  to  the  dates  relied  on  by  the  appellant  (as  to   his
    circumstances in Nepal) was scant.

 5. I refused the late production of this document  reminding  the  parties
    that the issue in the case had  all  along  been  whether  family  life
    existed at the date of decision.  Mr Melvin had indicated that  he  had
    concerns from the outset about the evidence in relation  to  the  dates
    and therefore must have been conscious that there might  come  a  point
    when he would wish to rely on the unread document.  He had not given  a
    satisfactory explanation why he had  not  shown  that  document  to  Mr
    Nathan at the outset of the hearing.  I did not consider  therefore  it
    was in the interests of justice for leave to be granted  for  its  late
    production in the face of understandable opposition from Mr Nathan.

 6. Mr Melvin thereafter continued his cross-examination of Laxmi Rai.  The
    only further issue outstanding related to evidence regarding the  dates
    on which the appellant's mother had come to the  United  Kingdom  after
    she was granted entry clearance to settle here on 20  August  2009.   I
    gave a direction in the course of the  hearing  that  it  was  for  the
    appellant to produce evidence by means of a faxed copy  of  Tika  Rai's
    passport. I reminded the parties of this direction after the hearing; a
    copy has now been provided.

 7. It was necessary to remind Mr Melvin in the course of  the  hearing  of
    the limit on the issues I  was  required  to  determine  with  specific
    reference to [4] and [5] of my error of law decision.   In  essence  Mr
    Melvin contended that recent case law with reference to the  new  Rules
    meant that Judge Adio's determination could not be relied on as showing
    that family life existed between the appellant and his sponsor as at  5
    December 2012. I reminded him that much of the recent case law  related
    to justification of interference where there is protected  family  life
    as opposed to  whether  that  family  life  has  been  established.   I
    reminded him that it had been conceded by Mr Saunders at the  error  of
    law hearing that the Secretary of State relied  only  upon  the  public
    interest  as  justification  for  interference.   Helpfully  Mr  Melvin
    refocused his questions.

 8. At the hearing of the appeal by the appellant and his  sister  on  27th
    September 2010 Judge Adio heard evidence  from  their  father  who  was
    cross-examined by a Presenting Officer.  The judge found as a fact that
    the two children were attending educational institutions in  Nepal  and
    that their father was responsible for  their  education,  clothing  and
    food.  There was no contrary evidence to show that  the  children  were
    working and he accepted that the appellants' finances were being met by
    their  father.   The  judge  went  on  to  conclude  at  [11]  of   his
    determination "bearing in mind there is financial  dependency  in  this
    case I find that there is more than emotional ties in the present case.
     I therefore find that there is family life between the appellants  and
    the sponsor in the UK".

 9. According to his statement, Badri Rai is  currently  a  lance  corporal
    serving in HM Forces.  He is the appellant's maternal uncle.  He refers
    to the appellant's family as close  knit.   He  also  states  that  the
    appellant  relies  wholly  on  his  parents  for   financial   support,
    accommodation and all expenses and that it  is  his  parents'  duty  in
    Gurkha culture to support a dependant child until he is independent.

10. In examination-in-chief he confirmed that he had last seen his  sister,
    the appellant's mother between October and  November  2013.   Prior  to
    that she had come to the UK in 2012 between October  and  November  and
    that she had returned at the "back end of  December  2012".   Prior  to
    that she had been here for about two and a  half  months  in  September
    2010.  Apart from those trips she has  been  back  in  Nepal  with  the
    appellant.

11. Under cross-examination Mr Rai explained that  he  had  last  seen  the
    appellant in 2012 when he had gone to Nepal.  He knew the appellant had
    completed intermediate level in his studies between 2010 and  2011  and
    that at present he was studying a BA in humanities.  That  had  started
    between 2011 and 2012, the appellant having had to wait some  time  for
    results.  When pressed by Mr Melvin Mr Rai explained that  he  did  not
    know the exact dates as to commencement of the courses.  He  knew  that
    since 2009 the appellant had been studying some "computer  stuffs"  and
    that he had also stated to Mr Rai that he had started an American board
    course.  He knew the name of the last college the appellant had studied
    at as Namuna in Kathmandu.  He confirmed also that the  appellant  used
    to live in a hostel at some time when  it  was  put  to  him  that  the
    appellant had been a boarder at that school.  He knew nothing about the
    appellant working between the courses he  had  undertaken  and  his  BA
    studies.  He had not attended the hearing of the appeal in 2010 due  to
    work commitments.  The appellant had never lived away from home between
    2010 and 2012 to his knowledge.   He  did  not  know  anything  of  the
    appellant's recreational interests.  During that period they had spoken
    on some six to ten occasions via  email,  yahoo,  facebook  and  social
    networking.

12. There was no re-examination.  In my question for clarification  Mr  Rai
    explained that he had last had contact with the  appellant  some  three
    weeks previously via facebook.

13. Madan Rai, the appellant's father refers to his marriage  in  1966  and
    the dates of his two children, Laxmi having been born 3  October  1986.
    He refers to her marriage on 10 July 2013 and her application for entry
    clearance as his spouse (which has since been granted).   His  daughter
    had decided to withdraw her appeal as a result of her marriage  and  he
    refers to his son once again being left behind in Nepal.  He refers  to
    two visits which he had made back to that country to see  the  children
    in 2011 and 2013 on  each  occasion  staying  for  approximately  three
    weeks.  The latter to attend his daughter's wedding and to be with  his
    wife and son.  It is not reasonably practical because of work leave and
    travel costs for him to visit Nepal often.  There is a greater need for
    the money earned to pay for  their  accommodation,  food,  tuition  and
    living costs.  The appellant's lack of  immigration  status  is  a  big
    problem for them and continues to cause them all serious upset.

14. Specifically in respect of the appellant, he refers to him  being  very
    much part of the family unit and he relies wholly on him and  his  wife
    for financial support, accommodation, tuition and  all  other  expenses
    throughout his life which Mr Rai was happy to continue to provide if he
    is granted entry.  He refers to his army  pension  being  paid  into  a
    joint account with his wife in Nepal from which his wife has been  able
    to withdraw funds in order to support their son.  They have  also  sent
    money transfers of approximately �500 every two months to assist  their
    children and he produces evidence of this with  HSBC  bank  statements,
    P60s and Standard Chartered bank account statements as  well  as  money
    transfers.  He refers to the adequacy of  accommodation  available  for
    his son in the United Kingdom and the  tenancy  agreement  provided  in
    support.  He too refers to a duty in  Gurkha  culture  to  support  his
    dependant son until such time as he is independent.

15. In examination-in-chief Mr Rai explained how the family  had  lived  in
    rented accommodation in Kathmandu until  1994/95  when  they  bought  a
    small house which was sold in 2008.  Thereafter they moved into  rented
    accommodation.  He confirmed the dates his brother-in-law had given  as
    to his wife's visits to the United Kingdom  but  with  more  precision.
    Apart from those visits she had  been  living  in  Kathmandu  with  the
    appellant.

16. Under cross-examination after pursuing questions which required  me  to
    remind him of the scope of the appeal, Mr Melvin sought to establish Mr
    Rai's knowledge of his son's studies and education in Nepal since 2010.
     From March that year he had studied on an open school board of  India.
    When it was put to him that the course had began in  November  2012  he
    thought on reflection that it had started in 2011 and the  results  had
    come out in  October  2013.   He  confirmed  the  name  of  the  school
    (Himalayan White House Open School).  Our questions then turned  to  Mr
    Rai's knowledge of other courses that the appellant  had  pursued.   In
    the course of his answers Mr Rai referred to a  four  month  course  on
    computers between 2009 and 2010.  He  referred  also  to  language  and
    graphic design  courses.   He  maintained  that  his  son  had  started
    studying at the open school in 2011.  He did not accept  that  his  son
    had only attended education to enhance the chance  of  his  application
    succeeding and further confirmed that his son had  not  worked  between
    March 2009 and December 2012.  He had made  no  applications  for  work
    during that period.

17. As to his own circumstances Mr Rai explained that on discharge from the
    army in 1993 he had worked in Hong Kong, Afghanistan and Iraq.  In  the
    letter he had been a security guard between 2007 and 2009 during  which
    time he had returned to the family in Nepal on his month's  leave  each
    year.  His wife looked after his son although he said that  he  had  no
    medical or psychological difficulties.  When asked about the nature  of
    the emotional dependence by the appellant, Mr Rai referred to the  need
    to look after him and to meet all the expenses because  both  his  wife
    and son were in Nepal.  It was not just about the expenses  being  paid
    but the emotional element.  Mr Rai referred to  telephone  conversation
    each day.

18. Laxmi Rai explains in her statement while she had got  the  opportunity
    to study in Japan in 2011 and that her mother had returned to Nepal  to
    join her brother.  She had returned to Nepal from Japan  on  completion
    of her studies and she refers also to the joint application  which  she
    had then made with the appellant.  Whilst in  Japan  her  accommodation
    had been paid for by her father as was  the  case  in  respect  of  the
    accommodation which  the  appellant  lived  in  Nepal.   She  describes
    herself and her brother being  completely  dependent  on  their  father
    financially, practically and emotionally.  They had  no  other  income.
    Her father had wanted them to make sure they had a good  education  and
    that they further their studies.  She and  her  brother  had  not  been
    leading independent lives.  It had been quite difficult for her brother
    to function without his parents or any other family members in Nepal.

19. Under cross-examination Mr Melvin  questioned  the  witness  about  the
    identity of the university she had been studying at in  Nepal  and  the
    chronology of those studies.  She explained that she had been in  Japan
    until 2013.  It was at that point that Mr Melvin  sought  to  introduce
    the entry clearance application which I refused for the  reasons  given
    above.

20. In his continuing cross-examination Mr Melvin established that for  the
    period of time in 2010 that the appellant's mother was  in  the  United
    Kingdom there was another relative in Nepal but he  had  moved  to  the
    United States.  It  appears  that  she  was  referring  to  an  earlier
    occasion when that relative had moved and that she had been living with
    her brother  during  the  months  of  2010.   During  this  period  she
    confirmed the appellant had been emotionally dependent  upon  him.   He
    had shared his personal thoughts with her and he  used  to  talk  about
    what was happening at the college.  There was no re-examination.

DISCUSSION

21. In the course of his oral submissions Mr Melvin contended  that  I  had
    not received in the evidence a real picture of the changes between 2010
    and 2012.  The appellant at the date of  decision  was  nearly  24  and
    there was no evidence of closeness beyond normal  emotional  ties.   At
    best it was purely one  of  financial  responsibility.   I  invited  Mr
    Melvin to address me on the fact of the appellant's  mother  continuing
    to live with him in Nepal.  He considered the evidence  on  this  scant
    noting that her statement did not refer  to  any  emotional  ties.   He
    acknowledged the difficulties the Secretary of State would be in  if  I
    found that Article 8 was engaged.

22. In his oral submissions Mr Nathan referred to the evidence I heard from
    the appellant's brother-in-law and his father are  that  the  appellant
    had always lived with his mother and he referred me  to  the  interview
    with the Entry Clearance Officer in respect of this.   He  argued  that
    there would be no material in change in circumstances between the  ages
    of 21 when protected family life had been found and the appellant being
    about to turn 24 in December 2012.  He distinguished in L and Ifzal  by
    the fact of the appellant's mother  continuing  to  live  with  him  in
    Nepal.  He otherwise relied on his skeleton argument and in  particular
    the references in Ghising and Others.

23. In addition to the oral testimony, I have had regard to the  statements
    by the appellant's mother and the appellant  himself  as  well  as  the
    other evidential  documentation  relied  on  including  the  record  of
    interview.   The  Court  of  Appeal  in  Gurung  &  Others  R  (on  the
    application of) v SSHD [2013] EWCA  Civ  8  asked  the  question  "what
    constitutes family life within the meaning of Article 8(1)".   At  [44]
    the Master of the Rolls expressed these views:

         "In several of the appeals the Tribunal found  that  the  applicant
         did not enjoy family life within the meaning of Article 8(1).  Save
         in the case of the appeals of NL and  SL,  we  do  not  propose  to
         examine the facts of any of the cases set out before  us.   Instead
         we propose simply to  say  something  about  what  is  the  correct
         approach.

         45.  Ultimately the question whether an  individual  enjoys  family
             life is one of fact and depends on a careful consideration  of
             all the relevant facts of the  particular  case.   Ms  McGahey
             submits, therefore, that  the  case  law,  both  domestic  and
             European, can be of limited assistance.  She (rightly) accepts
             that, as a matter of law, in some  instances  an  adult  child
             (particularly if he does not have a partner or children of his
             own) may establish that he has a family life with his parents.
              It all depends on the facts.

         46.  We think that the cases are of  some  assistance  to  decision
             makers  and  Tribunals  who  have  to  decide  these   issues.
             Paragraphs 50 to 62 of the  determination  of  UT  in  Ghising
             contains a useful review of some of the jurisprudence and  the
             correct approach to be adopted.  It concludes at paragraph  62
             that 'the  different  outcomes  in  cases  with  superficially
             similar features emphasises to us that the issue under Article
             8(1) is highly fact-sensitive'.  The correctness of  the  UT's
             review has not been doubted before us.  We endorse  this.   We
             doubt whether any useful purpose is served by further  general
             elaboration."

    Mr Nathan's skeleton sets out that review in Ghising [2012] and  refers
    to the Tribunal's conclusion at [68]

         "We have found that the appellant  depends  upon  his  parents  for
         financial, practical and  emotional  support  and  guidance.   They
         depend upon him as their only child still living at  home.   Mr  L.
         Ghising's evidence was that it is the custom among Nepalese  people
         for the younger son to remain living with his parents,  even  after
         marriage, to care for them when they become elderly.  This evidence
         was no challenged by the respondent."

    He argues that the appellant and  his  family  have  applied  the  same
    custom and offers an explanation  for  the  appellant's  mother  living
    separately from her husband as a discharge of that  duty  no  doubt  in
    anticipation of the son in due course observing his own duties to them.

24. Mr Melvin points out the two and half years that had passed since Judge
    Adio had found family life and that he had  done  so  based  solely  on
    financial dependency.  It was unclear how  much  time  the  appellant's
    mother had spent in Nepal since 2010 but he argues that  it  was  clear
    she had spent extensive time in the United Kingdom  with  the  sponsor.
    He further argues that it would  appear  from  the  evidence  that  the
    appellant was ready and willing to  take  employment  as  the  date  of
    decision and was only studying short courses whilst  looking  for  work
    and to improve his employment prospects.   It  was  accepted  that  the
    appellant had yet to marry or form his own family unit.   He  considers
    the appellant's own evidence relating to his education  was  discrepant
    but that given by his father who suggested the appellant was  in  full-
    time education.  Given that it appeared the appellant was pursuing  his
    own agenda with reference to education and employment it was  difficult
    to see how  emotional  dependency  could  seriously  be  found  in  the
    circumstances.

25. Judge Adio found the appellant's father to be a credible witness and  I
    come to the same conclusion.  He gave his answers after reflection in a
    careful measured way.  It is correct that he did not have an  immediate
    ability to catalogue with precision the appellant's various courses  of
    studies.  That is not unusual and for him to give an  account  of  that
    could well be indicative of something that had been rehearsed.  I found
    no reason to disbelieve the appellant's brother-in-law  or  his  sister
    about  the  closeness  of  the  continuing  family  ties  despite   the
    appellant's adulthood.  In fact there has been no real material  change
    in circumstances since Judge Adio found  protected  family  life.   The
    appellant continues with education.  He has not  taken  employment  nor
    has he sought employment.  It may seem untypical that a  mother  should
    spend so much time away from her husband to be with an adult son, but I
    am satisfied that her  decision  to  do  so  is  driven  by  continuing
    affection and regard that is reflective of a more intense  relationship
    than usual.  I am persuaded that the appellant's mother has  been  with
    him continuously apart from the limited periods of time she  has  spent
    in the United Kingdom.   I  find  that  the  family  life  between  the
    appellant and  his  parents  has  continued  with  the  same  level  of
    intensity as was the case in 2010 sufficient to engage Article  8  when
    the decision was made to refuse the application in 2012.

26. The Entry Clearance  Officer  considered  that  having  regard  to  the
    appellant's age there needed to be more than the normal emotional ties.
     He had seen nothing  that  would  lead  him  to  conclude  there  were
    particular bonds in the appellant's case.  All the evidence  before  me
    points to bonds over and above the  residual  affection  usually  found
    between parents and their adult children and I am satisfied that he was
    wrong to find Article 8 was not engaged.

27. The Entry Clearance Officer considered  on  a  hypothetical  basis  the
    approach that should be taken  even  if  Article  8  were  engaged  but
    concluded that any interference would be justified and proportionate in
    the exercise of immigration control.  As acknowledged  by  Mr  Saunders
    that was the only basis to justify interference.  Having regard to  the
    guidance given in Ghising [2013],  I  am  satisfied  that  this  appeal
    should therefore be allowed.

28. By way of summary, I have set aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for error of law.  I have remade that decision and  allow  the
    appeal against the Entry Clearance Officer's decision.






Signed                                                Date 16 June 2014

[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson


