
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/00308/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 20 December 2016                       |On 09 January 2017               |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER-TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                            Mr harpal singh hehar
                      (anonymity direction DISCHARGED)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Sharma, Counsel instructed by Immigration
                    Advice Bureau
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant has been partially successful in error of  law  challenge
    to a decision by the First-tier Tribunal that his  appeal  against  the
    refusal of entry clearance as a spouse should be dismissed.

 2. In an error of law decision promulgated on  22  November  2016,  Deputy
    Upper Tribunal Judge Lever held that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  was
    entitled to dismiss the appeal under  the  Immigration  Rules  for  the
    reasons which he gave.  However, his assessment under  Article  8  EHCR
    outside the Rules was materially flawed as it contained factual  errors
    which, if they had not  been  made,  might  have  led  to  a  different
    conclusion.

 3. Judge Lever directed that the Article 8 claim outside the Rules  should
    be heard afresh in the Upper Tribunal.  Judge Lever also discharged the
    anonymity order previously made in the appellant's favour.

Relevant Background

 4. The appellant is a national of India, whose date of birth is 1 February
    1984.  The appellant entered the United Kingdom illegally in 2007.

 5. In September 2011 he met his future wife, "K", through friends.  K  had
    been born in India, and she had entered the  UK  as  the  spouse  of  a
    British national, who was also of Indian heritage.  K had  married  her
    first husband on 22 October 2003, and their marriage had been dissolved
    in Punjab province in India on 8 July  2011.   K's  first  language  is
    Punjabi, as is the appellant's.  Through  her  marriage  to  her  first
    husband, K acquired British nationality.  K had a child  by  her  first
    husband, and the child is a British national.

 6. In November 2012 the appellant returned to India, and K accompanied him
    as a visitor. They got married in India on 15 November 2012.   In  July
    2013 he applied to join K in the UK.

 7. On 4 September 2013 an Entry Clearance Officer in New Delhi refused the
    application on  suitability  grounds  with  specific  reference  to  S-
    EC.2.2(a).  In his application, in answer to question 3, the  appellant
    had failed to disclose the identities of Kamal Singh  (DOB:  21.1.1984)
    and Ramandeep Singh (DOB: 1.2.1985) which  he  had  used  during  three
    unsuccessful attempts to enter the UK illegally between 11 May 2013 and
    26 May 2013.

 8. The appellant appealed against the refusal decision, and the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge allowed his appeal to the extent  that  his  application
    was remitted to the Entry Clearance Officer for  reconsideration.   The
    Judge held that the non-disclosure had been accidental, not deliberate,
    and also that the ECO had proceeded on the erroneous premise  that  the
    appellant had attempted to enter the UK illegally shortly before making
    his application for entry clearance as  a  spouse,  when  in  fact  the
    attempts had been made five years earlier in 2007.

 9. On 7 November 2014 an  Entry  Clearance  Officer  in  New  Delhi  (post
    reference  New  Delhi\3457832)  gave  his  reasons  for  refusing   the
    appellant's application upon reconsideration.  He  noted  that  in  the
    determination dated 17 September 2014, at paragraph [29] it was  stated
    that the appellant had admitted using false names on two  occasions  to
    enter the UK unsuccessfully.  He claimed that the failure  to  disclose
    these names was a genuine mistake.  But he had  not  demonstrated  that
    the non-disclosure was a genuine mistake, as he had sought to enter the
    UK  using  false  identities  only  two  months  prior  to  making  his
    application for entry clearance. There was no reasonable explanation as
    to why he would have forgotten these incidents in such a short time.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

10. The appellant's appeal against the second refusal decision came  before
    Judge James, sitting at Hatton Cross in the First-tier  Tribunal  on  6
    April 2016.  Ms Sharma appeared on behalf of  the  appellant,  and  the
    Entry Clearance Officer was represented by  a  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer.

11. In his subsequent decision, Judge James referred to an IFB report by  a
    fingerprint expert, Mr Pearson, dated 31 March 2015.  He confirmed that
    the appellant, using the false identities of Ramandeep Singh and  Kamal
    Singh had been fingerprinted on three occasions in France on 11 May, 23
    and 26 May 2007 respectively, while attempting to enter the UK.   Judge
    James held that, as was known to  his  UK  spouse,  the  appellant  had
    previously used false names and a false date of birth, and that he  had
    attempted to enter the UK illegally on three occasions  in  2007  using
    these false identities.

12. At paragraph [27] of his decision, Judge James held that the  error  of
    the ECO in referring to a date of 2012 instead of 2007 did not  vitiate
    the respondent's decision.

13. At paragraph [30], Judge James held that the non-disclosure in response
    to question 3 (and in response to other questions  in  the  application
    form  identified  by  the  Judge)  did  not  constitute   an   innocent
    misrepresentation, but  "a  deliberate  eschewment  of  disclosure"  of
    issues relevant to the appellant's immigration history.

14. At paragraph [31], the Judge held that there was  a  pre-meditated  and
    persistent pattern of behaviour  exhibited  by  the  appellant  in  his
    attempts to unlawfully enter the UK in breach of Immigration  Law.   He
    thus found  the  appellant  had  deliberately  been  dishonest  in  his
    completion of his application form, as well as in the  three  attempted
    entries into the UK.  As stated in the case  of  Shen  (paper  appeals:
    proven dishonesty) [2014] UKUT 00336 (IAT), there was no basic level of
    plausibility of the appellant in his claimed error or genuine  mistake.
    He found the Secretary of State had established a  relevant  evidential
    threshold and had fully discharged the evidential burden of proving the
    appellant's dishonesty.

15. At paragraph [32], he said that in coming to his  adverse  finding,  he
    relied on the comments of Mr Justice Mostyn in the case of  R  (on  the
    application of Aafia Ghebo) [2013] EWHC 146, in which  the  Judge  held
    that there was a duty of  care  on  an  applicant  when  completing  an
    application form, "and this extends to giving all relevant  immigration
    history".

16. At paragraph [35], the Judge turned to consider the appellant's Article
    8 claim outside the Rules.  He noted that K  had  a  cultural  heritage
    background similar to the appellant.  She had known, even prior to  her
    marriage  to  the  appellant,  of  his  adverse  immigration   history.
    Nonetheless, she had chosen not only to proceed with  her  own  Islamic
    and civil marriage to the appellant, but also  had  chosen  to  have  a
    child with him in full knowledge of his adverse immigration history and
    the fact that he  had  no  automatic  right  of  entry  and  choice  of
    residence in the UK.  Her child by the appellant had  been  born  on  9
    February 2015.  K claimed that her first child resided with  her  first
    husband.  There was a dearth of information regarding this  child,  and
    there was no documentary evidence relating to any contact or  residence
    arrangements.

17. Judge James held at paragraph [45] that on  the  face  of  it,  in  the
    absence of current evidence to the contrary, there appeared  to  be  no
    reason why K could not relocate to  the  appellant's  own  country  and
    reside with their child there.  Due to the age  of  the  child  (a  few
    months old) it would be in the child's best interests  to  remain  with
    the nursing mother.  If K's first child did  not  reside  with  her,  K
    would  be  able  to  visit  the  child  in  the  UK  on  holidays,   or
    alternatively take the child with her to the appellant's home country.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

18. On 12 September 2016,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Frankish  gave  his
    reasons for granting the  appellant  to  appeal  against  Judge  James'
    decision:

       Contrary to the application [for permission to appeal],  the  First-
       tier Tribunal Judge notes the first determination's finding that two
       false identities [were] used in three previous  failed  applications
       were  mistakenly,  not  dishonestly,  undisclosed  in  the   current
       application.  No arguable error arises,  based  upon  the  extensive
       authorities cited, from concluding  that  no  adequate  explanations
       provided by the appellant for his admitted extensive non-disclosure.
        However, an arguable error arises from the Article 8 assessment  in
       that there is found to be no English language certificate  when  the
       appellant says there is one, and that the parties are said to  share
       the same cultural background (i.e. the implication being  that  they
       could live in the Punjab) when the appellant is a Sikh and, to judge
       by paragraph 37, the sponsor is a Muslim.

The Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

19. In his law decision, Judge Lever held that there were potentially three
    mistakes in the First-tier Tribunal Judge's findings under  Article  8.
    With reference to paragraph [37], the evidence  demonstrated  that  the
    parties had undertaken a Hindu as well as a civil  marriage.   To  that
    extent, Judge James was in error - at paragraph [37] - in referring  to
    an Islamic marriage, but he was not necessarily in error  in  referring
    to the similar cultural heritage background of the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor.

20. The second error occurred at paragraph [39], where the  Judge  referred
    to financial income documents being out of date.   There  was  a  short
    bundle that provided up-to-date bank statements and  payslips  relating
    to the sponsor.   That  error  was  not  that  significant,  given  the
    features referred to by the Judge at paragraph [41], where  he  decided
    that the wife was not working, her income was unknown and  he  referred
    to unknown quantities in respect of many aspects of her life.

21. Finally, at paragraph [46], when looking at section  117  of  the  2002
    Act, the Judge noted that there were no formal  qualifications  of  the
    appellant's  ability  to  speak  English.   But,  he  noted  from   the
    appellant's application form that he had submitted to the respondent an
    English language test certificate.  The Entry Clearance Officer had not
    refused the application on the grounds of a lack of an English language
    test certificate.  It was thus proper and safe to assume therefore that
    the respondent was satisfied that the appellant had taken and passed  a
    relevant English language test consistent  with  a  certificate  having
    been provided by the appellant with his application  form.   The  Judge
    was in error of questioning this aspect of the case  which  might  have
    gone a little way to adverse findings under  Article  8.   Judge  Lever
    continued at paragraph [23] of his decision:

       I find therefore that in respect of his assessment of Article  8  of
       the ECHR, a material error of law was made by the Judge in the sense
       that he may well have reached a  different  conclusion  had  he  not
       fallen into error in respect of those two matters referred to above.

The Resumed Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

22. At the resumed hearing before me to re-make  the  decision,  Ms  Sharma
    called K as a witness.

23. K's evidence was that she had now lived here for  11  years.   She  had
    come from India as a spouse in 2004.  Her eldest son was now aged seven
    and a half.  He lived with his dad, but she saw him every  week.   This
    was for one or two days.  For if she was not working at the weekend, he
    stayed with her overnight.  This was an informal arrangement which  had
    been in operation since her divorce from her ex-husband in 2011.  There
    was a letter from her ex-husband confirming the  arrangement.   It  had
    been hard looking after her second son  as  a  single  mother  who  was
    working full-time.  Her aunt had come from India to help out.  She also
    had friends here who helped her.  But it was hard to cope.  She  had  a
    problem with her  back.   Judge  James  had  overlooked  the  financial
    documents which showed at the time of the decision in November 2014 she
    was earning over �19,000 per annum.  This was still the case.  She  had
    a good relationship with her eldest son, and it was  not  possible  for
    her to leave him and go back to India to reside there with her  husband
    and second child.

24. In cross-examination,  K  confirmed  that  there  was  no  third  party
    evidence to corroborate her account of the degree of contact which  she
    enjoyed with her first child.

25. In his closing submissions on behalf of the  ECO,  Mr  Tufan  submitted
    that the claim outside the Rules should be dismissed.  It was  open  to
    the appellant to make  a  fresh  application.   The  decision  appealed
    against was not disproportionate.  In  reply,  Ms  Sharma  acknowledged
    that the appeal was governed by the  old  statutory  regime,  with  the
    consequence that I could only consider the  circumstances  appertaining
    at the date of the refusal decision, rather than the  circumstances  at
    appertaining at the date of the hearing before  me.   Nonetheless,  the
    decision appealed  against  had  a  disproportionate  impact  upon  the
    relationship between the UK sponsor and her British national child by a
    previous relationship.

Discussion and Findings

26. Questions 1 and 2  of  the  Razgar  test  should  be  answered  in  the
    appellant's favour, as the effect of the refusal decision  in  November
    2014 was to prevent family reunion between the appellant and his spouse
    taking place in the UK.  Questions 3 and 4 of the Razgar test  must  be
    answered in favour of the respondent.

27. On the issue of proportionality, the best  interests  of  the  affected
    children must be a primary consideration.  K's second child had not yet
    been  born,  and  so  his  best  interests  cannot   feature   in   the
    proportionality assessment.

28. With regard to K's son by her previous marriage, there is a  dearth  of
    documentary evidence. In his application for entry clearance, there was
    no suggestion by the appellant that he had formed a  relationship  with
    this child as a result of being present when the child  came  to  visit
    his mother on a weekly basis, and to stay  overnight  with  his  mother
    from time to time.  This leads me to  question  whether  the  level  of
    contact which K has enjoyed with her eldest  son  is  as  frequent  and
    regular as she claimed in her oral evidence before me.

29. But I accept that prima face it is in the  child's  best  interests  to
    have as much contact as possible with his biological mother,  and  that
    his mother's enforced relocation to India would thus be inimical to his
    best interests in so far as the opportunities for direct contact  would
    be significantly curtailed.  He would only be able to see his mother on
    return visits by her to England, and in the meantime contact would have
    to be maintained at a distance through modern media such as Skype.   On
    the other hand, it is not shown that his welfare or wellbeing would  be
    thereby imperilled.  His mother is not his primary carer, and it is not
    suggested that he has not at all material times been  adequately  cared
    for in his father's household.

30. As the adverse impact on the child's best interests is thus  relatively
    limited and circumscribed, the public interest  factors  arising  under
    Article 8(2) do not need  to  be  particularly  cogent  to  render  the
    refusal decision a proportionate one.  It is in the appellant's  favour
    that he returned to India to regularise his status.  It is also in  his
    favour that he can speak English  and  would  probably  be  financially
    independent in the  UK  through  his  wife's  earnings  from  full-time
    employment.  But on the  debit  side,  he  was  rightly  refused  entry
    clearance on suitability  grounds.   Moreover,  now  that  his  adverse
    immigration history has been laid bare, there  is  no  reason  why  the
    appellant cannot make a fresh application for  entry  clearance.   Thus
    the  interference  consequential  upon  the  refusal  decision  is  not
    permanent.  It is unfortunate that  there  has  been  a  lengthy  delay
    between the date of the original refusal and the ultimate resolution of
    the appellant's appeal against the refusal.  The effect  of  the  delay
    has been to postpone the possibility of family reunion  in  the  UK  by
    some three years.  I accept that the ECO in  New  Delhi  was  partially
    responsible for this delay by wrongly accusing the appellant  of  using
    false identities to attempt to enter the UK  illegally  in  2012.  This
    error led to the appeal against the initial decision being remitted  to
    the British High Commission in New Delhi  for  a  fresh  decision,  and
    regrettably  the  fresh  refusal  decision  repeated  the  same  error.
    However, the appellant is the author of his own misfortune in not being
    candid about his attempts to enter the UK  under  false  identities  in
    2007 from the outset.

31. Accordingly, I do not consider that there are  sufficiently  compelling
    circumstances to justify the appellant being granted Article  8  relief
    outside the Rules in respect of the refusal decision of November  2014.
    The decision appealed against struck a fair balance between, on the one
    hand, the rights and interests of the  appellant  and  affected  family
    members in the UK, and, on the  other  hand,  the  wider  interests  of
    society.  It was proportionate to the legitimate public end  sought  to
    be achieved, namely the maintenance of firm and  effective  Immigration
    controls.

Notice of Decision

32. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing the appeal under the
    Rules did not contain an error of law, and that part  of  the  decision
    stands. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing  the  appeal
    on Article 8 grounds outside the Rules contained an error of  law,  and
    so the decision is set aside and the following decision is substituted:

    This appeal on human rights (Article 8 ECHR) grounds is dismissed.



Signed                              Date 30 December 2016


Judge Monson

Deputy Upper-Tribunal Judge


