
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/00836/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14th September 2015               |On 24th September 2015               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - dhaka
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Mrs Shahana Khatun
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M A Kalam, Kalam Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                             EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT

 1. The Appellant is a Bangladeshi national born on  15th  September  1964.
    On 11th February 2015 Judge Paul of the First-tier Tribunal allowed her
    appeal against a refusal to grant her  entry  clearance  as  a  partner
    under Appendix FM.  The Appellant married her British Sponsor  on  16th
    March 2012 and that was the relationship upon which  she  relied.   The
    Entry Clearance Officer now  has  permission  to  appeal  against  that
    decision.

 2. The only matter in issue before Judge  Paul  was  whether  this  was  a
    genuine and subsisting marriage.  The Entry Clearance Officer had taken
    the view that it was not, essentially because, as stated in the reasons
    for refusal dated 14th November 2013,

      i) although the Sponsor was in Bangladesh that did not  mean  that  he
         had in fact married the Appellant

     ii) having married in March 2012 and the Sponsor  remaining  until  May
         2012 only three photographs of the couple together over that period
         of time had been submitted.

    iii) there were no photographs of the actual marriage in March 2012.

     iv) there was an absence of post-marriage contact between the Appellant
         and his wife.  The application was made on 25th August 2013 and  it
         was supported by remittances going back some eight months  as  well
         as phone cards there was nothing earlier, and the Sponsor  had  not
         visited the Appellant in Bangladesh since the marriage.

 3. In Judge Paul's determination the evidence is clearly set out including
    the evidence that the Sponsor had visited the Appellant  following  the
    refusal and stayed in  Bangladesh  on  that  occasion  for  some  three
    months.  The judge notes the competing submissions and records,  having
    heard oral evidence from the Sponsor, Mr Abdus Salam that he found  him
    credible. His oral and witness statement evidence was corroborated both
    by  the  remittances  and  the  evidence  of  telephone  contact,   the
    subsequent visit, the making  of  the  application  and  the  Sponsor's
    attendance at court.

 4.  The judge correctly self-directs  in  respect  of  Goudey  (subsisting
    marriage - evidence) Sudan [2012] UKUT 00041 (IAC).  That of course  is
    based on the case of Naz (subsisting  marriage  -  standard  of  proof)
    Pakistan [2012] UKUT 00040 (IAC) in terms  of  the  evidence  available
    upon which to make a decision, as well as the relevant  date,  standard
    and burden of proof. Having taken into account all of the evidence  and
    the submissions, correctly self-directed the judge concludes  that  the
    marriage was genuine and subsisting as  at  the  date  of  decision  in
    November 2013.

 5. The Entry Clearance Officer appeals that decision on  the  ground  that
    the Tribunal's findings are wholly inadequate, from which I infer  that
    the ground is that the reasoning  is  inadequate.   In  particular  the
    Entry Clearance Officer takes issue with the  fact  that  there  is  an
    absence  of  evidence  from  the  Appellant,  asserts  the  judge   has
    incorrectly taken into account postdecision evidence as follows:

         "Whilst postdecision evidence may  demonstrate  a  relationship  is
         subsisting, this is only where there is  evidence  pre-decision  to
         support this.  In the Appellant's case there  is  a  lack  of  pre-
         decision evidence and without this there is no guarantee  that  the
         postdecision evidence now submitted has not  been  done  merely  to
         bolster their appeal."

 6. On their face the grounds are incoherent in the context of  a  decision
    which  follows  self-direction  in   accordance   with   the   relevant
    jurisprudence and statutory provisions and which resulted in a  finding
    which was open to the judge on the evidence.

 7. Before me Mr Duffy very wisely relied on the grounds and did  not  seek
    to address me further.

 8. Contrary to the assertion  made  in  these  grounds  oral  evidence  is
    evidence, and it is not an error of  law  for  a  judge  to  believe  a
    witness, and that is precisely what has happened in this case.

 9. The grounds do not identify an error of law.  Challenges to credibility
    findings can only succeed if an error of law is identified, and on  the
    grounds as they are drafted before me I am satisfied that no  error  of
    law is revealed.

Notice of Decision

Accordingly the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the  appeal  on
Immigration Rules grounds stands.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge
