
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/00101/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |                  Decision & Reasons  |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 27 May 2015                        |                  On 7 July 2015      |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before


                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        RAPU EMEFIANEM PATRICK IWEGBU
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    None


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The application  for  permission  to  appeal  was  made  by  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer.  Nonetheless I shall refer to the  parties  as  they
    were termed before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria  born  on  3  July  1973  and  he
    appeals against a decision dated 21 November 2914 to refuse  him  entry
    clearance as the spouse of a person present and settled in  the  United
    Kingdom, that being Kila Bubb.

 3. His application was  refused  on  the  basis  that  he  had  previously
    presented two visa applications on 8  May  2012  and  8  November  2012
    giving his wife's names as Rosemary Okoh.  There was an  absence  of  a
    divorce certificate and his marriage to the sponsor was not valid as he
    was not considered free to marry.  Further he was not exempt  from  the
    English language test and had not provided a relevant certificate.

 4. The appellant explained he had lived in a traditional relationship with
    Rosemary Okoh but the bride price was never paid so  the  marriage  was
    never formally legalised. He produced a customary court order dated  21
    December 2012 to show a dissolution of the relationship.  The appellant
    maintained that he had sent an original degree certificate but this had
    been lost.  He sent in a police report reporting it lost in transit  on
    18 December 2014.

 5. The appellant's sponsor stated they were expecting their first child on
    16 March 2015  and  she  had  always  maintained  that  the  house  and
    mortgage, and, if her husband arrived he would seek work whilst she was
    on maternity leave.  Letters and medical reports  about  the  pregnancy
    were produced which confirmed she was experiencing  some  complications
    and under a neurologist for migraine seizures.  She was unable to  cope
    without the support of her husband owing to the  complications  of  her
    health and pregnancy.

 6. First-tier Tribunal Judge Somal dismissed the appeal on  the  basis  of
    the Immigration  Rules  but  allowed  it  on  Article  8  grounds.   An
    application for permission to appeal was made. This contended that  the
    judge had made no reference either  implicitly  or  explicitly  to  the
    public interest factors particularised within Section 117B.  The  judge
    did not consider whether family life could be enjoyed in Nigeria  other
    than finding Article 8 should be engaged.  The judge should have  asked
    the question prior to finding Article 8 engaged.  There was  inadequate
    reasoning to establish whether it would be unreasonable to  expect  the
    family life to be maintained in  Nigeria.  There  were  no  exceptional
    circumstances disclosed by the determination.

 7. It was also contended that the judge applied the incorrect standard  of
    proof where he stated at paragraph 12 that  the  appellant's  exclusion
    was a real risk of a breach of Article 8 rights. This was  contrary  to
    Naz (Subsisting marriage - standard of proof) Pakistan  UKUT  40  (IAC)
    which confirmed that the  relevant  standard  of  proof  both  for  the
    Immigration  Rules  and  Article  8  is  that   of   the   balance   of
    probabilities.

 8. Permission to appeal was  granted  by  Judge  Page  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  He found that only paragraph 17 contained any case  specific
    findings under Article 8.  The judge found it would be unreasonable  to
    expect the appellant to move from the UK where she is present,  settled
    and working.

 9. At the hearing before me, Mr Tarlow relied on the  written  grounds  of
    application for permission to appeal.  The essence of the decision  was
    found in paragraph 17.  Essentially  Section  117  of  the  Nationality
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 was not considered.  The details should
    be considered by the Tribunal.  The reasoning given  was  very  sparse.
    The sponsor is employed and earns a salary and has property  but  there
    was nothing about the maintenance of immigration control.

10. The hearing was put back in order for Mr Tarlow  to  locate  the  entry
    clearance bundle.

11. Miss Bubb confirmed that she had made  a  fresh  application  the  week
    before the hearing before the Upper Tribunal.   She  was  currently  on
    maternity leave and her husband in Nigeria  was  currently  unemployed.
    She had met him last March in England when he was visiting  his  family
    and two brothers who lived in the UK.

Conclusions

12. Although the judge found at paragraph  11  of  the  decision  that  the
    appellant had failed to undertake the English  language  test  and  the
    appellant could not meet the Immigration Rules, there  were  inadequate
    findings in relation to Article 8.   At paragraph 15 the  judge  stated
    that there was no challenge to the nature of the  relationship  and  to
    the financial requirements but part of the  essence  of  rejecting  the
    appeal was  that  the  marriage  was  not  valid.   Indeed,  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer stated that the appellant had made two previous  visa
    applications, on 8 May 2012 and 8 November 2012, stating he was married
    and gave his  wife's  name  as  Igeo  Rosemary  Iwegbu.  The  appellant
    produced a customary court order dated 21st  December  2012  showing  a
    dissolution of the relationship.  There appeared, however,   to  be  no
    analysis of this by the Entry Clearance Officer and indeed there was  a
    reference in the entry clearance decision  to state that "You have  not
    provided a divorce certificate or  evidence   that  you  were  free  to
    marry".

13. I find on the basis that the Article 8 findings  were  inadequate  that
    there was indeed an error of law which may make a  material  difference
    to the outcome.

14. As stated in Singh v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ  74  where  the   Immigration
    Rules do not fully address the Article 8 claims so it is  necessary  to
    consider the claim outside the Immigration  Rules.  A  failure  by  the
    decision maker to consider Article 8 outside the Rules will only render
    the decision unlawful if the claimant  shows  that  there  has  been  a
    substantive breach of his or her rights under Article  8.   As  at  the
    date of decision which was 21 November 2014 there was no  reference  by
    the Entry Clearance Officer to the fact that the sponsor was pregnant.

15. Applying paragraph 64 of Singh I find that not all the relevant factors
    were taken into account when deciding Article 8 and the  five  stage  R
    (Razgar) v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27 test should be applied.

16. Article 8 of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights
    and Fundamental Freedoms provides for respect for  a  person's  private
    and family life, their home and correspondence.  An  appellant  has  to
    show that the subject  matter  of  Article  8  subsists  and  that  the
    decision of the respondent will interfere with it.  If he does so, then
    it is for the respondent to show that the respondent's decision  is  in
    accordance with the law, that it is for one of the legitimate  purposes
    set out in Article 8(2) (in this case for the economic wellbeing of the
    country, for the prevention of disorder or crime and for the protection
    of the rights and freedom of others) and that  it  is  necessary  in  a
    democratic society, which means that it must be proportionate.

17. I apply the structured approach in the guidance given in R (Razgar) and
    have regard to the following questions:

         "In a case where removal is resisted  in  reliance  on  Article  8,
         these questions are likely to be:

         Will the proposed removal be an interference by a public  authority
         with the exercise of the  applicant's  right  to  respect  for  his
         private or (as the case may be) family life?

         If so, will such interference have consequences of such gravity  as
         potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?

         If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

         If so, is such interference necessary in a  democratic  society  in
         the interests of national security, public safety or  the  economic
         wellbeing of the country, for the prevention of disorder or  crime,
         for the protection of health or morals, or for  the  protection  of
         the rights and freedoms of others?

         If so, is such interference proportionate to the legitimate  public
         ends sought to be achieved?"

18. Bearing in mind the very short length of the relationship  between  the
    appellant and the sponsor, and the fact that he had made an application
    in May and November 2012 giving his wife's name as Rosemary Okoh I find
    this undermines the strength of the relationship between the  appellant
    and  the  sponsor  and  albeit  that  the  sponsor  is  intent   on   a
    relationship, as at  the  date  of  decision  of  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer, the appellant has made concerted efforts to enter the UK prior
    to this application and only explained  the  breakdown  of  his  former
    relationship when challenged.  I  appreciate  that  the  appellant  and
    sponsor maintain that they are married  but  I  am  led  to  doubt  the
    strength of the relationship between the parties and I am not persuaded
    that the appellant intends to live permanently with the sponsor.

19. That said, the threshold for engaging Article 8 is low, and it  is  the
    case that the sponsor and appellant did form a relationship  such  that
    the sponsor states she is now married and pregnant with the appellant's
    child.  Some family life must exist.

20. The decision was made in accordance with the law  not  least  that  the
    appellant could not fulfil the immigration requirements in relation  to
    the English language test certificate and weight should be given to the
    position of the Secretary of State and immigration control,  not  least
    for the legitimate aim of the protection  of  rights  and  freedoms  of
    others.  I conclude that there is a legitimate  aim  being  pursued  in
    denying admission to a spouse in the claimant's circumstances, who does
    not comply with the rules on admission.

21. As it was accepted that the Immigration Rules  had  not  been  complied
    with, in that the English language test had not been provided, this  is
    relevant to whether the appellant would be able  to  integrate  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The Immigration Rules are indeed by starting point  as
    they reflect the position of the Secretary of State.  At  the  date  of
    the decision the appellant was an unemployed logistics expert  although
    there was financial evidence before me to the effect that  the  sponsor
    could support the appellant.

22. This leads to the question  of  proportionality  during  which  I  must
    consider Section 117B.

    117BArticle 8: public interest considerations applicable in all cases
         (1)The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the
         public interest.

         (2)It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests
         of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who
         seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able to speak
         English, because persons who can speak English-

         (a)are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

         (b)are better able to integrate into society.


23. The appellant had  not  demonstrated  as  at  the  date  of  the  Entry
    Clearance  decision  that  he  had  fulfilled  the   English   language
    requirements.

24. I note that the parties undertook a  legal  marriage  in  Maidstone  in
    August 2014 but this does not confirm the subsistence and the intention
    of either party and in the face of the questions that have been made in
    relation to the relationship I find that a separation whilst the formal
    requirements  of  the  Immigration   Rules   are   complied   are   not
    disproportionate.

25. At the hearing before me Mrs Iwegbu told me that she felt it was unsafe
    to travel to Nigeria.  She also told me that her husband had a house in
    Delta State where he also had two children, one of 13 years and one  of
    7 years old who lived in Nigeria.  She had no evidence in  relation  to
    health care in Nigeria.  I can appreciate that she has a valuable  task
    in schools in the UK but that does not tip the scales  in  relation  to
    proportionality in her favour or mean that she could not be expected to
    live in Nigeria where she could  apply  for  employment  as  she  is  a
    qualified teacher.  When they married there was no guarantee  that  the
    appellant could enter the UK on a permanent basis.

26. I take into  account  the  medical  evidence  submitted  to  me  by  Dr
    McAlonan's report dated 11th February 2014 which indicates that she has
    light sensitive migraine but she manages this  through  medication  and
    tinted glasses. I considered the report  from  'healthcare  dmc'  which
    stated that she could  suddenly  lose  consciousness.   That  said  the
    appellant was being treated and appeared to continue to work  and  thus
    sponsor her husband coming to the UK.

27. Her health conditions are said to include her suffering from  ADHD  and
    migraines and migraine seizures but none of these conditions  prevented
    her from teaching at the time of the report and there was  no  evidence
    put before me that she was on permanent sick leave (I note she  was  on
    maternity leave) or to the effect that there is no medical  support  in
    Nigeria.

28. ZH (Tanzania) (FC) (Appellant) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4 does not  apply  to
    the unborn child because as I state my decision relates to the date  of
    the decision taken by the ECO and it was taken  prior  to  the  child's
    birth.  However, I have considered  whether  the  principle  should  be
    extended to  all  children  who  will  be  directly  affected  by  this
    determination.  I have had regard to the principles advanced in T (s.55
    BCIA 2009) - entry  clearance)  Jamaica  [2011]  UKUT  483  (IAC)  and,
    further in Beoku-Betts (FC) (Appellant) v SSHD [2008]  UKHL  39  and  I
    conclude that the welfare of all children  affected  by  the  decisions
    should be given sufficient weight and the extent of that weight we have
    referred to below.  The appellant would appear to have  young  children
    in Nigeria who live close  to  the  appellant  and  it  is  logical  to
    conclude that these children will have their  relationship  with  their
    father diminished.

29. Article 8 does not oblige states  to  respect  the  choice  by  married
    couples of their matrimonial residence or to accept the settlement of a
    non-national spouse in  the  country.   The  relevant  principles  were
    articulated in Abdulaziz, Cabales and Balkandali v  UK  [1985]  7  EHRR
    471.  I conclude that it would be reasonable to expect the  sponsor  to
    continue conduct his family life as he has done hitherto.  There are no
    obstacles to him continuing family life as he has done so hitherto.

30. Failing that I find that it would be reasonable for the  appellant  and
    sponsor to relocate in Nigeria. Both the  appellant  and  sponsor  knew
    when they forged this relationship that there  was  no  guarantee  that
    they would be able to conduct  their  family  life  in  any  particular
    country and Mrs Iwegbu knew that her husband was a  Nigerian  national.
    Further, she must have known that he had children in Nigeria  for  whom
    he must have some responsibility.  I emphasise that my decision is made
    in relation to the Entry Clearance Officer's decision in November  2014
    and this was when the sponsor was pregnant but there was  no  child  in
    existence at that time.

31. I have taken into account all the circumstances including those of  the
    sponsor at a time when she was pregnant but at the time of the decision
    she was able to continue with her  life  in  the  United  Kingdom  with
    recourse to the NHS.  The fact that she provided important work to  the
    community does not to my  mind  outweigh  the  need  for  adherence  to
    immigration control.  There was reference to a  strain  on  her  mental
    health and she, at the time of the Entry Clearance  decision,  accessed
    the NHS for this in the United Kingdom. Alternatively it  was  open  to
    her to relocate to be with her husband.

32.  Although the sponsor thought it  dangerous  in  the  Delta  State  the
    appellant continues to maintain a house there and his children live  in
    that area.  There was no indication that they could not relocate  to  a
    safer area in Nigeria and as I state above  the  sponsor  has  teaching
    skills which she could put to use in Nigeria and which would allow  the
    appellant and  her  to  relocate  together.  Although  her  husband  is
    unemployed in Nigeria she could look for  work  there  to  support  the
    family.  Although she has family in the United  Kingdom  her  immediate
    family is now that of her husband.   No evidence was presented to me to
    the effect that all of Nigeria is an unsafe area.

33. I accept that she cannot be required to remove from the European  Union
    but this is an option if she does not wish to  be  separated  from  her
    husband.  Alternatively they can continue with their relationship as it
    is at present.

34. I acknowledge in accordance with EB (Kosovo) [2009] UKHL 41 that  there
    is no bright-line in  assessing  Article  8  cases  and  it  is  rarely
    proportionate to uphold an order for removal where the effect is that a
    spouse cannot reasonably be expected to follow the  removed  spouse  to
    the country of removal,  or  is  to  sever  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship between parent and child.  This however is not  a  removal
    case and  the  relationship  between  the  appellant  and  sponsor  can
    continue as before

35. The application  for  entry  clearance  was  defective  but  I  am  not
    persuaded that there would be significant interference with the  family
    life.  R (on the application of Chen) v Secretary of State for the Home
    Department)  (Appendix  FM  -  Chikwamba  -  temporary   separation   -
    proportionality) IJR [2015] UKUT 00189 (IAC)

    'There may be cases in which there are no insurmountable  obstacles  to
    family  life  being  enjoyed  outside  the  U.K.  but  where  temporary
    separation to enable an individual to make  an  application  for  entry
    clearance may be disproportionate. In all cases, it  will  be  for  the
    individual to place before the Secretary of State  evidence  that  such
    temporary separation will interfere disproportionately  with  protected
    rights. It will  not  be  enough  to  rely  solely  upon  the  case-law
    concerning Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40'.

36. This is not a case in which Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40 applies as  it  is
    not just the formality of an entry clearance application  to  be  made.
    The appellant has failed to comply with a substantive  element  of  the
    rules. It is also the case that this is an entry clearance decision not
    a  removal  decision.  The  status  quo  is  maintained.   Although   I
    acknowledge that the state must have a respect for the family  life  of
    the individuals, it is  open  to  the  appellants  to  make  a  further
    application to show that they can comply with the Immigration Rules and
    that in effect any separation will be temporary only.  The test  is  to
    show that there would be significant interference with family life even
    by a temporary separation such that the weight to be  accorded  to  the
    formal requirement of obtaining entry clearance is  reduced.   In  this
    particular instance it was always open to the appellant to make  proper
    enquiries of the immigration regulations such that he submitted all the
    appropriate documentation at the time of his application.  This  is  of
    course still open to him and I understand at the hearing before me that
    this is the course the parties have chosen to take.

37. Further to Huang v SSHD [2007] UKHL 11,  taking  full  account  of  all
    considerations, I did not consider that any family or private  life  of
    the claimant was prejudiced in a manner sufficiently serious to  amount
    to a breach of the fundamental  right  protected  by  Article  8.   The
    particular facts of this case and the evidence relied on, are such that
    the claimant has not established that the denial of entry clearance was
    an interference with his family life and even  if  it  were,  it  is  a
    proportionate and justified interference in pursuit of legitimate aims.
     There was no challenge in relation to  the  dismissal  of  the  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules and I set aside the decision in relation to
    Article 8 and remake the decision and dismiss the appeal of Mr Iwegbu.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal made an error of law and his decision is  set  aside
with respect to findings under Article 8 (the  matter  was  dismissed  under
the Immigration Rules).  I remake the decision and dismiss the appeal.

Mr Iwegbu's appeal on Article 8 grounds is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






