
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: oa/00886/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                      |              Decision & Reasons     |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|On 23 July 2015                        |              On 22 September 2015   |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                 shiza jamil
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER (ISLAMABAD)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Muhammad Ula (Sponsor)
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The application, Shiza Jamil, was born on 23 November  1995  and  is  a
    female citizen of Pakistan.  On 5 December 2013, a decision was made by
    the Entry Clearance Officer (ECO) Islamabad  to  refuse  the  appellant
    entry clearance to the United Kingdom as a dependent child of a Tier  4
    (General) Student Migrant.  The appellant appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  (Judge  Henderson)  which,  in  a  determination  promulgated
    without a hearing but following a consideration of the papers on 9 July
    2014,  dismissed  the  appeal.   The  appellant   now   appeals,   with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. A single issue arises  in  this  appeal.   It  would  appear  that  the
    appellant meets the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules  save  for
    paragraph 319H(f):

         Both of the applicant's parents must either be lawfully present  in
         the UK or been granted entry clearance or leave to  remain  at  the
         same time as the applicant or one parent must be  lawfully  present
         in the UK and the other has been granted entry clearance  or  leave
         to remain at the same time as the applicant...

 3. At [10], Judge Henderson wrote:

         The Appellant's father is currently remaining in the United Kingdom
         as a Tier 1 (General) migrant.   Her  mother  is  in  Pakistan  and
         resides with the Appellant.  These facts are accepted.  It is  also
         accepted by both parties that the Appellant's  mother  has  a  five
         year multiple entry visitor's visa.  The Appellant  cannot  satisfy
         the requirements of paragraph 319H given these facts.  Both of  her
         parents are not lawfully present in the  United  Kingdom  or  being
         granted entry clearance or leave to remain at the same time as  the
         Appellant.

 4. The Immigration (Leave to Enter and Remain)  Order  2000,  paragraph  2
    provides:

         Subject to Article 6(3) the entry clearance which complies with the
         requirements of Article 3 shall have effect as leave to  enter  the
         United Kingdom to the extent specified in Article 4, subject to the
         conditions referred to in article 5.

 5. Paragraph 3 of the same order provides:

         Subject to paragraph 4 an entry clearance shall only have effect as
         leave to enter  if  it  complies  with  the  requirements  of  this
         Article.

 6. There was no evidence to suggest that the mother's multiple visit  visa
    does not comply with the requirements of paragraph 3.  Paragraph  4  of
    the same Order provides:

         A visit visa... during its period of validity shall have effect  as
         leave to enter  the  United  Kingdom  on  an  unlimited  number  of
         occasions in accordance with paragraph (2).

         ...

         On each occasion the holder arrives in the United Kingdom, he shall
         be treated for the purposes of the Immigration Acts as having  been
         granted, before arrival, leave to enter the United  Kingdom  for  a
         limited period beginning on the date of arrival, being:

         (a)  six months if six months or more remain of the  visa's  period
             of validity; or

         (b)  the visa's remaining period of  validity,  if  less  than  six
             months.

 7. I hold that the effect of paragraph 4(2) is that the appellant's mother
    shall, when she arrives in the United Kingdom with  the  appellant,  be
    treated as having been granted, before arrival,  leave  to  enter.   As
    noted above, entry clearance shall have the same  effect  as  leave  to
    enter by virtue of paragraph 2 of  the  Order.   Mr  Diwnycz,  for  the
    respondent, argued that the entry clearance granted to  the  mother  in
    this case should be in the same status  or  category  as  that  of  the
    appellant.  However, paragraph 319 does not indicate  expressly  or  by
    implication that that is necessary but provides only  that  the  "other
    [parent] is being granted entry clearance or leave  to  remain  at  the
    same time as the applicant".  The fact that the mother's multiple entry
    visa was granted before any visa which may be issued to  the  appellant
    is irrelevant given the provisions of paragraph 4 of the 2000 Order.  I
    am satisfied, therefore,  that  the  appellant  is  able  to  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 319H(f)  provided  her  mother  utilises  her
    multiple entry  visit  visa  to  enter  the  United  Kingdom  with  the
    appellant.  Paragraph 4 of the 2000 Order applies both to  visit  visas
    and "any other form of entry clearance" and the provisions which I have
    cited above as regards entry clearance taking effect as leave to  enter
    applies both to the use by the mother of her multiple  visit  visa  and
    any visa under paragraph 319 granted to the appellant.  In consequence,
    I find that the appellant and  her  mother  are  being  "granted  entry
    clearance... at the same time..."

 8. In the circumstances, this appeal is  allowed.   The  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  I re-make the decision allowing  the
    appellant's appeal against the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which  was  promulgated  on  9  July
2014 is set aside.  I re-make the decision.  The  appellant's  appeal  under
the Immigration Rules against the decision of the Entry  Clearance  Officer,
Islamabad dated 5 December 2013 is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 20 September 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  fee  award
of any fee which has been paid or may be payable.





Signed                              Date 20 September 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

