
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/00694/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 9 April 2014                            |On 17th April 2014         |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN
                          IMMIGRATION JUDGE S CHANA
               sitting as a DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                               MRS RAZIA BEGUM
                        (No Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ISLAMABAD
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:

                            For the Appellant: Mr S Bhanji of Counsel
           instructed by Naseem & Co Solicitors
          For the Respondent: Mr E Tufan a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who was born on 1 January 1960.
      She has been given permission to appeal the  determination  of  First-
      Tier Tribunal Judge Burnett ("the  FTTJ")  who  dismissed  her  appeal
      against the respondent's decision of 19 December 2012  to  refuse  her
      entry clearance to the United Kingdom for settlement  as  a  dependent
      parent under the provisions of paragraph 317 of the Immigration Rules.
      Her sponsor is her son, Mr Abdul Qayoom.


   2. The respondent refused the application because the appellant  had  not
      shown firstly, that she was related as  claimed  to  her  sponsor  and
      therefore that she was related to a person present and settled in  the
      UK (paragraph 317 (i)). Secondly, she  had  not  shown  that  she  was
      financially dependent on her sponsor (paragraph 317 (iii)).


   3. The appellant appealed and the FTTJ heard her appeal  on  16  December
      2013. The appellant was not represented but the sponsor  attended  and
      gave evidence. The respondent was represented by counsel. At the start
      of the hearing counsel for the respondent raised a new issue;  whether
      the appellant, being under the age of 65, was  "living  alone  outside
      the   United   Kingdom   in   the   most   exceptional   compassionate
      circumstances" under the provisions of  paragraph  317  (i)  (d).  The
      judge offered to adjourn to  enable  the  sponsor  to  obtain  further
      evidence but he elected to continue with the hearing stating  that  he
      had said why there were exceptional compassionate circumstances in the
      letter of application.


   4. During the course of the hearing  the  respondent  conceded  that  the
      appellant and the sponsor were related as  claimed  and  the  FTTJ  so
      found. The FTTJ accepted that the sponsor sent money to the  appellant
      on a regular basis but concluded that she had not established that she
      was financially dependent on him such that she needed this  money.  He
      also found that the appellant had not established that she was  living
      alone in the most exceptional compassionate  circumstances.  The  FTTJ
      went on to consider the appeal  on  Article  8  human  rights  grounds
      concluding that the interference with  her  private  and  family  life
      would not be of sufficient severity to cross the low  threshold  which
      would  engage  Article  8.  Even  if  it   had   it   would   not   be
      disproportionate to refuse her leave to settle in  the  UK.  The  FTTJ
      dismissed the appeal under the Immigration  Rules  and  on  Article  8
      human rights grounds.


   5. The FTTJ did not make an anonymity direction. We have not  been  asked
      to do so and can see no good reason to make such a direction.


   6. The appellant applied for permission to appeal which was refused by  a
      judge in the First-Tier Tribunal but granted on renewal to  the  Upper
      Tribunal. The grounds argue that the FTTJ  erred  in  law  by  failing
      properly  to  consider  the  documentary  evidence  which  showed  the
      appellant's living expenses and established that  she  was  wholly  or
      mainly dependent on the sponsor. It was an error of law to  give  very
      little weight to the medical report  and  on  the  evidence  the  FTTJ
      should not have come to the conclusion that the appellant  had  failed
      to establish that  she  was  living  alone  in  the  most  exceptional
      compassionate circumstances.


   7. We have been provided with the judgement  and  determination  in  Azza
      Mohamed v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 331 and RM (Kwok On  Tong:  HC395  para
      320) India [2006] UKAIT 00039 (18 April  2006).  The  respondent  has
      submitted a Rule 24 response.


   8. Mr Bhanji submitted that the respondent must have  considered  whether
      the  appellant  was  living  in  the  most  exceptional  compassionate
      circumstances and, not having mentioned the point, have accepted  that
      she was. The appellant had submitted  all  the  documents  which  were
      needed to establish financial dependency on the sponsor and these were
      listed in the letter which the sponsor sent to the  respondent  on  30
      July 2012 and his letter to the First-Tier Tribunal of 8 January 2013.
      The FTTJ had accepted that  the  sponsor  was  sending  money  to  the
      appellant on a regular basis. The only basis for the finding that  she
      was not wholly or mainly dependent on him  was  the  alleged  lack  of
      evidence as to her needs.  In  addressing  this  the  FTTJ  failed  to
      consider what she had said in her interview.


   9. Mr Bhanji accepted that as the appellant was under 65 years of age she
      had to show that she was living outside the UK in the most exceptional
      compassionate circumstances. The Immigration Rules had  changed  on  9
      July 2012. Prior to that date paragraph  317  (i)  (e)  contained  the
      requirement for a parent or grandparent under the age of 65 that he or
      she must be "living alone outside  the  United  Kingdom  in  the  most
      exceptional   compassionate   circumstances   and   mainly   dependent
      financially on relatives settled in the United  Kingdom".  After  that
      date paragraph 317 (i) (d) set out the requirement  for  a  parent  or
      grandparent under the age of 65 that he or she must be  "living  alone
      outside the United  Kingdom  in  the  most  exceptional  compassionate
      circumstances". Both before and after the change paragraph  317  (iii)
      contain the requirement that the individual concerned "is  financially
      wholly or mainly dependent on the relative present and settled in  the
      United Kingdom".


  10. In relation to the additional grounds relating to the most exceptional
      compassionate circumstances raised by counsel for  the  respondent  at
      the hearing Mr Bhanji submitted that the sponsor had appeared  without
      legal representation. Whilst he was offered an adjournment  there  was
      no evidence that he was properly advised as to the consequences of the
      decision he was being asked to make. We were asked to find that  there
      were errors of law and to set aside the decision.


  11. Mr Tufan submitted  that  paragraph  317  had  seven  requirements  in
      subparagraphs (i) to (vii). These were conjunctive and cumulative; all
      of them had to be satisfied. The requirements under 317 (i) (a) to (f)
      were in the alternative subject to the initial  requirement  that  the
      appellant had to be related to a person present  and  settled  in  the
      United Kingdom. If the respondent was not satisfied that the appellant
      was related in this way  then  there  was  no  need  to  consider  the
      requirements in 317 (i) (a) to (f) one  of  which  was  the  provision
      which applied in this case relating to living in the most  exceptional
      compassionate circumstances. Under Kwok  on  Tong  principles,  having
      accepted that the appellant and the sponsor were related  as  claimed,
      the respondent was entitled, indeed required to raise the issue of the
      most exceptional compassionate circumstances. Mr Tufan submitted  that
      the evidence submitted by the appellant came nowhere  near  satisfying
      the high threshold of this test. There was no evidence as to what  the
      FTTJ had said to the sponsor when asking  him  whether  he  wanted  an
      adjournment. We were asked to find that the FTTJ  reached  conclusions
      open to him on all the evidence and that there was no error of law.


  12. In his reply Mr Bhanji submitted that the appeal was not bound to fail
      if the FTTJ had considered all the evidence particularly that  on  the
      visa application form. In reply to our question as  to  what  evidence
      showed  that  the  appellant  was  living  in  the  most   exceptional
      compassionate circumstances, he pointed us to the  evidence  contained
      in the visa application form and the fact that  the  appellant  was  a
      widowed mother living alone in Pakistan.  Whilst  her  daughters  were
      married and living in Pakistan her three sons were living abroad.


  13. We reserved our determination.


  14. Paragraph 317 of the Immigration Rules provide;

         "317. The requirements to be met by  a  person  seeking  indefinite
         leave to enter or remain in  the  United  Kingdom  as  the  parent,
         grandparent or other dependent relative of  a  person  present  and
         settled in the United Kingdom are that the person:


         (i) is related to a  person  present  and  settled  in  the  United
         Kingdom in one of the following ways:


                  (a) parent or grandparent who is divorced, widowed, single
                  or separated aged 65 years or over; or


                  (b) parents or grandparents travelling together of whom at
                  least one is aged 65 or over; or


                  (c) a parent or  grandparent  aged  65  or  over  who  has
                  entered into a second relationship of  marriage  or  civil
                  partnership but cannot look to the spouse,  civil  partner
                  or children of  that  second  relationship  for  financial
                  support; and  where  the  person  settled  in  the  United
                  Kingdom is able and willing  to  maintain  the  parent  or
                  grandparent and any spouse or civil partner  or  child  of
                  the second relationship  who  would  be  admissible  as  a
                  dependant; or


                  (d) parent or grandparent under the age of  65  if  living
                  alone outside the United Kingdom in the  most  exceptional
                  compassionate circumstances; or


                  (e) parents or grandparents travelling  together  who  are
                  both under the age of 65 if living in the most exceptional
                  compassionate circumstances; or


                  (f) the son, daughter, sister, brother, uncle or aunt over
                  the age of 18 if living alone outside the  United  Kingdom
                  in the most exceptional compassionate circumstances; and


         (ii) is joining or accompanying a person who is present and settled
         in the United Kingdom or who is on the same occasion being admitted
         for settlement; and


         (iii) is financially wholly or mainly  dependent  on  the  relative
         present and settled in the United Kingdom; and


         (iv) can, and will, be accommodated adequately, together  with  any
         dependants, without recourse  to  public  funds,  in  accommodation
         which the sponsor owns or occupies exclusively; and


         (iv) can, and will, be maintained  adequately,  together  with  any
         dependants, without recourse to public funds; and


         (v) has no other close relatives in his  own  country  to  whom  he
         could turn for financial support; and


         (vi) if seeking leave to enter, holds a valid United Kingdom  entry
         clearance for entry in this capacity; and


         (vii) does not fall for  refusal  under  the  general  grounds  for
         refusal."


  15. We find that it was not  necessary  for  the  respondent  to  consider
      whether the appellant was a "parent or grandparent under the age of 65
      if living alone outside the United Kingdom  in  the  most  exceptional
      compassionate circumstances" because the question did not arise  where
      the  respondent  was  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant   had   not
      established that she was related to a person present  and  settled  in
      the United Kingdom. The provisions in the alternative in subparagraphs
      (a) to (f) of 317 (i) did not fall to be  considered  if  the  initial
      requirement in 317 (i) that the appellant  was  related  to  a  person
      present and settled in the United Kingdom was not met. However,  after
      the respondent's representative accepted that the  appellant  and  the
      sponsor were related as claimed then it became necessary  to  consider
      whether one  of  the  provisions  of  subparagraphs  (a)  to  (f)  was
      satisfied. It is common ground that the relevant provision is that  in
      subparagraph (d) namely whether the appellant had shown that she was a
      "parent or grandparent under the age of 65 if living alone outside the
      United Kingdom in the most exceptional compassionate circumstances".


  16. We find no merit  in  the  submission  that  in  the  absence  of  any
      indication that the respondent considered the question of whether  the
      appellant was living alone outside the  United  Kingdom  in  the  most
      exceptional compassionate  circumstances  we  should  imply  that  the
      respondent must have or did  in  fact  consider  this  and  even  less
      whether, having done so, the respondent accepted  that  the  appellant
      was living in these circumstances.


  17. Kwok on Tong makes it clear that a judge cannot allow an appeal unless
      satisfied that all the requirements of the relevant  Immigration  Rule
      are met. The provisions  of  subparagraph  317  (i)  (d)  are  such  a
      requirement. Had  the  point  not  been  raised  by  counsel  for  the
      respondent the FTTJ would have been under an obligation to do so.


  18. The FTTJ had a duty of fairness to the appellant, represented  by  the
      sponsor, to give him a proper opportunity to address a new point  such
      as this. The FTTJ did so, by offering an adjournment, as  recorded  in
      paragraph 11. There is no witness statement from  the  sponsor  as  to
      exactly what was said or what explanation he was  given.  However,  we
      find that there is a sufficient summary in paragraph 11 in  which  the
      FTTJ said; "There was no request for an adjournment by either party. I
      should note though that during the course of the  hearing  Mr  Roberts
      raised an issue under paragraph 317 (i) of whether the  appellant  met
      the rules  in  respect  of  "living  alone  in  the  most  exceptional
      compassionate circumstances". The sponsor was asked if  he  wished  to
      continue with the appeal or adjourn  to  try  to  obtain  any  further
      evidence. He elected to continue with the appeal. He  stated  that  he
      had written why there were compassionate circumstances in  the  letter
      of application." We find that the  FTTJ  acted  properly  in  all  the
      circumstances. The sponsor chose to proceed with  the  appeal  hearing
      and even now no evidence has been produced which  might  have  made  a
      difference. We find that there was no unfairness or error of law.


  19. We can find no indication that the FTTJ failed to  take  into  account
      and properly assess the oral and documentary evidence before  him.  Mr
      Bhanji submitted that  the  FTTJ  failed  to  take  into  account  the
      evidence contained in the appellant's interview  record.  We  conclude
      that the reference to an interview record was a mistake because we can
      find no indication that there was an oral interview with the appellant
      and the paragraph numbers to which Mr Bhanji referred are those in the
      lengthy application form completed by her. We find that the  FTTJ  did
      take this into account the information in the application form.  There
      is reference to this in paragraph 24 and the FTTJ's findings  in  this
      paragraph are  clearly  drawn  from  the  application  form  including
      paragraphs 40, 48, 51 and 52 on which Mr  Bhanji  relied.  Whilst  the
      appellant referred to RS 15,000 per month and said that this was spent
      on "everyday life needs, food, medical" it was open  to  the  FTTJ  to
      conclude  that  there  was  no  breakdown  of  her  day-to-day  living
      expenses. He was also entitled to rely on the lack of explanation  for
      continuing cash withdrawals after the appellant had been robbed or how
      she coped after her  husband  died  and  before  the  sponsor  started
      sending money. The fact that the sponsor had been  registered  with  a
      money transfer agency since November 2004 did not establish what funds
      had been sent to his mother and father before his father's  death  and
      after his father's death up to 2011. There was  no  witness  statement
      from the appellant providing this  information  or  other  information
      about her circumstances which might have assisted.


  20. The letter submitted from the medical centre  stated  "not  valid  for
      court". In the absence of  any  explanation  for  this  the  FTTJ  was
      entitled to give the letter little weight.


  21. In reply to our question as to  what  evidence  established  that  the
      appellant  was  living   in   the   most   exceptional   compassionate
      circumstances Mr Bhanji pointed us to the evidence  contained  in  the
      visa application form, the fact  that  the  appellant  was  a  widowed
      mother living alone in Pakistan, her daughters were married and living
      in Pakistan her three sons were living abroad. We find that looking at
      this evidence with all the other evidence in the round it was open  to
      the FTTJ to conclude that the appellant had not established  that  she
      met the difficult but not impossible test of establishing that she was
      living alone outside  the  United  Kingdom  in  the  most  exceptional
      compassionate circumstances. In  our  judgement  the  same  conclusion
      would inevitably have been reached even if full weight had been  given
      to the evidence contained in the medical report.


  22. We can find nothing in in  the  Immigration  Rules  themselves  or  in
      Mohamed to indicate that the different  provisions  of  paragraph  317
      which were in force at the time of the application and at the time  of
      the decision should have made any material difference to consideration
      of the facts in this appeal.


  23. We find that there are no errors of law and that the decision does not
      fall to be set aside. We uphold the determination.












      .............................................
            Signed                                             Date 13
      April 2014
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

