
IAC-TH-WYL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/00321/2014
                                                               OA/00325/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 March 2015                     |On 21 April 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                        RAJU TAMANG - FIRST appellant
                       TARA TAMANG - SECOND appellant
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICE - NEW DELHI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr E Wilford, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of Nepal, born respectively on 30  November
    1988 and 14 December 1986.  Their father was born on 25  February  1962
    and is also a national of Nepal who served in the British Army  in  the
    Gurkha Brigade between 11 February 1983 and 27 November 1994  and  also
    served in the Gurkha Reserve Unit in Brunei between  7  September  2005
    and 31 December 2009.  He was granted a settlement visa on  25  October
    2010.  The appellants' mother and their younger sister were issued with
    settlement visas on 20 October 2010.  Their sponsor then  travelled  to
    the United Kingdom on 17 April 2011  and  the  appellants'  mother  and
    sister likewise travelled on 9 September 2012.  They  all  returned  to
    Nepal in October 2012.

 2. On 23 September 2013 the appellants applied  for  leave  to  enter  the
    United Kingdom as their father's adult dependants.  Their  applications
    were refused on 4 December 2013 and they subsequently appealed  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Following a hearing at Taylor  House,  and  in  a
    decision promulgated  on  8  December  2014  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Finch dismissed their appeals on Article 8  grounds  following
    an acceptance by both appellants that they were not entitled  to  entry
    clearance under Section EC-DR because they did not  require  long  term
    personal care to perform everyday tasks as  a  result  of  their  ages,
    illness or disability.

 3. On 2 February 2015 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Mark Davies granted
    the appellants permission to appeal.  His reasons for so doing were:-

         "1.  The appellants seeks (sic)  permission  to  appeal  against  a
             decision of the First-tier Tribunal (the judge) promulgated on
             8th December 2014 who dismissed the appellants' appeal against
             the  decision  to  refuse  them  entry  clearance   as   adult
             dependants on Article 8 grounds.

         2.   The grounds and the  determination  do  disclose  an  arguable
             error  of  law.   The  judge  appears   to   have   given   no
             consideration to prospective breaches  of  fundamental  rights
             and that is  a  matter  that  is  relevant  to  the  issue  of
             proportionality."

 4. Thus the appeal came before me today.

 5. Mr Wilford referred me to paragraph 14 of the  judge's  decision  where
    she finds that family life does exist between the appellants and  their
    father for the purposes of Article 8(1) of the European  Convention  on
    Human Rights (ECHR) and that the appellant are emotionally, financially
    and culturally dependent upon their parents.  He also  referred  me  to
    the following paragraph wherein  is  an  analysis  of  the  appellants'
    family's arrivals and departures  from  Nepal.   Paragraph  15  of  the
    judge's decision states:-

         "15. However, in his witness statement the sponsor admitted that he
             had returned to Nepal with his wife and  younger  daughter  in
             October 2012 and had remained there until 2  April  2014.   He
             also admitted that the appellants' mother and  younger  sister
             had  remained  with  them  in  Nepal  until  September   2014.
             Therefore, at the time of  the  decision  (and  until  shortly
             before the appeal hearing) the appellants were  not  separated
             from the sponsor and/or their mother and no  breach  of  their
             family life had occurred.  The appellants' Counsel argued that
             the fact that the sponsor was in Nepal was  irrelevant  as  he
             had been granted settlement in the United  Kingdom.   However,
             for the purposes of Article 8 I had to consider whether  there
             was a breach of Article 8 at the date of the decisions and the
             facts suggested that at the time there was no such breach.  It
             is also the  case  that  at  the  date  of  the  decision  the
             appellants' mother and sister had in fact only been present in
             the United Kingdom between 9 September 2012 and some  time  in
             October 2012 and the sponsor had only been  there  between  17
             April 2011 and October 2012 and then returned  to  Nepal.   It
             was said that this was for a funeral but in fact  he  remained
             there until 2 April 2014 and said  in  his  witness  statement
             that he had previously had difficulty in obtaining  employment
             in the United Kingdom.  Therefore, in my view at the  date  of
             the decisions the  whole  family  were  living  in  Nepal  and
             exercising their right to family life there.   Therefore,  the
             refusal of entry clearance did  not  amount  to  a  breach  of
             Article 8(1)."

 6. He argued that the judge erred in concluding that the instant  decision
    did not amount to a breach and drew my attention to Section  8  of  the
    Human Rights Act 1998 contending that it envisages consideration of the
    lawfulness or otherwise of future breaches.  Likewise  he  argued  that
    the test in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 is formulated in the future tense:

         "Will the proposed removal be an interference by a public authority
         ..."

 7. He also reminded me of  the  case  of  Quila  and  Another  R  (in  the
    application of) v SSHD [2012]  1  ALL  ER  1011  which  provides  clear
    authority that there is no difference  between  positive  and  negative
    obligations.  Thus the fact that the Razgar test refers, at stage 2, to
    "removal" rather than exclusion is immaterial.

 8. Additionally, and alternatively, he  submitted  that  even  taking  the
    facts as they were at the date  of  decision  it  was  clear  that  the
    decision amounted to a disproportionate interference  with  the  family
    life between the appellants and their family in the United Kingdom.  He
    therefore urged me to allow  this  appeal  and  substitute  a  decision
    allowing the appellants' appeals.

 9. Mr Walker contended that there were clear findings in relation  to  the
    facts of the case which were not  in  dispute.   At  the  time  of  the
    decision the appellants have been with their family for  a  substantial
    period of time.  The appellants' parents were back with them  in  Nepal
    and in concluding that there was no breach the judge quite  simply  had
    not erred.

10. Judge Finch has made clear findings of fact and taken into account  all
    relevant case law.  Indeed Mr Wilford accepted that beyond  the  issues
    of the claimed  breach  and  proportionality  the  decision  cannot  be
    impugned.

11. I do not accept any of Mr Wilford's submissions.  Judge Finch has given
    clear and detailed reasons for coming to her conclusions  that  at  the
    date of the decision the whole of the family were living in  Nepal  and
    exercising their right to family  life  there.   She  was  entitled  to
    conclude that as a consequence the refusal of entry clearance  did  not
    amount to a breach of Article 8(1).  All her findings were open  to  be
    made on the available evidence and I  am  not  persuaded  that  on  the
    factual matrix found it was incumbent upon Judge Finch to look  to  the
    future as submitted by Mr Wilford.   Her  task  in  what  is  an  entry
    clearance case  was  to  consider  whether  the  respondent's  decision
    engaged the appellants' right to respect for their  family  life  under
    Article 8.  Clearly she was aware that the right  to  respect  for  the
    family life of one member necessarily encompasses the right to  respect
    for the family life of others with whom that family  life  is  enjoyed.
    From the factual matrix here it was inevitable that she would  come  to
    the conclusion that she did given the facts at the date of decision and
    if those have now  changed,  and  I  understand  that  the  appellants'
    parents may now be back in the United  Kingdom,  then  the  appellants'
    remedy is to make a fresh application.

12. No anonymity order has previously been made in these proceedings and no
    such application was made before me today.  There is no need  for  such
    an order.

Notice of Decision

13. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

14. I do not set aside the decision.



Signed        Date 15 April 2015.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard.
