
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA002372015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18th May 2016                             |On 13th June 2016             |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

                        md milad ur rahman chowdhury
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Gill Q.C., Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 2nd January  1988.  He
    appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Froom,  dated
    14th September 2015,  dismissing his appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    decision refusing him entry clearance to join his wife under  paragraph
    320(11) of the Immigration Rules.



2.   The Appellant entered the UK on 18th February 2007 with leave to  enter
    as a student until 12th June 2010. On 25th January 2013 he applied  for
    further leave as a Tier 4  (General)  Student  Migrant,  but  this  was
    refused on 12th June 2013 with no right of appeal.  The  Appellant  was
    served with a notice informing him of his liability to removal. On 24th
    July 2013, the Appellant was arrested and  detained.  He  was  informed
    that he would be removed on 31st July 2013. It had been discovered that
    his passport contained a fake vignette purporting to grant him leave as
    a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant.

3.    On  29th  July  2013,  the  Appellant's  former  solicitors  requested
    reconsideration of the Appellant's case on human  rights  grounds.  The
    letter indicated that the Appellant had become engaged to Ms Tina Islam
    [the Sponsor], a British citizen, on 22nd June 2013.  This  application
    was refused on 2nd September 2013 and, although  the  Appellant  had  a
    right to appeal, he did not exercise it. Instead he  made  a  voluntary
    departure on 19th October 2013.

4.   On 17th December 2013, the Appellant obtained a  new  passport  and  on
    21st October 2014 he applied for entry clearance as  the  spouse  of  a
    British citizen. The Sponsor had travelled to Bangladesh to  marry  him
    on 15th August 2014. The application was refused on the  single  ground
    that the Appellant had previously contrived in  a  significant  way  to
    frustrate the intentions of the Immigration Rules and there were  other
    aggravating circumstances, in that:

    (1)  The Appellant overstayed his initial leave after 12th June 2010;


    (2)  With his application for further  leave  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
         Student Migrant, the Appellant submitted a  passport  containing  a
         counterfeit  vignette.  The  Appellant  had   blamed   his   former
         solicitors, but when questioned on 24th  July  2013,  he  had  been
         unable to recall details such as the name  of  the  solicitor,  the
         name of the firm where he worked and the address of the firm;


    (3)  The Appellant made a human rights application two days before  his
         removal was due to take place. He said he would marry  the  Sponsor
         on 15th September 2013, but he did not  do  so  until  15th  August
         2014.  His human rights application was considered to be  frivolous
         or vexatious application; and


    (4)  The Appellant had studied at the University of Gloucestershire and
         the University of West London by means of deception  given  he  did
         not have leave to remain in order to study after 12th June 2010.


5.   The Appellant appealed against  the  refusal  of  entry  clearance  and
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Froom dismissed the appeal for the  following
    reasons. The Appellant's explanation for the use of a  false  stamp  in
    his passport was not capable of belief for nine reasons which the judge
    set out at paragraph 13. The judge found that the  Appellant  was  well
    aware he had obtained a false stamp and that he had used it in order to
    be able to study in the UK.
6.   The judge made the following findings at paragraphs 17 to 21:

         "17. I regard the use of a counterfeit stamp in this was as plainly
         within the compass of  the  rule.   In  other  words,  I  find  the
         Appellant was an overstayer and he had contrived in  a  significant
         way to frustrate the  intentions  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  The
         aggravating circumstances would be the multiple occasions on  which
         he used his false stamp to obtain or try  to  obtain  services  and
         advantages  to  which  he  was  not  entitled.  The   examples   of
         aggravating circumstances set out in the rule are  not  applicable,
         but that list is not exhaustive.

         18. ... I must consider all the facts and the matters weighing  for
         and against  exclusion  and  substitute  my  own  view  as  to  how
         discretion should be exercised.


         19. Having heard the evidence, I was left in  no  doubt  about  the
         genuineness of the  relationship  between  the  Appellant  and  the
         Sponsor. On the face of it, the substantive rules  in  Appendix  FM
         would appear  to  be  met  in  terms  of  maintenance  and  English
         language. The Sponsor is plainly  suffering  as  a  result  of  the
         separation from her husband. She is innocent of all blame. She does
         not appear willing to join her husband  in  Bangladesh  except  for
         visits. I note she is British-born and she has all her close family
         members here. The decision represents an  obstacle  to  this  young
         couple starting out on their married life together.


         20. On the other hand, the case is quite different to  PS  (India).
         That case emphasised the public interest in encouraging persons  in
         the UK unlawfully to go back and apply  for  entry  clearance.  The
         individual would  make  a  clean  breast  of  things  and  seek  to
         regularise his status. However, the Appellant in this case has  not
         made a clean breast of things and has concocted a highly improbable
         story in order to seek to avoid responsibility for his actions.


         21. There may come a point in time when it would no  longer  be  an
         appropriate exercise of  discretion  to  keep  this  couple  apart.
         However, that point has not yet been  reached  in  my  judgment.  I
         therefore  confirm  the  entry  clearance  officer's  exercise   of
         discretion and uphold the decision."


7.   The Appellant applied for permission to appeal on the ground  that  the
    judge failed to identify aggravating circumstances of a sort which were
    sufficient to come within paragraph 320(11). The judge erred in law  in
    concluding that the multiple occasions on which the Appellant used  the
    false stamp to obtain services, to which  he  was  not  entitled,  were
    aggravating circumstances under paragraph 320(11). The listed  examples
    in Rule 320(11) were not exhaustive, but were indicative of the sort of
    conduct which could constitute other  aggravating  circumstances.  They
    were of a different nature to the use of a false stamp. Something  more
    was  required  to  fall  within  the  concept  of   other   aggravating
    circumstances. The use of a passport with a false stamp was not  listed
    in paragraph 320(11) as an aggravating circumstance.

8.   Secondly, the judge failed to take  into  account  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant had specifically left the UK to  regularise  his  immigration
    status and to take into account the  long  period  of  time  since  his
    departure. In support of this ground, the Appellant relied on paragraph
    14 of PS (paragraph 320(11) discretion: care needed) India [2010]  UKUT
    440 (IAC). There was no recognition that the Appellant had  voluntarily
    left the UK on 19th October 2013,  fourteen  months  before  the  ECO's
    decision and 23 months before the First-tier Tribunal's decision.  This
    was a considerable period of time and the failure to take into  account
    the Appellant's  voluntary  departure  was  counter-productive  to  the
    general purpose of the relevant immigration rule and the maintenance of
    a coherent system of immigration.

9.   Thirdly, the judge failed to make a finding  on  the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant's  father-in-law  which  was  relevant  to  the  exercise  of
    discretion under 320(11), and, fourthly, the judge failed  to  exercise
    the discretion in paragraph 320(11) consistently with Article 8 of  the
    ECHR.

10.   Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge
    Hollingworth on the grounds that it was arguable  that  the  judge  had
    failed to set out  sufficient  analysis  of  the  relevant  factors  in
    exercising the discretion referred to in paragraph 18 of the  decision.
    It was arguable that the relevant factors pursuant to Article 8  should
    have been evaluated.

11.  At the hearing before me, Mr Gill relied  on  a  skeleton  argument,  a
    speaking note and a bundle of documents  including  evidence  from  the
    Appellant which would be relevant to re-deciding the appeal  should  an
    error of law be found. The Respondent relied on the Rule 24 response.

12.  Mr Gill submitted that the judge's  findings  on  paragraph  320(11)(i)
    and (iv) were not perverse and were in fact open to  him.  However,  he
    erred in law in concluding that the multiple use of a false  stamp  was
    enough to amount to aggravating circumstances. As  well  as  satisfying
    subparagraphs (i) and/or (iv) of paragraph  320(11)  there  had  to  be
    something else. The judge concluded that the use of a false  stamp  was
    an aggravating circumstance. This was not a correct  way  to  interpret
    the Rule.

13.  The list  in  paragraph  320(11)  was  restrictive.  There  had  to  be
    something similar to those items listed and use of a  false  stamp  was
    not similar. There had to be a difference between 'significant  way  to
    frustrate  the  intentions  of  these  Rules'  and  'other  aggravating
    circumstances'. Although the list was  not  exhaustive,  other  matters
    which could be taken into account must be of a similar kind to those in
    the list. The judge had failed to appreciate this. The multiple use  of
    a false stamp was not of this kind.


14.  The list was restricted because the Rule did not say  'or  any  other'.
    Obtaining and use of a false document was not included in the  list  in
    paragraph 320(11) and the use of a  false  stamp  was  not  of  a  kind
    specified. The use of a false stamp formed part  of  subparagraph  (iv)
    and was relevant to  whether  the  Appellant  had  contrived  to  in  a
    significant way to frustrate the intentions of the Rules.

15.  The list of aggravating circumstances specifically included the use  of
    a false identity, not the use of a false document, and the  aggravating
    circumstances were limited  as  such.  Although,  the  first  limb  was
    satisfied the last limb was not.  The  use  of  the  document  was  not
    included in the list. I should take a narrow view because the provision
    restricted an individual's rights. He relied on Daley  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2001] UKHL 26.

16.  Mr Gill submitted that there was a significant error in  assuming  that
    the conjunctive limb of paragraph 320(11) was also satisfied. The  mere
    fact that the Appellant had contrived in a significant way to frustrate
    intentions of the Rules, in using a document with a  false  stamp,  was
    contrary to the rules of construction.

17.  In relation to  ground  2,  the  judge  had  wrongly  distinguished  PS
    (India) on the basis that the Appellant had not made 'a clean breast of
    things'. There was no such  requirement.  The  judge  was  imposing  an
    additional requirement on the Appellant  and  had  failed  to  consider
    paragraph  14  of  decision:  "If  the  circumstances  are  not   truly
    aggravating there is in this context a serious risk that those  in  the
    position of Mr S will simply continue to remain in the  United  Kingdom
    unlawfully and will not seek to  regularise  their  status  as  he  has
    sought to do. The effect then is likely to be counter-productive to the
    general purposes of the relevant rules and  to  the  maintenance  of  a
    coherent system of immigration."

18.  Mr Gill submitted that there was also  an  error  in  the  exercise  of
    discretion. The judge, when considering the length of time at paragraph
    31 of his decision, should have done so in  a  structured  way  and  in
    accordance with the Immigration Rules.  Had the  judge  looked  at  the
    whole of the Rules he would have seen that in paragraph  320(7B)  there
    were viable indicators as to the  amount  of  time  which  should  have
    elapsed before an  application  was  made  and  this  would  have  been
    relevant to the period of time applicable. This Rule  was  relevant  to
    this application. The Appellant had been out  of  the  country  for  23
    months at the time of the judge's decision and he had left promptly  at
    his own expense. The judge had wrongly applied  paragraph  320(11)  and
    even  if  he  applied  it  correctly,  and   there   were   aggravating
    circumstances, he had not applied the relevant time period set  out  in
    paragraph 320(7B).

19.  The Rules must be applied consistently with Article  8.   There  needed
    to be certainty and the judge had  not  given  an  indication  of  when
    discretion should be exercised. Mr Gill relied on paragraph 32 of Quila
    and Another v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2011]  UKSC
    45. If this approach had been taken there  could  only  have  been  one
    answer. The Appellant should not be  punished  anymore  and  discretion
    should have been exercised in his favour.
20.  Mr Tufan submitted that there was no reference to the guidance  in  the
    Rules, although there was reference to it by the judge in  PS  (India).
    The guidance could not be used to interpret the Rules, unless the Rules
    referred to such guidance and this Rule did not do so.  However,  there
    were examples in the guidance over and above  those  expressed  in  the
    Rules and the Appellant's behaviour was covered in the guidance. He had
    been receiving goods and benefits, namely higher education in  the  UK,
    to which he was  not  entitled.   He  had  made  a  frivolous  previous
    application. The judge had found that the Appellant did not have  leave
    to remain and then he made an application to remain on the basis of his
    intended marriage to his wife. This frivolous application comes  within
    the second limb and was referred to  in  the  ECO's  decision  of  11th
    December 2014. Although, the Appellant had paid for his own  flight  he
    was facing imminent removal.

21.  In relation to ground 2, it was clear from PS (India)  that  the  judge
    meant going abroad and making an application was making a 'clean breast
    of things'. There was no deception in PS (India).  Rule 320(7B) was not
    relevant. The discretionary power  was  under  paragraph  320(11).  The
    period to be taken into account was not the period until the First-tier
    Tribunal hearing, but the date of refusal even for Article 8 cases.

22.  Mr Tufan relied on paragraph 31 of VW (Uganda)  v  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2009]  EWCA  Civ  5  and  submitted  that  the
    Appellant had to show serious  obstacles  or  difficulties  which  went
    beyond matters of choice  or  inconvenience.  This  case  did  not  get
    anywhere near that. There were no insurmountable  obstacles  to  family
    life continuing in the Appellant's own country. It was not a matter  of
    choice.

23.  In response, Mr Gill submitted that the guidance  was  irrelevant.  The
    Appellant had not made a frivolous  application  because  he  had  been
    arrested prior to his marriage and  therefore  the  marriage  had  been
    unable to take  place.  His  application  was  not  frivolous  in  that
    respect. Judge Froom had not taken this into account in his  assessment
    of  the  Appellant's  evidence  because  it  was  not   relevant.   The
    aggravating circumstances related to the use of a false stamp, not to a
    frivolous application.

24.  Paragraph 320(7B), although not applicable, was relevant  to  the  time
    period that had to have elapsed. The Tribunal had discretion to  remake
    the  decision  and  therefore  should   look   at   the   circumstances
    appertaining at the date of the decision.

25.  It was not reasonable to expect the Appellant's wife to go and live  in
    Bangladesh following the hardship and seriousness test in VW.  She  had
    been born and bred in the UK and had limited knowledge  of  Bangladesh.
    It would be a different world and it was unreasonable to expect her  to
    go there. The issue in this case was how discretion should be exercised
    under paragraph 320(11) when the Appellant had left the UK  voluntarily
    and at his own expense.



Discussion and Conclusion

26.  The essential facts of this case are that the Appellant  overstayed  in
    the UK and used a false stamp in his passport to enable him  to  study.
    After his arrest, he was served  with  a  notice  of  removal,  but  he
    subsequently left the UK voluntarily and reapplied for entry  clearance
    as a spouse of a British citizen.

27.   The  Appellant's  entry  clearance  application  was   refused   under
    paragraph 320(11) which states:

         "Grounds on which entry clearance or leave to enter the  UK  should
         normally be refused:


         (11) Where the applicant has previously contrived in a  significant
             way to frustrate the intentions of these Rules by
             (i)  overstaying; or
             (ii) breaching a condition attached to his leave; or
             (iii)    being an illegal entrant; or
             (iv) using deception in an application  for  entry  clearance,
                  leave to enter or remain or in order to  obtain  documents
                  from the Secretary of State or a third party  required  in
                  support of the application (whether  successful  or  not),
                  and


             there are other aggravating circumstances, such as absconding,
             not meeting temporary admission/reporting restrictions or bail
             conditions, using an assumed identity or multiple  identities,
             switching nationality, making frivolous  applications  or  not
             complying with the re-documentation process."


28.  There are two limbs to  paragraph  320(11).  The  first  limb  includes
    alternative specified elements set out at subparagraphs (i) to (iv) and
    the second limb sets out a list of aggravating circumstances. The  list
    is not exhaustive and contains examples of  such  conduct.  Both  limbs
    must be satisfied.


Ground 1

29.  I accept that the  list  of  aggravating  circumstances  is  restricted
    because it does not contain the words 'or any other type'. It  contains
    the words 'such as' and then sets out a list of examples of  a  certain
    kind only. Therefore, in order  to  come  within  the  second  limb  of
    paragraph 320(11), the behaviour must be of a kind  specified  in  that
    list. I also accept that the list should be  interpreted  restrictively
    because the provisions of paragraph 320(11) would  in  many  situations
    interfere with an applicant's fundamental rights.


30.  However, I am not persuaded by Mr Gill's submission that using a  false
    stamp did not amount to an aggravating circumstance  because  the  list
    only referred to using a false identity and not using a false document.
    The Appellant's passport was not false, but contained a false stamp.  A
    passport issued through the proper channels in a false name was  not  a
    false document, but its use could amount to using a false identity.

31.  I am of the view that using a document containing a false stamp  is  of
    the same nature as using a false identity. Using a passport in a  false
    identity to which the holder is not entitled is 'of the same  kind'  as
    using a passport containing a false stamp to which the  holder  is  not
    entitled. I find that using a false stamp in a passport was of  a  kind
    specified in the list in 320(11) and therefore it  was  an  aggravating
    circumstance within paragraph 320(11). On the facts of this case,  both
    limbs were satisfied.

32.  Accordingly, there was no error of law in the  judge's  conclusion,  at
    paragraph 17, that the multiple use of a false stamp to obtain  or  try
    to obtain services and  advantages  to  which  the  Appellant  was  not
    entitled was an aggravating circumstance for the purposes of 320(11).


Ground 2

33.  In assessing the exercise of discretion,  the  judge  assessed  whether
    the  Appellant's  breach  of  UK  immigration  law   was   sufficiently
    aggravating to justify the refusal of entry clearance  (PS  (India)  at
    paragraph 14). I am of the view that  he  was  entitled  to  take  into
    account the Appellant's evidence given on appeal.  The  judge  rejected
    the Appellant's account that he was  unaware  that  the  stamp  in  his
    passport was false. The judge gave cogent reasons for  his  conclusions
    and there was no challenge to this finding.

34.  Mr Gill submitted that the judge  had  imported  an  extra  requirement
    that the Appellant should 'come clean' and tell  the  truth  about  his
    dishonesty. I am not persuaded by this submission because the judge, in
    reviewing  the  discretion  under  the  Rules,  looked   at   all   the
    circumstances. He did not apply a separate  test,  but  considered  the
    evidence as a whole and concluded that the  Appellant's  behaviour  was
    sufficiently aggravating to justify the refusal.

35.  It is clear from paragraph 3 that the judge was took into  account  the
    Appellant's voluntary departure at his own expense more than 12  months
    before he applied for entry clearance. This application was not refused
    under paragraph 320(7B), the provisions of which are  mandatory  unless
    certain exceptions apply. The period of time between leaving the UK and
    making  the  application  for  entry  clearance  was  a  factor  to  be
    considered, but it was  not  determinative  in  this  case.  The  judge
    properly considered the exercise of discretion under paragraph 320(11).




36.  At paragraph 18, the judge stated that that he should consider all  the
    facts and matters weighing for and against exclusion and substitute his
    own view as to how the discretion  should  be  exercised.  The  judge's
    finding that the Appellant had concocted a  high  improbable  story  in
    order to seek to avoid responsibility for his actions was one which was
    open to him on the evidence before him and one which he was entitled to
    take into account in deciding how discretion should be exercised.

37.  I find that the judge took into account the length  of  time  that  had
    elapsed, but concluded that, given the Appellant's current  refusal  to
    accept  responsibility  for  his  actions,  discretion  should  not  be
    exercised in his favour. There was no  error  of  law  in  exercise  of
    discretion.


Ground 3

38.  The judge took into account the evidence of the Appellant's  father  in
    law and the weight to be attached to it was a matter for the judge. Any
    representations made by Immigration Officers prior to  the  Appellant's
    voluntary departure from the UK would not affect the application of the
    Immigration Rules. There was no material error of law  in  the  judge's
    decision in respect of ground 3.


Ground 4

39.  The judge accepted that the Appellant's relationship  was  genuine  and
    the substantive requirements of the Immigration Rules  were  satisfied.
    He took into account the effect on the  Sponsor  at  paragraph  19.  He
    accepted that she would not go to Bangladesh and the refusal  of  entry
    clearance was an interference with their family  life.  The  judge  was
    well aware of the Article 8 implications.

40.  The judge balanced this against  the  Appellant's  behaviour  including
    his evidence on appeal. The Appellant had used a counterfeit stamp  and
    had claimed, in interview after his arrest, that he  had  no  knowledge
    that the stamp was false. He had applied for entry  clearance  and  put
    forward an account on appeal that he had no knowledge  that  the  stamp
    was false which was rejected by the judge.

41.  This case was different from  PS  (India).  The  judge  identified  the
    relevant factors he had taken into  account  in  the  exercise  of  his
    discretion and his decision was open to him on the evidence before him.
    There was no error of law in the judge's decision.







Summary

42.  I find that multiple use of the false stamp by the  Appellant  amounted
    to aggravating circumstances for the purposes of paragraph 320(11). The
    judge properly considered the exercise  of  discretion  and  took  into
    account all relevant circumstances. There was no material error of  law
    in his decision dated 14th September 2015. I  dismiss  the  Appellant's
    appeal.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 9th June 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



           J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 9th June 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
