
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/00829/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 September 2015                 |On 18 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

                              Miss Aiza Waheed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Entry Clearance Officer
                                 (ISLAMABAD)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M A Saeed, Legal Solutions Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms E Savage, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. In this appeal, the  appellant appeals against a decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal  dismissing her appeal against a  decision  taken  on  18
    December 2013 to refuse her entry  clearance  to  come  to  the  United
    Kingdom as the partner of a Points-Based System Migrant.

Background Facts

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who was born on  27  June  1991.
    She applied for entry clearance under Paragraph 319C of the Immigration
    Rules HC395 (as amended).  That application was refused  on  the  basis
    that the Entry Clearance Officer was not satisfied that  the  appellant
    and sponsor's marriage  was  subsisting  or  that  that  the  appellant
    intended to live with the sponsor throughout her stay in the UK.

Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    promulgated on 24 February 2015, Judge Malins dismissed the appellant's
    appeal.  The First-tier Tribunal found that the appellant had failed to
    show (by a wide margin) that the marriage was subsisting  or  that  the
    appellant and sponsor intended to live together in the UK.

Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 4. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.  The
    grounds of appeal can be summarised as essentially that, i)  the  judge
    erred by failing to take into account the evidence and  relevant  case-
    law regarding the relationship between the appellant  and  sponsor  and
    ii) that the judge was more influenced  by  the  sponsor's  immigration
    history (an irrelevant matter) rather  than  the  relationship.  On  24
    April 2015 First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Pooler  granted  the  appellant
    permission to appeal.  Thus, the appeal came before me.

Summary of the Submissions

 5. Mr Saeed submitted that the judge had misdirected herself. He  asserted
    that there was an error in the Entry Clearance Officer's decision as it
    overlooked the visit on 6 April 2013 when the sponsor went to  Pakistan
    and married the appellant. Since April 2013  two  further  visits  have
    been made,  September  2013  and  September  2014  but  the  judge  has
    overlooked these. The sponsor and appellant have been in regular  touch
    - there is considerable evidence in  the  bundle  of  e-tickets,  daily
    contact through Skype and the internet and of the  joint  bank  account
    and of remittances. He submitted that the judge effectively ignored the
    evidence. Mr Saeed relied on the case of  Naz  (subsisting  marriage  -
    standard of proof) Pakistan [2012] UKUT 00040 (IAC). In that  case,  at
    headnote ii), the Tribunal specifically held that post decision  visits
    by a sponsor to his spouse are admissible in  evidence  in  appeals  to
    show that a marriage is subsisting. He  also  relied  on  the  case  of
    Goudey (subsisting marriage - evidence) Sudan [2012] UKUT  00041  (IAC)
    in particular headnote  i)  which  clarifies  that  in  GA  (Subsisting
    marriage) Ghana [2006] UKAIT 00046 evidence of  a  subsisting  marriage
    does not require  the  production  of  particular  evidence  of  mutual
    devotion. He submitted that  there  is  no  requirement  or  additional
    significant burden to show a genuine intention  to  live  together.  He
    submitted that it is clear from the decision that the judge was  overly
    concerned with the sponsor's immigration  history.  Several  paragraphs
    are devoted to the immigration history. There is nothing adverse in the
    sponsor's immigration history. He is in the UK working lawfully. Tier 1
    leave is on the basis of income not what job you  do.  The  immigration
    history is described in a negative  way.  The  judge  has  been  highly
    critical of the evidence; for example, the wedding photos, the mode  of
    communication and number of visits.  The  judge  failed  to  take  into
    consideration different cultural values.  It  is  quite  common  for  a
    husband to live apart from his wife for work. In this case  it  is  the
    refusal of entry clearance that is keeping the couple apart. The  judge
    was more influenced by the immigration history than the real  issue  of
    the subsistence of the marriage.

 6. Ms Savage relied on the Rule 24 response and submitted that  the  judge
    has taken all the evidence into account. It was not  correct  that  the
    judge had overlooked the visits - see paragraph 8(d).  The  judge  took
    the bank account details into account and the remittances post decision
    but was entitled to note as a fact that there was only  one  remittance
    prior to the Entry Clearance Officer's refusal. Post decision  evidence
    is only relevant to what the position was at the date of  the  refusal.
    The weight to be attached to the evidence was a matter for  the  judge.
    Ms Savage referred to  paragraph  7  of  the  decision  in  Goudey  and
    submitted that in contrast to the evidence in Goudey in this  case  the
    judge found evidence of communication to be limited. With regard to the
    reliance by the appellant on the case of Naz, Ms Savage submitted  that
    headnote i) emphasises that it is for the appellant to  establish  that
    the relationship is subsisting. It is  open  to  the  judge  to  attach
    limited weight to the documents. Although the judge  did  set  out  the
    sponsor's immigration history it is  clear  from  paragraph  9  of  the
    decision that the judge's findings on the subsistence of  the  marriage
    was only in respect of the matters considered at sub-paragraphs 8  (c)-
    (h). The judge heard oral evidence and  took  that  into  account.  The
    judge does not need to set out in detail every piece of evidence.

Discussion

 7. I have considered in detail the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Although I am reluctant to go behind the  findings  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on an issue of credibility it appears in this  case  that  the
    judge's  view  of  the  sponsor's  immigration  history  has  adversely
    influenced the decision.

 8. At paragraph 8 the judge set out the sponsor's immigration  history  in
    some detail including making a couple of comments, for example, at sub-
    paragraph 8 (iv) the judge notes that there is no evidence of the basis
    on which a two year highly skilled migrant visa was granted.

 9. At paragraph 9 of the decision the judge sets out:

         "The findings above show that the appellant has been employed in  a
         modest way for the majority of his study years in the  UK  and  has
         used every possible device, to prolong his stay"

10. There is nothing in the sponsor's immigration history to support a view
    that he has 'used every possible devise  to  prolong  his  stay  here'.
    There is nothing in the decision or the evidence on the court  file  to
    suggest that the sponsor has had any of his applications refused or has
    attempted to stay in the UK other than pursuant  to  lawful  grants  of
    leave made by the Secretary of State.  It  is  not  a  case  where  the
    sponsor has attempted to circumvent the Immigration Rules with spurious
    or fraudulent applications, failed to  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Rules or has breached any conditions of his leave. I accept Mr  Saeed's
    submissions that there is nothing adverse in the sponsor's  immigration
    history. If the Secretary of State was prepared to grant him leave  for
    each application he made then there is nothing adverse to be drawn from
    his immigration history.

11. The judge also appears to have been influenced by the  'modest'  nature
    of his employment in the UK. This is entirely irrelevant.

12. Ms Savage quite rightly pointed out  that  at  paragraph  9  the  judge
    indicates that the findings in sub-paragraphs 8(c) - (h) are considered
    separately to the Immigration history. However, those paragraphs do not
    set out sufficient analysis or reasons to enable the appellant to  know
    why the conclusions were reached.

13. Turning to the evidence in the case,  the  judge  considered  that  the
    appellant and sponsor had engaged in a  paper  producing  exercise  and
    found that the appellant (the reference was clearly intended to  be  to
    the sponsor) was not a credible witness in any aspect  of  the  appeal.
    The judge recorded at paragraph 8:

         "I now make the following findings of fact and credibility, which
         will inform my determination"

14. What follows in the decision does not contain any reasoning as  to  why
    the sponsor was not found to be credible or why the  judge  effectively
    disregarded all the evidence as a 'paper producing exercise'. The judge
    has not set out how or on what basis those findings were reached.

15. I accept Ms Savage's submission that the judge took  into  account  the
    two visits to Pakistan made by the sponsor after the marriage. However,
    it appears that the judge disregarded those visits as evidence to  show
    that a marriage is subsisting.  No reasoning is given for rejecting the
    visits as evidence to support the subsistence of the  marriage  at  the
    time of the decision but it would seem that the basis for this might be
    that the judge considered that the sponsor had made a number of  visits
    to Pakistan over the years that he was in the UK 'no doubt to visit his
    family' (para 8(d)(ii)) the inference being that these  further  visits
    could not necessarily  be  attributable  to  visiting  his  wife.  This
    appears to be mere speculation on the part of the judge.  In  order  to
    disregard this evidence some reasons based on evidence  ought  to  have
    been articulated.

16. The judge considered evidence of remittances but accorded little weight
    as only one remittance was made prior to the refusal of the appellant's
    application. I  accept  Ms  Savage's  submission  that  the  judge  was
    entitled to be unimpressed by that evidence.

17. With regard the evidence of communication the judge  noted  that  there
    were no letters, cards or emails. There were 89 pages of printouts, the
    significance of which was incomprehensible to the judge,  22  pages  of
    computer screen printouts and a single unnumbered  page  which  was  an
    extract from a telephone bill. Although the evidence was not  presented
    coherently and the telephone bill extract  does  not  indicate  between
    whom the calls were  made,  it  is  clear  that  overall  the  evidence
    represents communication via Skype between the  appellant  and  sponsor
    over a period of months in 2013 and (although to a  lesser  extent)  by
    telephone over  a period in excess of a year.  There  is  no  need  for
    other forms of communication in addition.

18. The remaining items of evidence were wedding photos and evidence that a
    bank account was opened in June 2013 though no balance was  given.  The
    fact of the marriage was not in contention so the  wedding  photos  may
    not have taken the appellant any further. The  judge  was  entitled  to
    place little weight on a bank account  that  had  no  evidence  of  any
    balance.

Error of Law

19. In my judgement the  judge  has  adopted  an  irrational  view  of  the
    sponsor's immigration history leading to  the  finding  that  he  'used
    every possible devise to prolong his stay here'. In the absence of  any
    reasoning for the judge's conclusions on credibility I am of  the  view
    that this erroneous view  has  tainted  the  judge's  analysis  of  the
    evidence. The judge has failed to give sufficient reasons as to how and
    why she has reached her conclusion on credibility. Further,  the  judge
    has misdirected herself as weight to be attached to  the  documentation
    relating to the Skype and telephone conversations and the  evidence  in
    relation to the visits to Pakistan. The visits to Pakistan and evidence
    of communication are substantial support for  the  subsistence  of  the
    marriage. In the case of Goudey the Upper Tribunal held  (at  paragraph
    10) that:

         "Parties who intend to conduct a relationship by telephone  do  not
         also have to  demonstrate  that  they  conduct  a  relationship  by
         written correspondence in order to show that they  intend  to  live
         together"

20. At paragraph 12 in Goudey the Tribunal also held that  the  requirement
    set out in GA only requires  that  there  is  a  real  relationship  as
    opposed to the merely formal one  of  a  marriage  that  has  not  been
    terminated and that to show that there was a genuine intention to  live
    together does not impose some significant burden  to  produce  evidence
    other than that showing that there was  a  genuine  intention  to  live
    together.

21. Accordingly I find  that  there  has  been  an  error  of  law  in  the
    assessment of this case and the decision is set-aside.

Re-making the decision

22. I therefore re-make the decision.  The only issues in terms of  failure
    to meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules were the  subsistence
    of the marriage and intention to live together- Sub-paragraphs 319C (d)
    and (e). Having considered all the evidence taken as a  whole  (as  set
    out above)  there  is  sufficient  evidence  to  demonstrate  that  the
    marriage is subsisting and that the parties intend to live together.  I
    am therefore satisfied on the evidence that the appellant has  met  the
    requirements of Paragraph 319C of the Immigration Rules.

23. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously. Having
    considered all the circumstances and evidence  I  do  not  consider  it
    necessary to make an anonymity direction.

Decision

24. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law.  I set aside that decision.

25. The appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  the  Entry  Clearance
    office is allowed.


Signed   P M Ramshaw   Date 18 September 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw

