
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                  Appeal
Number:     OA/00279/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                  |Determination Promulgated |
|On: 25th June 2014                     |On: 26th June 2014        |
|                                       |                          |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                       Entry Clearance Officer, Dhaka
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                           Musammod Marjina Begum
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr Kandola,  Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Kalam, Kalam Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The Respondent is a national of Bangladesh date  of  birth  22nd
       March 1990. On the  28th  March  2014  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       (Judge   Flecther-Hill)   allowed   her   appeal   against   the
       Respondent's decision to refuse to grant her entry clearance  as
       the spouse of  a  person  present  and  settled  in  the  United
       Kingdom.  The Respondent now has permission  to  appeal  against
       that decision.

    2. The only matter in issue  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
       whether the marriage to the sponsor was  valid.  The  ECO  noted
       that the sponsor had been married twice previously, and since no
       documentary  evidence  had  been  supplied  in  respect  of  the
       dissolution of those earlier marriages, the  ECO  could  not  be
       satisfied that he had been free to marry the Respondent when  he
       did.

    3. The determination  sets  out  much  of  the  evidence,  and  the
       submissions of the parties. The 'findings of fact and  decision'
       amount to 3 short paragraphs in which the Judge accepts that the
       sponsor and Respondent are validly married. No reasons are given
       for reaching that conclusion.  As Judge  Nicholson  observes  in
       granting permission to appeal, determinations do not need to  be
       lengthy but the losing party is entitled  to  understand  how  a
       decision was reached. If no reasons are given, it is  impossible
       for the reader to know.  I am satisfied that  the  determination
       is flawed for want of reasoning. I set the decision aside.

    4. The agreed chronology of events, supported  by  the  documentary
       evidence, is as follows. The sponsor  married  a  British  woman
       called Nazma Meah on the 5th February 1998 in  Bangladesh.    He
       was granted entry clearance as a result of that  marriage  later
       that same year and in 2005 he became a  British  national.    On
       the 24th February 2006 he married in Bangladesh  a  woman  named
       Ahia Khanom. She was domiciled in Bangladesh at the time but the
       sponsor was by then domiciled in the UK. That marriage may  well
       have been recognised in Bangladesh but was not considered  valid
       by UK law, since the first marriage to  Ms  Meah  had  not  been
       dissolved. Ms Khanom appears to have remained in Bangladesh.  As
       far as the Secretary of State is concerned she is not a  British
       national and the post in Dhaka has no record of her ever  having
       made an application to join the sponsor in the UK.  On the  12th
       May 2006 the sponsor obtained  a  decree  absolute  from  Dudley
       County Court dissolving his first marriage to Ms Meah.    As  we
       have seen, at that point the Sponsor was no longer a party to  a
       marriage considered valid in  UK  law.   He  apparently  however
       considered himself married to Ms Khanom, by  either  Islamic  or
       Bangladeshi law or both, since he subsequently repudiated her by
       pronouncing talaq on the 22nd November 2010.   That matter  does
       not concern the Tribunal.   The decree absolute issued by Dudley
       County Court in 2006  makes  it  clear  that  when  the  Sponsor
       married the Respondent on the 23rd February 2011 he was free  to
       marry. The marriage is  valid  by  UK  law  and  the  appeal  is
       allowed.


Decisions

    5. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law
       and it is set aside.

    6. I re-make the decision in the appeal as follows: "the appeal  is
       allowed under the immigration rules".




      Deputy          Upper          Tribunal          Judge           Bruce


      25th June  2014
