
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/00395/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 August 2015                    |On 7 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                           Mr Indra Bahadur Magar
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Akinbola, Counsel instructed by Howe & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Horvath dismissing his appeal against  the  refusal
    by the Entry Clearance Officer to grant him entry clearance to join his
    sponsor for settlement  as  his  dependent  son  under  the  discretion
    provided for in the Secretary of State's published policy  in  relation
    to the dependants of Foreign and Commonwealth  HM  Forces  Members  and
    under Article 8 ECHR.  The appellant applied together with his parents,
    whose applications were approved but his was rejected.

2.   The appellant is a national of Nepal born on 2 October 1988.

3.   His father and sponsor was a Gurkha who was discharged  from  the  army
    in 1984.  The appellant with his parents  made  an  application  on  17
    September 2013 to accompany his parents for settlement  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  Following an interview on 12 November 2013,  the  application
    of his parents was approved but his was refused on 3 December 2013.  At
    the date of the refusal of his application both his parents were  still
    in Nepal.  His father left Nepal on 15 December  2013  and  his  mother
    left in August 2013, some eight months later.

4.   At the date of application and decision, the  appellant  was  25  years
    old, a student and was living with his parents in his  brother-in-law's
    home.  He was supported financially by his parents,  from  the  pension
    his  father  received  from  the  British  Army.   He  suffers  from  a
    congenital heart defect, leaving him physically weak.

5.   At the hearing before the judge, the appellant's Counsel,  Mr  Collins,
    relied upon Article 8 ECHR outside the  Immigration  Rules  as  to  the
    appellant's right to a  family  and  private  life,  and  secondly  the
    discretion provided for in the Secretary of State's published policy in
    relation to the  dependants  of  Foreign  and  Commonwealth  HM  Forces
    Members, which included Gurkhas, and the issue relating  to  historical
    injustice.   Mr  Collins  relied  in  particular  upon  Ghising  &  Ors
    (Ghurkhas/BOCs: historic wrong; weight) [2013] UKUT 567 (IAC).

6.   It is argued in the grounds that  the  judge's  Record  of  Proceedings
    would  show  that  the  evidence  of   the   appellant's   father   was
    unchallenged.  That evidence was to the effect that had he been allowed
    to apply for settlement in the UK upon his discharge from the  army  in
    1984, he  would  have  done  so.   However,  he  was  never  given  the
    opportunity until recently.

7.   Based on the unchallenged evidence of the appellant's  father,  I  find
    that the judge erred in finding  that  there  was  insufficient  cogent
    evidence for finding that the sponsor would have applied for settlement
    in the UK upon his army discharge in 1984 had he been allowed to do so.
     The judge's finding goes against the father's unchallenged evidence.

8.   The respondent's policy, which came into  force  in  January  2013  and
    which is in respect of applications for settlement by an adult child of
    a former Gurkha, appears to have come into force  after  the  Court  of
    Appeal's decision in R (Gurung) v SSHD [2013] 1 WLR 2546, which is  the
    authority on historic injustice suffered by Gurkha  and/or  dependants;
    and the Tribunal's decision in Ghising & Ors  (Ghurkhas/BOCs:  historic
    wrong; weight) Nepal [2013] UKUT 567 (IAC).

9.   I accept Ms Akinbola's submission that the findings made by  the  judge
    at paragraph 34 which led her to conclude  that  there  was  sufficient
    evidence to justify a grant of settlement status to the appellant under
    the discretionary criteria of the policy, should have led the judge  to
    find that the appellant's case engaged Article 8(1) and  therefore  the
    appeal should have been allowed under Article 8.

10.  Indeed Mr Wilding submitted that if Article 8(1)  is  engaged  then  on
    the facts the appellant should succeed.

11.  I find that those findings were sufficient to engage Article 8(1).

12.  I find that the unchallenged evidence of the appellant's father to  the
    effect that he would have settled in the United Kingdom in 1984 had  he
    been given the opportunity to do so was, as noted in Ghising,  material
    to the outcome of the applicability of the respondent's policy  and  to
    the proportionality exercise.

13.  I find that had the judge applied her findings under the policy to  the
    Article 8 appeal, she  would  have  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    appellant engaged Article 8(1) of the ECHR and  that  applying  Ghising
    and Gurung his appeal should succeed.

Notice of Decision

I find that the judge's  decision  cannot  stand  for  the  material  errors
identified above.

I redetermine the appeal and allow the appellant's appeal.

Prior to signing this determination, a letter was received from  Howe  &  Co
dated 24 August 2015 information the Upper Tribunal that the  appellant  was
granted indefinite leave to enter on 10 August 2015.  The respondent  should
have been aware of this and saved the parties and the  Upper  Tribunal  time
and funds.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

