

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/00607/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre |Decision and Reasons            |
|                                      |Promulgated                     |
|On 5 April 2016                       |On 11 April 2016                |
|                                      |                                |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                          emmanuel jonathan johnson
                          (no anonymity direction)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      entry clearance officer, kingston
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs A Johnson (Appellant's mother and sponsor)
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on 20 November 1999 and is a citizen of Jamaica.
     He applied to join his mother  who  is  settled  in  the  UK  but  his
    application for entry clearance was refused on 19 November  2014.   His
    appeal against that decision was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Frankish on 14 July 2015.  It is against that decision that he  appeals
    with permission to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Judge Frankish found that the decision to refuse  entry  clearance  was
    correct because the evidence was not sufficient to show that (i) it was
    more likely than not that the sponsor had sole responsibility  for  the
    appellant, (ii) the appellant's exclusion from the UK  was  undesirable
    because of serious and compelling family or other considerations, (iii)
    the decision was contrary to the best interests of  the  appellant,  or
    (iv) there was any reason to consider article 8  of  the  human  rights
    convention separately as all relevant issues had been examined.

 3. The appellant was legally represented before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and the same solicitors completed the  application  for  permission  to
    appeal.  The grounds allege  that  Judge  Frankish  had  misapplied  TD
    (Yemen) and Mundeba (DRC)  because  he  had  conflated  the  issues  of
    responsibility for  day  to  day  care  with  sole  responsibility  and
    although he made findings on the former he made no  clear  findings  on
    the latter.  The alternative ground is that the  judge  suggested  that
    the appellant could care for his grandmother which could not be in  the
    child's best interest.

 4. The sponsor attended the hearing and explained that she had been unable
    to continue paying for legal representation for the appellant.  In such
    circumstances I explained the nature of the Upper Tribunal hearing  and
    the factors I  needed  to  consider.   I  was  satisfied  that  sponsor
    understood these matters; it was evident  that  she  had  been  advised
    about what to expect and she was able to take part effectively so as to
    be able to represent her own interests and those of her son.

 5. Mr McVeety replied to the grounds of appeal  and  argued  that  it  was
    evidence from the decision that Judge Frankish had had proper regard to
    the two cases.  Not only had he quoted from them in paragraphs  13  and
    14 but he had gone on to make relevant findings in paragraphs 16 to  20
    applying their principles.  In paragraph 16 the judge had found that he
    did not believe the evidence that the sponsor had been involved in  the
    appellant's upbringing.  He pointed to  the  fact  that  the  sponsor's
    mother had been the effective mother of  the  appellant  since  he  was
    young, the sponsor having had to abandon him for understandable reasons
    given her own  personal  history.   The  judge  gave  reasons  for  his
    findings, drawing on the age at which  the  child  was  left  with  his
    grandmother  and  the  fact  he  was  a  teenager  learning   to   take
    responsibility for himself.  Mr McVeety submitted that  these  findings
    were sound and that they could only be read as meaning that  the  judge
    did not accept that the sponsor had sole responsibility.

 6. Turning to the others issues, Mr McVeety  argued  that  the  judge  had
    proper regard to the appellant's living circumstances in  Jamaica.   He
    did not accept that the appellant's grandmother was unable to  continue
    caring for him.  He argued that the author of the grounds of appeal had
    been misleading in  suggesting  that  the  judge  had  found  that  the
    appellant could care for his grandmother since what was  actually  said
    in paragraph 19 was that it was reasonable to expect the child to  take
    some responsibility for his own care given his age  and  to  help  out.
    This is common in all cultures, that  children  are  expected  to  look
    after themselves more and more as they grow up and to help  around  the
    home.

 7. Mr McVeety disagreed with the grounds when they  suggested  that  Judge
    Frankish had not had sufficient regard to the child's  best  interests.
    He took me to paragraph 20 which indicated that the judge had regard to
    the child's interests beyond being reunited with his mother.  The judge
    pointed out that to bring the child to the UK would be  to  uproot  him
    from everything he knows.

 8. The sponsor replied by reminding me that she had admitted to the  Entry
    Clearance Officer and the First-tier Tribunal that she had been  unable
    to care for her son when he was younger but  that  she  was  now  in  a
    position to look after him and she wanted a chance to parent him  which
    was impossible to do when he was in Jamaica and she  was  living  here.
    She said she had told the truth about  her  involvement  in  her  son's
    upbringing.  She accepted that she did not have day to day care of  her
    son because of the distance but she refuted the notion that she had  no
    involvement in his upbringing.  For instance, she had been involved  in
    decisions to change his school.

 9. I reserved my decision and reasons which I now give.

10. My role is to decide whether or not the judge made an error in law.   I
    do not have any power to reconsider the facts of the  case  and  cannot
    take into consideration the sponsor's disagreement  with  the  findings
    made.

11. I have considered the  competing  arguments  and  have  considered  the
    documents and law and have decided that there is no legal error in  the
    decision and reasons statement.

12. I am satisfied the judge properly  directed  himself  to  the  relevant
    legal issues.  It is evident from paragraph 12 that he was aware of the
    relevant  immigration  rules  and  in  the  subsequent  paragraphs   he
    identifies the relevant case law that  guides  all  judges  on  how  to
    approach the requirements of the rules.  In paragraph  15  he  directed
    his mind to the issue of sole responsibility and in paragraphs  16  and
    17 he found that the sponsor had abandoned the appellant  when  he  was
    young albeit for good reasons.

13. My analysis of the judge's reasoning  is  as  follows.   He  found  the
    appellant had been abandoned.  Where a child has  been  abandoned,  the
    parental responsibility that might otherwise exist even at  a  distance
    must be regarded as having been broken.  It was  necessary,  therefore,
    for the appellant to show that the sponsor had  resumed  responsibility
    at some point in his life thereafter and that responsibility was either
    when resumed or some time later solely held by the sponsor.  It  is  on
    these issues  that  the  judge  found  he  had  insufficient  evidence.
    Responsibility for the appellant's upbringing had been  transferred  to
    the sponsor's mother and there was no evidence  to  show  that  it  had
    ceased.  The judge found that the grandmother had become the  effective
    mother of the appellant.  Although there was some evidence to show that
    the sponsor had some involvement  in  the  child's  upbringing  it  was
    insufficient to show that she had sole responsibility for him.

14. I cannot fault this reasoning.   It is logical and the conclusions  are
    drawn from the evidence that showed the grandmother had  responsibility
    for the appellant's upbringing and the lack of evidence that failed  to
    show the sponsor had sole responsibility.

15. Turning to the alternative ground of appeal, I find that this is  based
    on a misreading of the judge's findings.  The judge did not  find  that
    the appellant could be expected to care for his grandmother but that it
    was reasonable to expect the appellant to take more responsibility  for
    his own care as he grows up and to be more considerate to the needs  of
    others.  When I explained this at the  hearing,  the  sponsor  accepted
    that this was expected as children grow up in any culture because it is
    part of growing up.  The judge said it was in the best interests of the
    child to remain where he  was  rather  than  being  uprooted  and  that
    finding on the evidence was one he was entitled to make.

16. As the appellant is without legal representation I have  considered  on
    my own motion whether or not there might be a legal error elsewhere  in
    the decision.  It is clear from paragraph 20 that the judge  took  into
    consideration factors relevant to assessing the best interests  of  the
    appellant and analysed them appropriately.  I am  also  satisfied  that
    there were no additional factors to consider in relation to  article  8
    and therefore there was no need  to  make  separate  findings  on  that
    aspect.

17. As I find  there  is  no  legal  error  in  the  decision  and  reasons
    statement, I uphold Judge Frankish's decision.



Decision

The appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

There is no legal error in the decision and reasons statement of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Frankish and I uphold his decision.




                               Signed                     Date


                               Judge McCarthy
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
