
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/00338/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 August 2015                     |On 21 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                   ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER UKBA SHEFFIELD
                            (SECRETARY OF STATE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   MISS oi
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Sponsor, Mr A Ogunkowa


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the  Secretary  of
    State but for the purposes of  this  decision  I  shall  refer  to  the
    appellant and the sponsor as they were described before the First  Tier
    Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a minor and a citizen of Nigeria born on 24 March 1999
    and at the date of the decision was 14  years  old.   She  applied  for
    entry clearance to the United Kingdom as the adopted child  of  Mr  AO,
    the sponsor.  The application was refused on 11 December  2013  as  the
    respondent was not satisfied that she met the requirements of paragraph
    310 of the Immigration Rules.

 3. Judge of the First-tier Tribunal C Ferguson heard  the  appeal  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal on 21 January 2015 and allowed  the  appeal  on  30
    January 2015.

 4. The background to the appeal was that the  sponsor  was  said  to  have
    adopted the appellant on 11 May 2011 in Nigeria.  The  appellant  lived
    in the sponsor's family home in Nigeria with his grandmother.  After Mr
    AO's grandmother died in July 2010 he asked the appellant's grandmother
    if he could adopt her and she agreed because she was struggling to look
    after the children.  The sponsor and his wife  had  three  children,  a
    girl aged 8, a boy aged 5 and a 1 year old girl and they wished to have
    the appellant live with the rest of the family.

 5. In the Entry Clearance Officer's decision of 11 December  2013  it  was
    stated that the  appellant  had  failed  to  submit  any  documents  to
    evidence his claimed adoption and the decision referred to the Adoption
    Act 2002 and the Adoptions with a Foreign Element Regulations 2005.   A
    list of the documents that should be supplied with the visa application
    were identified but not submitted.

 6. An Entry Clearance Manager reviewed the decision and  stated  that  "No
    new documentary evidence whatsoever had been submitted with the  appeal
    to address the issues raised in the refusal notice".

 7. Judge Ferguson allowed the appeal and accepted documentation  submitted
    at the hearing itself in answer to the challenges  made  in  the  Entry
    Clearance  Officer's  decision.   These  documents  were  recorded   at
    paragraph 17 as follows:

    (i)  A Final Adoption Order from the  Ondo  State  Court,  stamped  and
         dated 11  May  2011,  which  appears  to  confirm  the  appellant's
         adoption by Mr AO.

    (ii) A document entitled "Bond by Adoption", also stamped by the  Court
         and dated 11 May 2011, which appears  to  show  that  Mr  AO  bound
         himself  to  perform  various  obligations  in   respect   of   the
         appellant's care and welfare.

    (iii)    An Order by the Chief Magistrate of Ondo  State,  stamped  and
         dated 11 May 2011, approved the adoption and confirming the consent
         of both the appellant's grandmother and the appellant herself.

    (iv) A letter from the Ministry of Woken Affairs and Social Development
         dated 5 September 2011 confirming that as result by Mr AO to  allow
         the appellant to reside with him in the UK has been approved.

    (v)  A letter from the Permanent Secretary of the Ondo State Government
         confirming the authenticity of the Order, Final Adoption Order  and
         Bond."

 8. There was a challenge by the Secretary of State on behalf of the  Entry
    Clearance Officer in that the  sponsor  maintained  that  the  adoption
    documents had been submitted with the entry clearance  application  but
    the judge found that they had not  [22]  and  [23].   This  raised  the
    question of  the  sponsor's  credibility  which  the  judge  failed  to
    resolve.  These were important documents which went to the heart of the
    lawful adoption.

 9. Further, the Entry Clearance Officer did not have  the  opportunity  to
    scrutinise the adoption documents or to refer them for verification  to
    the relevant Nigerian  authorities  and  the  judge  accepted  them  as
    genuine but there was no evidence of his  expertise  in  the  field  of
    document verification.  In effect the judge had taken on  the  role  of
    primary  decision  maker.   The  circumstances  of  the   appeal   were
    particularly important in the case of an appellant child.

10. Permission to appeal was granted by a Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    Colyer who stated that the judge had failed to  give  adequate  reasons
    for his findings with regard to the documentation.  Further,  that  the
    judge gave inadequate reasons as to why he accepted  the  documents  at
    the hearing and accepted them as genuine without the respondent  having
    an opportunity to verify them.

Conclusion

11. At the hearing Mr Avery submitted that the  adoption  papers  were  not
    submitted to the Entry Clearance Officer and there  was  a  discrepancy
    between the judge's findings that the sponsor  had  not  submitted  the
    relevant documents [23] and yet  the  appellant's  claim  that  he  had
    indeed submitted them [18] and the judge finding him credible [22].

12. The appellant's sponsor at court stated that he  had  indeed  submitted
    documents in relation to the adoption to the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    and he suggested that perhaps some of these had become detached.

13. I note from the file that the notice of hearing was issued on  12  June
    2014 to the appellant at the  sponsor's  address  as  directed  on  the
    notice of appeal and that there was a direction that all  documents  be
    served on the Tribunal or the other  party  no  later  than  five  days
    before the date of full hearing.  The Record of Proceedings also record
    that the Home Office Presenting Officer objected that the Rules had not
    been complied with.

14. The judge delivered apparently  contradictory  findings  regarding  the
    credibility of the sponsor.  It is fundamental that  the  documentation
    should be viewed in the context of that credibility.   On the one  hand
    the judge found that the sponsor was a credible witness and yet on  the
    other found that the evidence he had given at the hearing [18] that the
    documents had  been  submitted  to  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  was
    incorrect.   The judge found the documents  submitted  at  the  hearing
    were not submitted with the original application and that they were not
    before the Entry Clearance Officer.  It may be correct  that  they  are
    relevant to the circumstances appertaining at the time of the  decision
    but the judge failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  admitting  such
    important  and  fundamental  documents,  particularly  when  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer  had  not  had  the  opportunity  to  consider  those
    documents.  It is also relevant that at paragraph 24 the  judge  stated
    that

         "No evidence was submitted  to  the  Tribunal  about  the  adoption
         process in Nigeria and the law as applies to a dual  national  non-
         resident seeking to adopt a Nigerian national, but it appears  from
         the documents that the authorities knew that Mr AO was resident  in
         the UK."

15. The judge stated

         "His UK address is given in  the  bond  and  the  letter  from  the
         Ministry of Women Affairs and Social Development approves  Mr  AO's
         request for the appellant to live with  him  in  the  UK.   In  the
         circumstances I consider the documents are sufficient to  establish
         that a lawful adoption took place."

16. Mr Avery pointed out that  as  the  relevant  documents  had  not  been
    submitted the Entry Clearance Officer would not have  submitted  expert
    evidence about the adoption process in Nigeria.

17. Although the judge recorded that Ms Ojo did not  submit  the  documents
    were forgeries, she did make representations that the procedural  rules
    had not been complied.  The judge stated with regards the documents  at
    paragraph 24

         "I accept that they are genuine.  The (sic) have the  hallmarks  of
         official  court  documents  and  there  were  no  errors  or  other
         indicators that they might have been fabricated."

18. The challenge was made on the basis that there was no  indication  that
    the judge had any expertise in the verification of  the  documentation.
    The judge proceeded to make his own analysis of the documentation which
    relates to a child adoption, which  he  may  be  entitled  to  do,  but
    bearing in mind the failure to give the respondent  proper  opportunity
    to examine the documentation and the failure to explain  his  departure
    from the Tribunal direction that the  documents  should  be  served  at
    least five days prior to the hearing, and  the  difficulties  with  the
    findings on the sponsor's credibility, I find there is a material error
    of law.

19. In addition I also note that part of the  decision  notice  is  missing
    from the decision at a key  point  of  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's
    objections to the validity of the adoption. The Entry Clearance Officer
    should submit a full copy of the entry  clearance  decision  should  be
    submitted to the Tribunal.

20. Mr Avery received the original documents  from  the  sponsor  which  he
    agreed  to  forward  forthwith  to  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  for
    verification.  The matter should be set down not before twelve weeks in
    the First-tier Tribunal.

21. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified.  I set aside the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent
    of the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007  and  further
    to 7.2 (b) of the Presidential Practice Statement



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
