
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/00368/2014
                                                             & OA/00369/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 June 2016                                |On 12 August 2016             |
|And 5 July 2016                               |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                               SUCCESS [O] (1)
                                PEACE [O] (2)
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants


                                     and



                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms Osezele, Sponsor
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Presenting Officer (7 June 2016)
     Mr L Tarlow, Presenting Officer (5 July 2016)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants appeal with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge  R  B  L  Prior  promulgated  on  8  October  2014.
    Permission to appeal was granted on  27  November  2014  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge R A Cox. The appeal then came before the Upper  Tribunal
    on 14 January 2015. In a decision  promulgated  on  11  February  2015,
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft dismissed the appeal.  Subsequent
    to that, the Arden LJ granted permission to  appeal  to  the  Court  of
    Appeal.

 2. By a consent order sealed on 27 April 2016, the appeal to the Court  of
    Appeal was allowed, and remitted  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  for  it  to
    considered two specific issues:

      a) The extent to which the Appellants' physical  and  emotional  needs
         were being met in Nigeria following the death of their grandmother,
         and any consequent impact on an analysis of paragraph 297 (i0(f) or
         the children's best interests

      b) The extent to which the decline in the grandmother's  health  prior
         to  her  death  meant  that  their   mother   had   acquired   sole
         responsibility for their upbringing for the purposes of 297 (i) (e)
         even if she did not have such responsibility in the past.

 3. It was on that basis that the appeal first came before  me  on  7  June
    2016.

The appellants' case

 4. The appellants are both citizens of Nigeria,  born  in  2001  and  1998
    respectively.  Their parents were married in 1998, later divorcing  and
    re-marrying on 11 June 2011.  Their mother ("the sponsor") has lived in
    the United Kingdom since  2006  initially  as  the  spouse  of  an  EEA
    national, and later obtained permanent residence on that basis. She was
    naturalised as a British Citizen in august 2013 and is self-employed as
    a Child Protection Social Worker. The father has been resident  in  the
    United Kingdom since 2006, albeit without leave.

 5. The appellants had visited the United Kingdom in 2006, but returned  to
    Nigeria. The sponsor's case is that she had thought that best for them,
    as she was studying and then working to provide  for  them.  The  lived
    with her mother whose health gradually failed;  she  died  of  a  heart
    attack on 21 December 2013 the day after the  appellants'  applications
    for entry clearance, made on 23 October 2013, were refused

 6. It is the appellant's case that,  despite  being  cared  for  by  their
    grandmother, their mother has had sole responsibility, her  involvement
    in their care increasing as the  grandmother  became  frail.   Although
    there is an uncle (the sponsor's younger brother) he  is  not  able  to
    care for the children and, it appears, has developed his  own  problems
    since his mother's death.

 7. The sponsor states that  she  has  been  in  regular,  daily  telephone
    contact with the appellants, and has made the  important  decisions  in
    their lives.

The respondent's case

 8. The respondent's case, as  set  out  in  the  notice  of  refusal,  and
    supplemented in submissions, is that there was not sufficient  evidence
    that the sponsor has  had   any  day  to  day  responsibility  for  the
    appellants; that there was a lack of evidence of visits or contact, and
    that  there was  insufficient  evidence  that  there  was  serious  and
    compelling family or other considerations making exclusion undesirable.



The hearing on 7 June 2016

 9. The parties accepted, given that this is an appeal against a refusal of
    Entry Clearance, that it would not be possible for the  Upper  Tribunal
    to take into account the effect of the grandmother's death, given  that
    that occurred after the date of decision.

10. I am satisfied that, as was accepted by the parties,  and  is  set  out
    tine Statement of Reasons endorsed by the Court  of  Appeal,  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision involved the making of an error  of  law
    in that the judge failed to consider  whether  the  appellant's  mother
    had, in the light of the grandmother's failing  health,  acquired  sole
    responsibility. It is, following Nmaju v ECO [2000]  EWCA  Civ  505,  a
    relevant and important factor to consider  a  change  in  circumstances
    which may result in a change of responsibility. It is entirely possible
    for a parent to re-acquire sole responsibility if  it  has  been  lost.
    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not properly consider this
    issue, and it was entirely possible that, had the question been  asked,
    it could have been resolved in the  appellant's  favour.  There  is  no
    indication in the decision at [18] that the judge considered  if  there
    had been a change in circumstances, given it had  been  concluded  that
    the sponsor supported the  appellants  financially  [20].  It  is  also
    apparent that, as the sponsor sets out in her skeleton argument at [15]-
    [20] that some of  the  evidence  had  not  properly  been  taken  into
    account.

11. In the circumstances, I am satisfied  that  the  error  identified  was
    capable of affecting the outcome and that,  accordingly,  the  decision
    must be set aside. There being insufficient  available  to  remake  the
    decision, the appeal was adjourned.

The hearing on 5 July 2016

12. I heard evidence from the sponsor as well as submissions from  her  and
    Mr Tarlow.

13. The sponsor adopted her witness statement and  the  skeleton  argument,
    that being in part an additional witness statement. She was then cross-
    examined.

Findings

14. The core issue in this appeal is whether the sponsor, as at the date of
    decision, has had sole responsibility for the appellants. There  is  no
    requirement for sole  responsibility  to  have  been  exercised  for  a
    specific length of time, and it is evident from the case law,  that  it
    may be that case that at times no person has  sole  responsibility  for
    children, but, as this issue is fact sensitive and family circumstances
    are fluid, at other times, sole responsibility may, having  been  lost,
    vest once again in a parent.

15. As was noted in TD (Paragraph  297(i)(e):  "sole  responsibility")Yemen
    [2006] UKAIT 00049at [7]:

    7. The cases struggle with the obvious difficulty that where there is a
    UK based parent - the sponsor - whom the child is seeking to  join  for
    settlement there will inevitably be others in the country of origin who
    de facto 'look after' the child. Usually these are  relatives  such  as
    grandparents or aunts and uncles but they could, as in  this  case,  be
    the other parent of the child concerned. As a matter of  common  sense,
    some responsibility for the child's life must rest with  the  carer  in
    the country of origin

16. TD (Yemen) makes it clear that while financial support is relevant,  it
    is not determinative. It should also be noted what is said at [34]:

    34.  These  cases  are  largely  concerned  with  the  issue  of  "sole
    responsibility" arising between  a  UK-parent  and  relatives  who  are
    looking after the child in the country of origin. In many of the cases,
    the other parent has disappeared from the child's life totally or plays
    so little part as to have, in effect, abdicated any responsibility  for
    its upbringing. What emerges is a concept of "authority"  or  "control"
    over a child's upbringing which derives from  the  natural  social  and
    legal role of an individual as a parent. Whilst others may, by force of
    circumstances, look after a child, it may be that  they  are  doing  so
    only on behalf of the child's parent. The struggle in the case  law  is
    to identify when the parent's responsibility has been  relinquished  in
    part or whole to another such that it should  be  said  that  there  is
    shared rather than sole responsibility. By contrast, where both parents
    are active in the child's life, the involvement of the  parent  in  the
    country of origin is significant  -  perhaps  crucial  -  in  assessing
    whether the parent in the UK has "sole responsibility" for the child.

17. It is important to note also what was said in TD Yemen at [49]-[51]
   1. Where one  parent  has  disappeared  from  the  child's  life  and  so
      relinquished or abdicated his (or her) responsibility for  the  child,
      the starting point must be that it is the remaining active parent  who
      has "sole responsibility" for the child. The fact that  the  remaining
      active parent is in the UK makes no difference to this. Of course, the
      geographical separation of the parent from the child  means  that  the
      day-to-day care of the child will necessarily be undertaken by  others
      - relatives or friends abroad - who look after the  child.  Here,  the
      issue under the immigration rules is whether the UK-based parent  has,
      in practice, allowed the parental responsibility for the child  to  be
      shared with the carer abroad. This is, of course, the question we  see
      most frequently in the case law.
   1. The cases, particularly Nmaju and Cenir in the Court of  Appeal,  make
      clear that the touchstone of "sole responsibility" is  the  continuing
      control and direction by the parent  in  the  UK  in  respect  of  the
      "important decisions" about the child's upbringing. The fact that day-
      to-day decision-making for a child - such as  "getting  the  child  to
      school safely and on time, or putting the child to bed, or seeing what
      it has for breakfast, or that it  cleans  its  teeth,  or  has  enough
      clothing, and so forth" (Ramos, per Dillon LJ at p 151) -  rests  with
      the  carers  abroad  is  not  conclusive  of  the   issue   of   "sole
      responsibility". However, if the UK-based parent has allowed the carer
      abroad to make some "important decisions" in the  child's  upbringing,
      then it may readily be said that the responsibility for the child  has
      become "shared".
   1. In reaching a decision on what is a fact-rich issue, it  is  important
      to take account of evidence of any contact between the parent and  the
      carer in respect of important decisions to be taken  about  the  child
      and  its  upbringing.  The  availability  of   modern   communications
      technology may reduce the impact of distance alone on  a  UK  parent's
      ability to be consulted  (and  therefore  decide)  about  the  child's
      upbringing  in  another  country.  The  length,  and  cause,  of   the
      separation of parent and child and the reasons  for  its  continuation
      may shed some light on the role played by the carer abroad.  Likewise,
      it may be helpful to look at the financial  support  provided  by  the
      parent and, in particular, its absence may be very telling.

18. It is not submitted by the respondent in this case that the father, who
    is present  in  the  United  Kingdom,  shares  responsibility  for  the
    children.

19. The issue before me is, in light of the error of  law  found,  and  the
    observations made in the Statement of Reasons to remake  the  decisions
    with respect to sole responsibility and, if relevant, whether there are
    there are serious and compelling family or other  considerations  which
    make  the  exclusion  of  the  appellants  undesirable   and   suitable
    arrangements have been made for their care (paragraph 297 (i) (f)).

20. The starting point for consideration of the case  is  the  decision  of
    Judge Prior who did not fined the sponsor to be a satisfactory witness,
    in particular with regard to the appellants' educational  achievements,
    noting in particular [16] a lack of term reports. The judge noted  also
    [17] - [18] an apparent lack of commitment as well as delay in  seeking
    entry clearance for the appellants.

21. The sponsor has dealt with these observations in her witness statements
    at some length. She explained (and this was not challenged0 that it was
    she who had chosen their schools, and that term reports had  been  lost
    when the grandmother died. She states also that, in Nigeria, it was not
    common for a head teacher to have contact with parents unless there was
    a problem; the link teacher was Mrs Enahoro, hence why she was noted in
    the evidence.

22. The sponsor also states, again unchallenged, that she had made all  the
    decisions in respect  of  the  appellants'  healthcare,  and  pays  for
    treatment.  She also ensured that the children  had  been  baptised  as
    Pentecostals, and had proper Christian instruction.  With regard to her
    brother, she stated that he did assist the grandmother as she had  been
    illiterate.

23. Asked about the situation in relation to the  grandmother's  health  in
    the last few months  before  her  death,  the  sponsor  said  that  the
    appellants had in fact become her carers. That had been  difficult  for
    all of them, and that initially, the grandmother had tried  to  conceal
    this.

24. Cross-examined, the sponsor said that her daughter had  called  her  to
    tek her that the granmother was so frail that she was unable to  go  to
    the toilet without help, and that this was due  to  problems  with  her
    legs. It also became clear that she  may  have  begun  to  suffer  from
    dementia, this being around 3-4 weeks before the application.  She said
    the appellants had tried to help, but it was difficult to look after  a
    sick person.

25. The sponsor said she could  not  move  back  to  Nigeria,  as  she  had
    established herself here. She said her younger brother, now only 27, is
    struggling to cope since their mother died.

26. The sponsor also said that when she had  left  the  children  with  her
    mother, she had thought that she was doing the best for them. She would
    not have wanted her children to be unhappy, and that she  had  educated
    herself, and worked hard to provide for them.

27. Mr  Tarlow  relied  on  the  refusal  notices.  Asked  if  he  had  any
    submissions to add in respect of the second  issue  identified  in  the
    Statement of Reasons, he said he had nothing to add.

28. Having heard evidence from the sponsor, which  was  subject  to  cross-
    examination, I am satisfied that her involvement with her children  was
    greater than that identified by Judge Prior. Albeit that  the  evidence
    now given is in part in response to that decision, I am satisfied  that
    it is supported at least in part by the documents put before the First-
    tier Tribunal. The care shown for the appellants' health and  spiritual
    development was not addressed in any detail, and I consider that  these
    were and are significant indicators of care and control  shown  by  the
    sponsor.

29.  I  am  satisfied  by  the  detailed  and  clear  evidence  about   the
    deterioration of the grandmother's health, that the sponsor's testimony
    on this point had the ring of truth. It was spontaneously and  candidly
    given and was not disturbed by cross-examination, nor  indeed  was  the
    evidence on this issue challenged in any material way in submissions.

30. Taking these factors into account, and viewing the evidence as a whole;
    and, bearing in mind the doubts of Judge Prior, I find that by the date
    of decision, the situation in Nigeria had changed significantly in  the
    preceding 3 to 4 months.  I am satisfied that there had been  a  marked
    deterioration in the grandmother's health to  the  extent  that  rather
    than being a carer, she was being cared for in part by the  appellants,
    albeit at the behest and under the direction of the sponsor. This  was,
    I find, a significant change; even assuming the grandmother had  shared
    responsibility, she was no longer doing so, being in reality  close  to
    being dependent on the appellants.

31. The factual matrix in these appeals is,  unusual,  if  not  unique.  It
    changed significantly shortly before the date of decision such that, by
    the  date  of  decision,  the   appellants'   mother   had   had   sole
    responsibility for them. It is not submitted by the respondent that the
    father has any responsibility for the appellants, nor am I satisfied in
    the  light  of  the  evidence  and  earlier  findings   that   he   has
    responsibility for them as defined.

32. For the avoidance of doubt, no submission has been made to me that  the
    appellants did not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules apart
    from paragraph 297 (i) (e). I find that that requirement was met at the
    date of decision. It  is  therefore  unnecessary  for  me  to  consider
    whether the requirements of paragraph 297 (i)(f) are met. Further, I am
    satisfied by the evidence before me, none of which is challenged,  that
    all the other requirements of the Immigration  Rules  are  met.   I  am
    further satisfied that, notwithstanding the lapse of  time,  that  this
    continues to be the case, and that in particular the sponsor's siblings
    are unable to take responsibility for  the  appellants,  and  that  the
    sponsor continues to exercise sole responsibility for them.

33. For these reasons, I am satisfied that the appeal should be allowed  on
    the  basis  that  the  appellants  meet,  and  continue  to  meet,  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules, there  being,  on  the  evidence
    before me, no indication of any material change in the circumstances of
    the sponsor or the appellants since the date of decision. The death  of
    the grandmother, if anything, strengthens the claim that  their  mother
    has sole responsibility for them.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS AND DIRECTIONS.

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the  making  of  an
    error of law and I set it aside.

 2. I remake the appeal by allowing it under the Immigration Rules.




Signed                                  Date:  11 August 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
