
IAC-HW-MP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/00368/2014
                                                               OA/00369/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14th January 2015                          |On 11th February 2015         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                       master S A O (first Appellant)
                        miss P E O (second Appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                           entry clearance officer
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr A. Jafar of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr I. Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellants

1.   The Appellants are both citizens of Nigeria and are brother and  sister
    respectively.  The First Appellant was born on 17th July 2001  and  the
    Second Appellant on 19th August 1998.  They appeal against  a  decision
    of Immigration Judge Prior sitting at Hatton Cross on 8th October  2014
    who dismissed their appeals against decisions of the  Respondent  dated
    9th December 2013.  Those decisions  were  to  refuse  the  Appellants'
    applications for entry clearance to the United Kingdom in order to join
    and settle with their Sponsor, Ms  J  O  O,  a  British  citizen  ("the
    Sponsor") pursuant to  paragraph 297(i)(e) and (f) of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The Sponsor and the Appellants' father, Mr P A  O,  married  in
    Nigeria in 1998 and subsequently re-married in the  United  Kingdom  on
    11th June 2011.

The Relevant Immigration Law

2.   Paragraph 297 sets out the requirements to be met by a  person  seeking
    indefinite leave to enter the United Kingdom as the child of  a  parent
    present and settled in the United Kingdom.  Those requirements  insofar
    as they are relevant to this application are at sub-paragraph (e): that
    one parent is present and settled in the United  Kingdom  and  has  had
    sole responsibility for the child's  upbringing  or  sub-paragraph  (f)
    that one parent is present and settled in the United Kingdom and  there
    are serious and compelling family or other  considerations  which  make
    exclusion of the child undesirable and suitable arrangements  had  been
    made for the child's care.  The burden of proof  of  establishing  that
    the requirements of the paragraph are met rests upon the Appellants and
    the standard of proof  is  the  usual  civil  standard  of  balance  of
    probabilities.  The Appellants also argue that their exclusion from the
    United Kingdom as  a  result  of  the  refusal  of  their  applications
    breaches this country's obligations under Article 8 (right  to  respect
    for private and family life)  of  the  Human  Rights  Convention.   The
    burden and standard of proof of establishing a breach equates with  the
    burden and standard of proof under the Immigration Rules.

The Explanation for Refusal

3.   The Respondent noted that  the  Appellants  were  residing  with  their
    maternal grandmother. The Appellants  had  provided  no  evidence  that
    their mother, the Sponsor, had any day-to-day responsibility for  them.
    The Appellants had last visited their parents in the United Kingdom  in
    2006 and the Sponsor had visited  her  children  in  Nigeria  in  2012.
    There was no other evidence that the Appellants had seen  their  mother
    since her arrival in the United Kingdom in  2005.   The  Sponsor  could
    thus not satisfy the sole responsibility test under sub-paragraph (e).

4.    Letters  written  by  the  Sponsor  in  support  of  the   Appellants'
    application and lodged with it indicated that the Appellants'  maternal
    grandmother with whom they were living was suffering  ill-health  as  a
    result of which the Appellants might be subjected to various  forms  of
    abuse.  However the Sponsor had been aware of  the  grandmother's  ill-
    health in 2006 when the Appellants returned from  their  visit  to  the
    United Kingdom and they had made no application to join  their  mother,
    the Sponsor, permanently since then.  A visit visa application had been
    refused in 2008.  The Respondent was not satisfied under  sub-paragraph
    (f)  that  there  were  serious  and   compelling   family   or   other
    considerations which made the Appellants' exclusion undesirable.

5.    The  grounds  of  appeal  against  that  decision  argued   that   the
    grandmother's health had deteriorated to the point  where  she  was  no
    longer able to look after the Appellants in Nigeria.  There was medical
    evidence in support of this which had been ignored by  the  Respondent.
    Although the Sponsor could have applied for the Appellants to join  her
    in the United  Kingdom  she  was  happy  for  them  to  continue  their
    education in Nigeria but the circumstances had now changed and  it  was
    in their best interests that they  should  join  their  mother  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The Sponsor had had evidence to show that she sent her
    children monies for  their  daily  upkeep  including  school  fees  and
    uniforms etc.  She had produced evidence of regular contact with  them.
    The Respondent had not considered the duty imposed by Section 55 of the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.

The Decision at First Instance

6.    The  Judge  heard  oral  testimony  from  both  the  Sponsor  and  the
    children's father but had reservations about the evidence of them both.
     At paragraph 17 of his determination the Judge wrote:

         "The evidence before me somewhat indicated a lack of commitment and
         care for the Appellants on the part of the  Sponsor.   The  Sponsor
         did not endeavour to see the Appellants between 2006  and  2012  by
         visiting them in Nigeria.  ... the Sponsor in  her  statement  made
         reference to the visit that she did make in June 2012 as  including
         the purpose of an attempt at achieving reconciliation  between  her
         family and the father's family  in  Nigeria,  albeit  in  terms  of
         initiating  contact  between  the  Appellants  and  their  paternal
         grandparents in Nigeria.  I took the view that it might  have  been
         expected that the Sponsor's primary concern in 2012 would have been
         to bring the Appellants away from Nigeria where due to the loss  of
         her son and failing health the grandmother was  struggling  in  her
         care of the Appellants.  The Sponsor's  visit  in  March  2014  was
         explained  in  terms  of  her  attendance  upon  the  grandmother's
         funeral".

7.   Although the  grandmother  had  been  admitted  to  hospital  on  three
    occasions the Sponsor had made no application  for  the  Appellants  to
    come to the United Kingdom until 23rd October  2013.   The  Appellants'
    father, Mr O had not known where the Appellants had lived  between  the
    grandmother's death and the commencement of their  (present)  residence
    with their maternal uncle in March  2014.   Financial  support  of  the
    Appellants by the Sponsor did  not  constitute  the  exercise  of  sole
    responsibility by her.  Mr O had no status in the  United  Kingdom  and
    there was no evidence why the Sponsor should not join the Appellants in
    Nigeria with him.  The Judge concluded at paragraph 21:

         "I was not satisfied that sub-paragraph 297(i)(f) or Article 8  was
         engaged given that the Appellants are well  integrated  in  Nigeria
         and have a large extended family in that country".





The Onward Appeal

8.   In grounds of appeal which at seven pages were  one  page  longer  than
    the determination appealed against, it  was  argued  that  the  Judge's
    finding that the Appellants were well integrated into a large  extended
    family was not borne out by the evidence.  The Appellants still had  to
    look after themselves. Apart from the Sponsor's brother no other family
    member was willing to take them in.  The evidence about the grandmother
    was that prior to the application being made she was no longer able  to
    bathe or take care of herself.

9.   Article 8 was engaged in this case and the grounds cited  a  number  of
    Strasbourg cases to indicate that  only  in  exceptional  circumstances
    could family life between a parent and the parents' biological child be
    broken.  The Judge  had  not  made  findings  on  whether  the  Sponsor
    demonstrated sole responsibility.  Nor had he made any findings on  who
    actually did exercise sole responsibility (if  the  Sponsor  did  not).
    The financial support given by the Sponsor was  an  important  part  of
    sole  responsibility.   The  Respondent  had  failed  to   follow   the
    Immigration Directorate Instructions August 2003, Chapter 8, Section 3,
    Children - Annex M, which said that the objective of the provision  [in
    paragraph 297] was to allow a child to join a parent where  that  child
    could not be adequately cared for by his parents or  relatives  in  his
    own country.  The child should first and foremost be cared for  by  his
    natural parents and only if they could not care for the  child  in  the
    child's own country should consideration be given to joining  relatives
    in another country.  The Judge had not considered the right of a  child
    to live with his biological parent (or  vice  versa)  or  the  positive
    obligation under Article 8 to facilitate this.

10.  The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Cox  on  27th  November  2014.   In  granting
    permission he wrote:

         "The grounds in essence contend for extensive  reasons  given  that
         the Judge's ultimate findings  that  there  was  no  feature  which
         engaged paragraph 297(i)(f) or Article 8 family life were perverse,
         incorrect in  law  and  based  on  a  false  factual  premise.   On
         reflection  I   find   the   grounds   are   arguable   and   merit
         consideration."

11.  The Respondent replied to this grant  on  12th  December  2014  stating
    that the Judge had properly considered the evidence before him and made
    reasonable sustainable findings  that  the  Appellants  had  failed  to
    discharge the burden of proof to the requisite standard  to  show  that
    the Sponsor was exercising sole  responsibility  over  them.   Although
    various comments were made relating to the Sponsor  and  her  husband's
    attitude towards their responsibilities as parents this did not in  any
    way compromise the sound sustainable findings by the Judge  which  were
    properly open to him on  the  evidence.   The  Sponsor  had  failed  to
    demonstrate that she exercised sole parental  responsibility  over  the
    two Appellants who  were  now  in  the  care  of  their  uncle  as  the
    grandmother had passed away.  The grounds were a mere disagreement with
    the negative outcome of the appeal.

The Hearing Before Me

12.  In oral submissions Counsel for the Appellant stated that there  was  a
    letter from the children's uncle to the effect that he could no  longer
    look after them. It was difficult to see  how  the  Judge's  conclusion
    that the children were well integrated was relevant to  paragraph  297.
    It was a low threshold to establish the existence of family life.   The
    relationship of parent and child would amount  to  family  life  unless
    there were exceptional circumstances.  The requirement in sub-paragraph
    (f) to show compelling reasons was entwined with the duty under Section
    55 to consider what was in the children's best  interests.   The  Judge
    had  given  no  consideration  to  who   had   been   taking   parental
    responsibility after the grandmother had died in December 2013.

13.  In referring to a lack of effort by  the  Sponsor  to  reunite  herself
    with her children the Judge had glossed over the fact that the  Sponsor
    had sought to bring the children to the  United  Kingdom  [on  a  visit
    visa] but that was refused in 2008.  Although the Judge  had  dealt  at
    paragraph 16 with the children's education  there  was  no  finding  on
    whether the Sponsor had  chosen  the  schools,  nor  on  the  Sponsor's
    evidence that the grandmother could not  communicate  with  the  school
    which was an English-speaking one.  It would not have been possible for
    the Sponsor  to  have  provided  documentary  evidence  in  support  to
    establish that she, the Sponsor, had chosen the schools as  the  school
    would not have a record of that.  The visit in 2012 made by the Sponsor
    was both to effect a reconciliation between the  two  families  and  to
    visit the children.  The children's father had not contributed a  penny
    towards the Appellant's upkeep in Nigeria.  He had been living in  this
    country illegally since 2011.  A letter in the Appellant's bundle  from
    the Appellant's uncle dated 5th September 2014 (in which he had  begged
    the Sponsor to come back to Nigeria and  collect  the  Appellants)  was
    uncontradicted.

14.  The Judge had misunderstood the affidavit from  the  grandmother  dated
    7th October 2013 which he had characterised as making no  reference  to
    the Sponsor having sole responsibility for the  Appellants.  The  Judge
    had commented on references in the Appellants' letters to the advice of
    the Sponsor and the children's father rather  than  decisions  made  in
    relation to  the  Appellants.   Part  of  the  affidavit  was  to  give
    permission for the Appellants to travel to the United  Kingdom  as  the
    grandmother  was  the  Appellants'  guardian  at  that  time.   It  was
    difficult to understand how the grandmother could have  used  the  term
    "sole  responsibility".   The  letters  had  not  dealt  with  who  was
    exercising actual control.  It was not an answer to the proportionality
    exercise to say that the children's parents could go back  to  Nigeria.
    There had been no findings on the issue of sole responsibility.

15.  In reply the Presenting Officer argued that  as  this  was  an  out  of
    country appeal the case fell to be decided on the situation at the date
    of decision.  The Respondent's decision was made on 9th December  2013,
    the grandmother died twelve days later on 21st December.  Although  the
    decision had been reviewed by the  Entry  Clearance  Manager  in  March
    2014, that was not the date of decision for these purposes.  The  Judge
    therefore had to consider the case on the basis  that  the  grandmother
    was still alive.  If the Judge had not made findings about who had sole
    responsibility it was because that was not what his task was.  What was
    before the Judge was a claim that the Sponsor had sole  responsibility.
    It would be speculation for the Judge to go on to say who did have sole
    responsibility if it was not  the  Sponsor.   The  Judge  set  out  the
    evidence regarding the contact between the parents and the  school  (at
    paragraph 16 of the determination) to show that  the  Sponsor  was  not
    exercising sole responsibility.  If the Sponsor  wished  to  give  more
    evidence about contact with the school that should have been set out in
    the witness statement.

16.  The Appellants' argument that the Judge had said there  was  no  family
    life in this case was wrong.  The Judge's decision that Article  8  was
    not engaged was not because there was no family life but rather because
    the parties could live in Nigeria and family life  could  be  continued
    elsewhere.  It was difficult to see how on the  basis  of  the  Judge's
    findings that compelling circumstances could be made out.  Even  though
    the grandmother was extremely unwell in  2012  and  had  been  for  the
    previous five years the application was not made until late 2013.

17.  In closing Counsel for the Appellant argued that even  if  the  parties
    could go back to Nigeria  the  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27  step  by  step
    approach applied and the best interests of the children still had to be
    considered.  Failure to do so would be an error of law.  The Appellants
    did not know what the Judge found to be in their  best  interests.   It
    could  be  said   that   someone   was   always   exercising   parental
    responsibility.  The grandmother was unable to look  after  herself  at
    the date of decision.  The Sponsor had come to the  United  Kingdom  at
    the age of 18 and had remained in touch whilst studying and working  in
    this country.  The error of law was  that  there  were  no  sustainable
    findings and the proper course of action would be to remit  the  matter
    back to the First-tier to be decided again.

Findings

18.  This matter came before me to decide in the first place  whether  there
    was an error of law in the determination such that if there was it fell
    to be set aside and the decision re-made.  If I were to find there  was
    no such error then the decision of the First-tier Tribunal would stand.
     The issues before the Judge were firstly whether the Appellants  could
    bring  themselves  within  either  limb  of  paragraph  297(i)  of  the
    Immigration Rules and secondly, if they could not whether their appeals
    should nevertheless be allowed  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  under
    Article 8.

19.  The Judge's concern in the case was the lack  of  contact  between  the
    children and the Sponsor and indeed the lack of knowledge of  what  was
    happening to the Appellants by both the Sponsor and her husband, Mr  O,
    the children's father.  The Judge accepted that the Sponsor was  making
    payments to her relatives in Nigeria who had the day-to-day care of the
    Appellants but did not consider that that by itself was  sufficient  to
    establish the test of sole responsibility under sub-paragraph (e).

20.  What the Appellants needed to show was evidence that  the  Sponsor  was
    exercising  parental  responsibility  for  her  children.   This  would
    involve evidence that the Sponsor was making decisions in  relation  to
    them but upon enquiry the Judge could  not  find  evidence  to  support
    that.  The Sponsor testified in vague and generalised terms as  to  the
    Appellant's  educational  achievements.   If  the  Sponsor  was  taking
    decisions in relation to the children's education it was reasonable  to
    have expected her to be rather more knowledgeable about that  than  she
    was.  She had no knowledge of the grades achieved  by  the  Appellants.
    Someone the Sponsor said was a teacher at the children's school did not
    figure on the school reports.  The Appellants' letters referred to  the
    advice of the Sponsor and their  father  rather  than  decisions.   The
    Sponsor put forward a letter from Reverend Gyasi which  said  that  the
    Sponsor had sole responsibility but the Sponsor was unable to  say  how
    the Reverend was in a position to know what was  happening  in  Nigeria
    with the Appellants.

21.  The importance of that was not just that the Sponsor  had  put  forward
    evidence which had failed to come up to proof but more importantly  she
    was unable to produce evidence from  a  disinterested  third  party  to
    confirm her case that she had sole  responsibility  for  the  children.
    Corroboration of itself is not a requirement but in circumstances where
    it would be reasonable to expect supporting evidence to be produced and
    none is, it is open to a trial Judge to take an adverse view.

22.  This was very much a case where the impression made by the  Sponsor  on
    the Tribunal was going to be important. The Judge evidently felt  there
    were difficulties with the  general  credibility  of  the  Sponsor  for
    example at paragraph 15 of the determination. The Sponsor had  said  in
    oral testimony that  she  had  re-started  her  relationship  with  the
    children's father, Mr O in 2009 when her own statement had said that it
    was only in early 2011 that he had approached her for a reconciliation.



23.  It is correct, as the Presenting Officer submitted,  that  it  was  not
    the task of the Judge, once he had rejected the Sponsor's claim to have
    sole responsibility for the Appellants, to make a finding as to who did
    have sole responsibility.  That would be to engage  in  speculation  in
    circumstances where the  Judge  had  found  that  he  did  not  have  a
    satisfactory description of what was going on in Nigeria.  Someone  was
    evidently looking after the children  but  that  someone  was  not  the
    Sponsor.  The Judge was  also  concerned  about  the  lack  of  contact
    between the Sponsor and the children noting that there were a number of
    opportunities where steps could have been taken to improve the level of
    contact but they had not been and no good reason had been provided  for
    that.  The failure  to  take  steps  was  not  the  action  of  someone
    exercising sole responsibility over her children and it was open to the
    Judge to make that assessment.  It is inaccurate to say that the  Judge
    made no findings on the issue of sole responsibility.  His finding  was
    that the Sponsor was not exercising sole responsibility.   He  did  not
    have to go on to say who was.  The Appellants  failed  to  prove  their
    case under sub-paragraph (e).

24.  The  alternative  argument  was  that  even  if  the  Sponsor  was  not
    exercising sole responsibility the circumstances of the  Appellants  in
    Nigeria were such that their  exclusion  was  undesirable.   The  Judge
    reminded himself of the authority of Mundeba [2013]  UKUT  00088  which
    mirrors the content of the Immigration Directorate  Instructions  cited
    in Counsel's grounds of onward appeal.  The Judge was fully aware  that
    the best interests of a child were usually best served  by  being  with
    both or at least one of their parents.  It was in that context that the
    Judge considered whether the parents could return to  Nigeria  to  look
    after the children.  In the case of the children's  father  he  had  no
    status in this country as was readily acknowledged by Counsel and there
    would appear to be no reason at all why he should not return to Nigeria
    to assist in the care of the children. This is particularly  so  as  he
    had told the Sponsor that he felt heartbroken that he had neglected and
    abandoned them.  The Sponsor is now a British citizen but the Judge was
    aware of her ties to Nigeria and her travel there and  evidently  could
    see no reason why she too could not return to Nigeria to look after her
    children.

25.  In those circumstances it was open to the Judge to conclude that  there
    were  no  compelling  or  compassionate  circumstances   under   either
    paragraph 297 or when conducting  the  proportionality  exercise  under
    Article 8, to allow the appeal either under the Rules or outside  them.
    The Judge's comment that the Appellants had a large extended family  in
    Nigeria derived from the Sponsor's own evidence that  she  had  made  a
    visit to Nigeria  in  June  2012  as  the  Judge  put  it  "to  achieve
    reconciliation  between  her  family  and  the  father's  family".   By
    definition that meant that there were members of the extended families.
     This was not a conclusion  that  the  Judge  arrived  at  without  any
    reference to the evidence he assessed in his determination.

26.  The Judge had to consider matters at the  date  of  decision  when  the
    grandmother was alive, albeit the evidence appeared to suggest that her
    health was already very poor by then.  At some  point  the  uncle  took
    over care of the Appellants.   The  Judge  was  not  impressed  by  the
    father's lack of knowledge of who had looked after the children between
    the death of the grandmother  (and  by  implication  her  progressively
    worsening illness) and the commencement  of  the  children's  residence
    with their uncle, Nosa, in March 2014.

27.  Notwithstanding the repeated reference to it in  both  the  grounds  of
    onward appeal and Counsel's submissions, the Judge  did  not  say  that
    there was no family life between a mother and her children rather  that
    Article 8 was not  engaged  because  family  life  could  be  continued
    elsewhere.  He gave his reasons for that conclusion which were open  to
    him on the evidence before him.  The arguments to the  contrary  are  a
    mere disagreement  with  those  findings.   I  do  not  find  that  the
    Appellants  can  demonstrate  any  errors  of  law   in   the   Judge's
    determination and I dismiss their appeals.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and I uphold the Judge's decision to  dismiss  the  Appellant's
appeal against the Respondent's decision.

Appeals dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed this 10th day of February 2015

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed this 10th day of February 2015

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft


