
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-dh-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/01090/2015
                                                               OA/01092/2015
                                                               OA/01093/2015
                                                               OA/01095/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24th November 2016                |On 5th January 2017                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                (1) Ranee [m]
                                  (2) [h i]
                                  (3) [s i]
                                  (4) [e e]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                   the Entry Clearance Officer, islamabad
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    No legal representation
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge L Rahman promulgated on 21st June 2016, following  a  hearing  at
    Taylor House on 28th April  2016.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeals of the  Appellants  whereupon  they  subsequently
    applied for, and were  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellants

 2. The Appellants are the spouse and children respectively of the Sponsor,
    Mr Ahsan Anees, who is settled in the UK, and in a decision  dated  2nd
    December 2014, their application for entry clearance to  join  him  was
    rejected by the Entry Clearance Officer in Islamabad, and  subsequently
    upheld by the Entry Clearance Manager in a  decision  dated  1st  April
    2015.  The basis of the refusal decisions were that the three children,
    namely, the second, third, and fourth Appellants, are from  a  previous
    marriage of the principal Appellant, the first Appellant herewith,  and
    there was a lack of  regular  contact  and  communication  between  the
    Sponsor and the First Appellant such as would demonstrate there  to  be
    in existence a genuine and subsisting relationship.

The Judge's Findings

 3. At the hearing before Judge Rahman on 28th April 2016, the Sponsor,  Mr
    Ahsan Anees, did not attend the hearing and the  respondent  agreed  by
    telephone for the appeal to  proceed  without  further  representation.
    The judge went on to look at the evidence, noting how  the  reason  why
    the Sponsor had not visited the Appellants in Pakistan as often  as  he
    would have was because he was working hard to ensure that he would have
    funds to meet the minimum financial threshold requirement, but  he  was
    sending them remittances and he was currently "fully focused on his job
    and business to satisfy the income  requirements  and  to  support  his
    family" (paragraph 15).  He did travel to Pakistan in January 2015  and
    spent nearly two months there with  his  family  (paragraph  16).   The
    judge held that the first Appellant  and  the  Sponsor  had  failed  to
    adequately explain why there is only one visit  for  nearly  six  years
    after the claim of marriage in 2008 and upheld  the  decisions  of  the
    Respondent authorities.

Grounds of Application

 4. The grounds of application state that there has  been  an  error  of  a
    procedural nature in that the Sponsor did not  receive  any  letter  or
    date of the hearing and he had every intention to attend  the  hearing.
    He attended the hearing in Manchester with witnesses when  this  matter
    had been listed on the float list but was adjourned to London.

 5. On 19th October 2016, permission to appeal was granted by the  Tribunal
    and it was noted that on 17th February 2015 Judge  Cameron  found  that
    there was no  right  of  appeal  in  this  case,  and  the  notice  was
    apparently served on the Appellants  at  a  different  address  to  the
    Sponsor's address, although on 28th April  2016  there  was  an  appeal
    hearing and the judge made findings  that  there  was  no  satisfactory
    explanation for the Sponsor's non-attendance.  Given that  the  Sponsor
    did not have an opportunity to be heard, permission was granted.

 6. In the Rule 24 response by the Respondent, it was considered that there
    was a procedural error of law in the circumstances.

This Hearing

 7. At the hearing before me, there was a letter dated 22nd November  2016,
    two days prior to this hearing  from  the  judicial  liaison  and  file
    management team, pointing out that the Appellant  had  written  to  the
    Tribunal asking for the appeal to  be  withdrawn.   However,  this  was
    under the misapprehension that the Respondent had conceded  the  appeal
    and accepted that the Appellants had the  right  to  come  to  the  UK.
    There had been a letter dated 21st October 2016 (which was received  on
    22nd November 2016 by the Tribunal) asking that the Appellants wish  to
    withdraw the appeal.  The judicial liaison  and  file  management  team
    pointed out, however, that the Rule 24 response dated 8th November 2016
    did not indicate that the "appeal can be  successful  under  PBS",  but
    only conceded that there was a procedural error of law, and  there  was
    no concession that on remaking the appeal it should be allowed.

 8. In fact, the last paragraph of the Respondent's Rule 24 response  makes
    it clear that, "the Appellants cannot succeed in this application"  and
    suggests a fresh application is made.  The reason is that  the  Sponsor
    is now a British citizen and this  means  that  the  Appellants  cannot
    apply under the PBS system.  The judicial liaison and  file  management
    team were wrong to state in their letter of 22nd  November  2016  that,
    "the Tribunal does not consent to the withdrawal and  the  hearing  set
    for 24th November 2016 will proceed unless the Appellant confirms  that
    she still wishes to withdraw in light of a correct understanding of the
    Respondent's position".  It goes without saying that  this  is  a  very
    short decision by the Tribunal  designed  to  protect  the  Appellants'
    interests in the light of the fact that they had been under a  complete
    misapprehension about the response to this  appeal  by  the  Respondent
    authority.

 9. At the hearing  before  me,  Mr  Tufan,  appearing  on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent, stated that, plainly there was a procedural error  in  that
    if the Sponsor had not been sent notification of the  hearing,  he  and
    his witnesses could not attend  to  give  evidence,  on  the  issue  of
    whether there was a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  between  the
    parties, and the matter should  be  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, to be heard by a judge other than Judge L Rahman.

10. On the other hand, it remained equally true that the  Appellants  could
    not now succeed under the PBS because the Sponsor was a British citizen
    and it would be altogether better for the Appellants to  make  a  fresh
    application.  The Sponsor indicated that he was in no position to  make
    a decision in this respect and to take a draconian step of  withdrawing
    his appeal without legal advice on this matter and so  he  was  content
    with the suggestion that an error  of  law  finding  be  made  by  this
    Tribunal, on the basis that he had been prevented from giving  evidence
    due to lack of notification, and that the matter be  remitted  back  to
    the First-tier Tribunal to be heard by  a  judge  other  than  Judge  L
    Rahman.   In  the  meantime   he   would   seek   advice   from   legal
    representatives as to what to do given that his status was now that  of
    a full British citizen.  He also  pointed  out  that  his  address  had
    changed so that he was now living at [Surrey] and  that  is  where  any
    future notifications should be sent.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the  decision  of  the
original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal is  remitted
back to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard by a Judge other  than  Judge  L
Rahman.  I give directions  that  any  future  notification  of  the  appeal
should be sent to the Appellants at the Sponsor's address of [Surrey].

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    4th January 2017

