
 [pic]

Upper Tribunal


(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
OA018032015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At  Field House                    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 6th June  2016                  |On 15th June 2016                  |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   |                                   |


                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between


                               MRS MARYA NASRI
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                          Appellant

                                     And


               THE  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                          Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr J.Jaigri of Crown and Mehria, Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mr Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer.

                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction


   1. Although it is the respondent who is appealing I will continue to
      refer the parties as they were in the First-tier Tribunal for the sake
      of convenience.


   2. The appellant is a national of Afghanistan. She is married to
      Mr.Wahidullah Nasri, her sponsor. He came from Afghanistan as a child
      and now has British nationality. She applied for entry clearance to
      join her husband and this was refused on the basis her sponsor had not
      met the evidential requirements of appendix FM-SE.

   3. Their appeal was heard before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
      Rothwell. The appellant was represented by Counsel who accepted that
      the immigration rules were not met .Her sponsor had two sources of
      income from employment. In one of these he was paid in cash and had
      not provided the necessary bank statements to show the lodgement of
      his wages.

   4. The appeal was argued on the basis of article 8. The appellant and
      sponsor are first cousins. They married in 2013 in Afghanistan. The
      appellant lives with her mother and uncle in Kabul. The sponsor had
      been with his wife for two periods, each lasting three weeks. The
      security situation in Afghanistan was raised and there was reference
      to difficulties for the appellant trying to make a fresh application
      as she would have to travel by road with her uncle into Pakistan to
      Islamabad.

   5. The First-tier judge found the sponsor to be credible and accepted
      that the financial requirements were fulfilled but not the evidential
      requirements. It was accepted on behalf of the appellant that the
      appeal could not succeed under the rules because of this.

   6. The judge felt the circumstances were such that it was appropriate to
      consider article 8. The judge found that family life existed and that
      the marriage was genuine and subsisting. The judge pointed out that
      the sponsor was a British citizen settled in the United Kingdom and
      accepted that he was fearful of going to Afghanistan because of the
      violence there and the possibility of kidnap. Adopting the Razgar
      sequential approach the judge progressed to the question of
      proportionality, noting the legitimate aim of the respondent was
      immigration control. The judge found as a fact that although not
      evidenced as required the financial requirements were de facto met and
      the appellant would not be a burden on public funds.

   7. At paragraph 20 the judge described the situation as one of a near
      miss and this could be taken into account when considering
      proportionality. The judge did say however if this was the only factor
      the appropriate step would be for a fresh application with the correct
      evidential requirements being met. However the judge was influenced by
      the security risks involved.

   8. The judge accepted the appellant would need to apply from Islamabad
      and the journey by road would be dangerous. She would need to be
      accompanied by a male relative. It was said that her uncle cannot
      obtain a passport and there was reference to a bombing attack on the
      airport in Afghanistan. At paragraph 22 the judge refers to the
      sponsor's evidence that he felt unsafe going to Afghanistan and
      referred to the Home Office advice about travel. On this basis the
      judge found the decision to be disproportionate and allowed the appeal
      under article 8 but not under the immigration rules.


   9. The application for permission to appeal submitted that the near miss
      point was at best an adornment and not a basis in its own right to
      allow the appeal. Regarding the security risk, whilst the tribunal had
      found that the appellant would need a male companion in order to
      travel to Islamabad the reference to it having to be her uncle and a
      real risk of kidnapping en route amounted to conjecture. It was
      submitted that the sponsor could assist.

  10. Permission to appeal the decision was granted to the respondent on the
      basis it was arguable that the judge's proportionality assessment was
      flawed. The risks for her travelling to Islamabad to make a fresh
      application did not arguably amount to compelling and exceptional
      circumstances.

  11. Mr Duffy in opening the appeal suggested in fairness to the appellant
      she may be assisted by EX.1 in appendix FM .It was accepted her
      sponsor was a British citizen and the relationship was genuine and
      subsisting. The issue under EX.1 then was whether there were
      insurmountable obstacles to family life with her partner continuing
      outside the United Kingdom. He acknowledged the sponsor's concerns
      about safety in Afghanistan and the fact he had established a life
      here. If this assisted the appellant the appeal should have been
      allowed under the immigration rules as the financial requirements
      would not apply in this situation.

  12. On reflection Mr Duffy felt EX.1 did not apply because this was an
      entry clearance application. He did acknoweledged that the security
      situation was a legitimate consideration and did not seek with any
      vigour to challenge the article 8 finding when this was factored in.

Consideration

  13. The heading of EX .1 of Appendix FM is `Exceptions to certain
      eligibility requirements for leave to remain ...'There are divisions
      within Appendix FM between eligibility for entry clearance; for
      limited leave to remain; and for indefinite leave to remain. Thus, the
      construction of appendix FM suggests EX.1 does not apply to entry
      clearance cases. As found in Sabir (Appendix FM - EX.1 not free
      standing) [2014] UKUT 00063 (IAC) EX.1 is "parasitic" on a Rule within
      Appendix FM that otherwise grants leave to remain.

  14.  The judge dismissed the appeal under the immigration rules and was
      correct in law in doing so. The judge did allow the appeal under
      article 8 grounds. It is notable that the judge found as a fact that
      the sponsor de facto met the financial requirements but have failed to
      produce the required evidence under appendix FM-SE. The judge
      described this as a near miss situation. Article 8 is not a general
      dispensing power and the judge recognised this by indicating that had
      this been the only factor the appeal would not have succeeded. However
      the judge was influenced by the security situation in Afghanistan. The
      emphasis in the decision was on the practical difficulties of making a
      new application given the security situation in Afghanistan. The need
      for a male chaperone was stated as were the difficulties for the
      appellant's uncle to accompany her. The decision also referred to the
      appellant's husband's fear in travelling to Afghanistan. Furthermore,
      the decision indicates the judge took into account the public interest
      in immigration control. The factors raised were relevant
      considerations in a proportionality assessment. On the facts found it
      was open to Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Rothwell to dismiss the
      appeal under the immigration rules and to allow it on article 8
      grounds. Consequently the decision shall stand.


   Decision


      The decision of Judge of the First-tier tribunal Rothwell  dismissing
      the appeal under the immigration rules and allowing it under article 8
      does not materially err in law and shall stand.



   Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly

