
                                    [pic]
IAC-CH-SA-V

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/01355/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20th May 2016 (Error of Law)      |On 21st November 2016                |
|And 18th October 2016                |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                         ECO
                                     and

                                     G F
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the ECO:  Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Claimant: Mr G Lee (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Anonymity having previously been ordered  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
there being no application to remove the order, I see no  reason  to  do  so
and the order remains in place.  Unless and until  a  Tribunal  or  a  court
directs otherwise, the Claimant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  his
family.  This direction applies  both  to  the  Claimant  and  to  the  ECO.
Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.


 1. The ECO (ECO) appeals with permission  a  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Andonian allowing  the  Claimant's  appeal  against  the
    ECO's decision to refuse him entry clearance to be  reunited  with  his
    wife and seven children present in  the  United  Kingdom  with  refugee
    status.

 2. The ECO Claimant was the ECO before the First-tier  Tribunal,  and  the
    Sudanese national was the Claimant. For ease of reference I use ECO and
    Claimant to refer to the parties.

 3.  On  18  November  2013  the  ECO  refused  this  Sudanese   national's
    application for entry clearance  to  be  reunited  with  his  wife  and
    children in the UK on four grounds.

          i) Firstly, with reference to  the  substantive  family  re-union
             Immigration Rules' requirements at paragraph 352A(i), (iv):

                   "I am not satisfied that you are the spouse of  a  person
                  granted refugee status in the United Kingdom, and that you
                  and your Sponsor intend to live  together  in  the  United
                  Kingdom."

         ii)  Secondly,  with  reference  to  the   mandatory   documentary
             requirements at paragraph 320(3):

                  "I am satisfied that you  have  failed  to  satisfactorily
                  establish your identity and nationality.  I  am  therefore
                  not satisfied with your identity."

        iii) Thirdly with reference to  the  general  reasons  for  refusal
             mandatory requirements at paragraph 320(7A):

                  "I am satisfied that the  Ugandan  passport  presented  as
                  (sic) a  genuine  document.   However,  it  is  a  genuine
                  document  and  it  incorporates  false  information."   KB
                  (Para: 320(7A): "False  Representations")  Albania  [2009]
                  UKAIT 00043.

         iv) Fourthly with reference to the  general  reasons  for  refusal
             discretionary ground at paragraph 320(19):

                  "You are the leader of the Justice and  Equality  Movement
                  (JEM).  I am  aware  from  official  reporting  and  media
                  reporting that JEM continues to be  involved  in  fighting
                  against the Sudanese government forces.  As  the  head  of
                  JEM, and prior to you  taking  the  leadership,  you  have
                  played a significant role in the conflict in  Darfur.   In
                  view of the above, I am satisfied that your exclusion from
                  the United Kingdom is conducive to the public good on  the
                  basis of your conduct, character and associations."

 4.  Judge Andonian resolved the family reunion  disputes  concerning  Rule
    352A (i) and (iv) in favour of the Claimant.  The Grounds of Appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal did not extend to encompass those findings.    Judge
    Andonian resolved the mandatory grounds of refusal  Rule  320  (3)  and
    320(7A) and the discretionary grounds of refusal at  Rule  320(19),  in
    favour of the Claimant. The Judge allowed  the  appeal  on  Immigration
    Rules grounds.  The grounds of appeal to the  UT  concern  the  Judge's
    conclusions in respect of the Rule 320 parts of the ECO's decision, and
    argue that, in any event, the Judge did not have jurisdiction.

 5. Following an initial hearing in the  Upper  Tribunal  [UT],  and  in  a
    decision dated 20 May 2016, I concluded that the  judge  had  erred  in
    allowing the appeal on Immigration Rules grounds.   I  found  that  the
    Judge did have jurisdiction. I  found  the  mandatory  requirements  of
    320(3), as they were at the date of decision,  and  they  have  changed
    since, amounted to a mandatory strict formal documentation requirement,
    which, it was conceded, the Claimant had not  met.  As  a  result,  the
    rules-based grounds of appeal before the First-tier Tribunal were bound
    to fail, despite the positive findings in relation the  subsistence  of
    the marriage relationship.  It followed that Judge Andonian's  allowing
    of the appeal on rules-based grounds was vitiated by  error  and  could
    not stand. Turning to the other rules-based parts of the  decision,  in
    respect of the consideration of 320 (7A), I found an error  of  law  in
    failing to resolve and reason the factual dispute  as  to  whether  the
    Ugandan passport was a false document. In respect of 320(19),  I  found
    an error of law in the conflation of  the  Article  1F  test  with  the
    paragraph 320(19) test.  The full reasons are set out in that  decision
    and need not be repeated here.

 6. I relisted the matter to remake  the  decision  in  the  UT,  including
    determining the outstanding factual dispute as to whether the  passport
    was a  false  document.  In  light  of  Judge  Andonian's  unchallenged
    resolution of the family reunion dispute in favour of the Claimant, the
    issue of Article 8 family and private  life  rights  remains  live.  In
    those circumstances, both representatives recognised that  if  I  found
    for the ECO on 320(3), as I have done, 320(19)  is  not  determinative,
    and the dispute ultimately  falls  to  be  resolved  in  an  Article  8
    consideration. The Article 8  assessment  must  start  with  a  correct
    evaluation of the rules-based  position,  including  of  the  mandatory
    refusal provisions at 320(7A), and the discretionary refusal provisions
    at 320(19). At the commencement of the rehearing in the UT, I  set  out
    the  above  as  the  structure  of  my  decision-making  task  and  the
    representatives were in agreement with that approach.

Background

 7. I set out my introduction from the error of law decision to provide the
    background information to this case.

         "2.  There is a lengthy history with a number of unusual  features.
             This Claimant entered the United Kingdom in 2006  and  made  a
             claim for asylum.   The  ECO  refused  the  asylum  claim  but
             granted 6 months' discretionary  leave  on  27  October  2007,
             affording no right of appeal.  During  the  currency  of  that
             leave the  Claimant  made  a  second  claim  for  asylum,  the
             decision  which  followed  has  been  subject  to   successful
             challenge on more than one occasion, so that at  what  was  to
             become a significant turning point  in  the  Claimant's  case:
             2012, he still awaited a lawful decision  in  respect  of  the
             Asylum  claim,  but  also  in  respect  of  variation  of  his
             application based on a "legacy policy" as well as accumulating
             6 years continuous residence  under  the  discretionary  leave
             policy.

         3.   The SSHD is, to say the least, unhappy  about  the  Claimant's
             involvement in the Sudanese civil war.  Efforts to decide  the
             case against the Claimant because of this  history  have  been
             thwarted by errors in her consideration.  This  second  asylum
             claim  has  been  repeatedly  returned  to  her  for   further
             consideration.  The Claimant has been determined not  to  have
             fallen foul of Article 1F (c) of the refugee convention.   The
             asylum claim remains  undetermined,  and  is  the  subject  of
             proceedings in the High Court  currently,  apparently  at  the
             instigation of the Claimant  in  order  to  prompt  a  "lawful
             decision".  The basis of that case and  matters  arising  from
             his presence abroad are not germane to my  consideration  save
             as background of the chronology.

         4.   Following making the second  claim  for  Asylum  the  Claimant
             travelled  extensively,  initially  on  his  previous   issued
             Sudanese passport, now expired, and in any event lost  in  the
             keeping  of  the  ECO.   He  has  also  been  afforded  travel
             facilities by the UK Government, sometimes at the direction of
             the Courts, and sometimes  through  Ministerial  intervention.
             On one occasion in  March  2012  his  return  to  the  UK  was
             facilitated,  even  though  the  issued  travel  document  had
             expired.  The Claimant has  managed  to  participate,  as  the
             leader of the Justice and Equality Movement, in  the  Sudanese
             peace talks.

         5.   Having afforded travel facilities to the Claimant in 2012  the
             ECO then failed, later in 2012, to issue him with a new travel
             document.  On the evidence that refusal was  maintained  after
             Mr Cameron acknowledged the Claimant's beneficial role in  the
             peace talks and his assuring him that a travel document  would
             be available to attend pending  peace  talks.   In  the  event
             nothing was forthcoming,  and  having  been  offered  passport
             facilities by the Ugandan Government in order to  be  able  to
             attend the said  talks,  the  Claimant  was  provided  with  a
             Ugandan  passport.   He  used  the  passport  to  travel   and
             participate in the peace process, leaving the  United  Kingdom
             on 24 July 2012.  In October 2012 the Claimant asked  the  ECO
             to permit him to return to the United  Kingdom  only  to  find
             that his request was refused.  He has been abroad ever since.

         6.   On 13 February 2013 meantime, the Claimant's  wife  and  seven
             children were granted refugee status here.

         7.   On 19  August  2013  the  Claimant  made  the  family  reunion
             application the subject of this appeal."

The 320 (7A) Dispute

 8. Mr Wilding relied on his skeleton argument of 25 August 2016 which,  in
    its material part, reiterates the point  taken  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, which is that the Ugandan  passport  submitted  is  a  "false
    document" and as such entitles the ECO to  a  mandatory  refusal  under
    320(7A).  He submitted that, because the Ugandan passport  stated  that
    the Claimant was Ugandan, and born in Uganda, it was  a  document  that
    told a lie about itself. It mattered because if  it  was,  in  fact,  a
    false document then the ECO did not need to establish that the Claimant
    had made dishonest use of it, although it was his view  that  he  self-
    evidently had. A mandatory refusal on false document grounds must carry
    great weight against the Claimant in the overall Article 8  assessment.



 9. Mr Lee for the Claimant submitted  that  the  document  was  a  genuine
    passport and, whilst it contained incorrect  information,  even  though
    not included by mistake, it was not a false document. There had been no
    deception because of the  statements  of  the  Claimant,  when  it  was
    produced, specifically setting out that he was not Ugandan, and was not
    born in Uganda.  There  has  been  no  attempt  to  use  the  incorrect
    information to deceive.  The  ECO  had  not  established  a  breach  of
    320(7A).

Discussion

10. I have found the discussion of the mandatory Rule at 320(7A)  a  useful
    framework for the consideration of Mr Wildings's submissions  going  to
    the dishonesty of the Claimant, as relied upon in the  context  of  the
    discretionary Rule, as well as Article 8.

11. I begin with the "false document" dispute.

12. The case of AA (Nigeria) v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 773 s authority for the
    proposition that the reference to false documents  is  a  reference  to
    "documents which tell a lie about themselves" (paragraph 67).

13. There is no issue in this case that  the  passport  is  issued  by  the
    Ugandan authorities, and there is no evidence that deception  was  used
    in the obtaining of the document from the Ugandan authorities.

14. Mr Wilding argued that the  statements  of  the  passport  -  that  the
    Claimant is a Ugandan national born in Uganda  -  mean  that  it  is  a
    document lying about  itself.   I  disagree.  The  difficulty  with  Mr
    Wilding's  approach  is  that  it  runs  counter  to  the   established
    jurisprudence  that  he  relies  on.  In  KB  (Para:  320(7A):   "False
    Representations") Albania [2009] UKAIT 00043, at paragraph 10:

         "Para 320(7A) is widely drafted, and in our view  it  is  perfectly
         clear that as well as applying to false documents,  it  applies  to
         genuine documents containing false  information.   The  Immigration
         Judge erred in reading para 320(7A) as though it  applied  only  to
         false documents.  The falsity of the information contained  in  the
         passport produced in support of the application is amply sufficient
         to justify the invitation of para 320(7A)."

15. Contrary to Mr Wilding's  submission,  a  genuine  passport  containing
    false information is not regarded in that case  as  a  false  document.
    Although it is capable of coming within 320(7A), it is clear  that  the
    ratio of the case is that it is contained within  320(7A)  and  in  the
    context of the use of the passport  constituting  a  misrepresentation,
    not as a false document.

16. Indeed, the ECO has clearly not  read  it  that  way,  given  that  the
    reasons of refusal specifically refer to a genuine document  containing
    a false representation, the reasoning being premised on  the  basis  of
    false representation, rather than the production of a false document.

17. Mr Wilding's reference to the case of Begum (false documents and  false
    statements) [2015] UKUT 41 (IAC)  takes  the  matter  no  further:   it
    simply reiterates the point that I have set out above:

         "A document which is not itself 'false' within the meaning of AA  v
         SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 773 may fall equally foul of para  320(7A)  if
         it contains a statement that is, to a relevant person's  knowledge,
         untrue."

    I.e. untruthful statements in the documents fall within 320(7A) because
    they amount to  misrepresentations.   There  is  no  authority  for  Mr
    Wilding's proposition that the untruthful or inaccurate  statements  on
    the Ugandan passport make it a "false document".

18. As can be seen from my reasoning above, the upshot is that the ECO  has
    to show that the use of the Ugandan passport was,  in  the  context  of
    this  application,  deceitful.  Whereas  the  law  is  clear  that  the
    deception does not have to be that of the applicant, the  circumstances
    of this case are limited to a consideration of the Claimant's  actions.



19. Judge Andonian considered the issue  of  dishonesty  in  terms  of  the
    misrepresentations contained in the passport. Judge Andonian  found  no
    evidence of dishonesty in  the  context  of  the  use  of  the  Ugandan
    passport. His conclusions: that the Claimant has never claimed to be  a
    Ugandan, further  that  in  the  covering  letter  submitted  with  his
    application he did not assert that he was born in  Uganda,  but  rather
    that he consistently asserted his Sudanese nationality, are  rooted  in
    the evidence. Mr Wilding's skeleton argument recognises the correctness
    of that position at paragraph 3, when he concedes the accuracy of those
    findings.    Mr Wilding's efforts today put a gloss  on  the  argument,
    submitting that  simply  relying  on  the  document  in  the  sense  of
    submitting  it  to  the  ECO  even  whilst   presenting   an   accurate
    information, was morally wrong because it is a false document, and  its
    use amounts  to  a  deception,  so  that  the  Judge  was  perverse  in
    concluding that there had been no dishonest use of the passport.  I  am
    satisfied  that  the  moral  culpability  argument   cannot   establish
    perversity in Judge Andonian's conclusions and if I were  remaking  the
    decision today I would reach the same conclusions.  I do not  know  why
    the passport was produced although I note that  in  order  to  make  an
    application there must be a passport.  However, given the  explanations
    that accompanied the application and the submission of the passport, it
    is incoherent to suggest, as the ECO argued, that it was to mislead  as
    to nationality or identity, particularly in light of the fact,  as  the
    refusal notice  indicates,  that  the  Home  office  had  his  original
    Sudanese passport and accepted  his  Sudanese  identity.  Mr  Wilding's
    gloss is, at best, simply further reliance on the false passport point,
    rather than bringing anything new to  the  dishonest  misrepresentation
    argument.

20. Mr Wilding sought to persuade me that in the past the Claimant has  not
    been forthright with the Home Office about the travel documents that he
    possesses. I do not have a full chronology or all of the evidence about
    the earlier dealing.  Mr Wilding  did  not  take  me  to  any  specific
    evidence that established the assertion. It  is  not  for  me  to  wade
    through the evidence  to  see  if  there  is  sufficient  to  make  the
    assertion out. I am not  in  a  position  to  know  the  truth  of  the
    assertion, but  the  burden  is  on  the  ECO,  and  it  has  not  been
    discharged. The point falls away.

21. In short, although Judge Andonian fell into error in failing to make  a
    finding as to whether the passport was a false document, I  have  found
    that in fact it is not. The  Judge's  conclusions  in  respect  of  the
    absence of deceit do not reveal any error.  The ECO has not established
    the necessary deceit to substantiate a mandatory refusal.  The point is
    decided in favour of the Claimant.

The 320(19) Dispute

22. Paragraph 320(19) is as follows:
         "(19)    The immigration officer deems the exclusion of the  person
             from the United Kingdom to be conducive to  the  public  good.
             For  example,  because   the   person's   conduct   (including
             convictions  which  do  not  fall  within  paragraph  320(2)),
             character, associations, or other reasons, make it undesirable
             to grant them leave to enter."

Discussion

23. It is  self-evident  that  a  test  in  respect  of  the  international
    protection regime of the Refugee Convention is a setting  which  cannot
    be equated with an application for entry  clearance  under  the  family
    reunion provisions  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   Issues  relating  to
    international protection are different in  nature  and  character  from
    Immigration Rules based entry and the qualified Article 8 rights of the
    ECHR.

24. The task for the Judge when considering an ECO's reliance on  the  rule
    is to examine the evidence of the alleged conduct, to decide whether it
    meets the threshold and, if  it  does,  to  move  on  to  consider  the
    exercise of discretion.

25. In that context, I take into account the IDI which states at RFL9.1:

         "RFL9.1 When can I refuse on character, conduct or  associations  -
         paragraph 320(19)?

         Paragraphs  320(19)  and  S-EC.1.5.  provide  for  a  discretionary
         refusal of entry  clearance  on  account  of  a  person's  conduct,
         character or associations.  ECOs must be  aware  that  there  maybe
         more than one factor which would  lead  to  the  application  being
         refused on character, conduct or  associations  grounds.   While  a
         person does not necessarily  need  to  have  been  convicted  of  a
         criminal offence, the key to establishing refusal in this  category
         will be the existence of reliable evidence necessary to support the
         decision that the persons'  behaviour  calls  into  question  their
         character and/or conduct and/or associations such that it makes  it
         undesirable to grant them entry clearance."

26. Mr Wilding's argument was, in essence, that the evidence set out in the
    ECO's bundle showed clearly that the  Claimant  met  the  threshold  of
    conduct character and associations necessary for 320(19) and  that  the
    evidence also showed that to exercise  discretion  in  his  favour  was
    unthinkable.

27. I asked Mr Wilding to make clear  exactly  upon  what  matters  he  was
    relying.  He took me to evidence relied upon by the  ECO  at  [334]  to
    [344] of the ECO's bundle: The Special Cases Unit Research and Analysis
    report.  This is the State's own report. Mr Wilding clarified  that  he
    was relying on matters which arose after the Claimant became the leader
    of JEM in January 2012, following the death of his brother, rather than
    anything prior. Further, as the Claimant  was  in  the  United  Kingdom
    until March 2012,  and  it  was  matters  after  that  date  that  were
    particularly troubling.

28. Looking at the report in detail, there is reference  to  the  SRF:  The
    Sudanese Revolutionary Front. The group acts as an umbrella group.  The
    Claimant is its vice-president for external affairs. The  JEM  (Justice
    and Equality Movement) faction of the group constitutes  a  significant
    component of the SRF.

29. The report states in summary:

      a) JEM has been described as the largest and most  militarily  capable
         insurgent group in Sudan's Darfur  region  with  the  objective  of
         political and economic reform. JEM has consistently refused to join
         peace talks with other militant groups in favour of  demanding  one
         to one talks with Khartoum government,  something  the  latter  has
         refused. However, without the  participation  of  the  movement  in
         peace talks, such conferences will only have limited impact on  the
         conflict. (336)

      b) In January 2012, the Claimant said on radio that he would  continue
         his brother's work to overthrow the Sudanese government.

      c) In 2012, JEM were  responsible  for  "the  continued  detention  of
         civilians from a Sudanese engineering  company  kidnapped  in  West
         Darfur in June 2012 and then released in September 2012."

      d) It was not until September 2012 that JEM issued  an  order  banning
         the recruitment and use of child soldiers, and the  later  evidence
         is that they were not demobilised.

      e) SRF/JEM were involved in fighting in North Darfur in September  and
         October 2012, including rocket and heavy artillery  attacks  on  El
         Fasher Airport and  shelling  of  the  city  of  Kadugli  in  South
         Kordofan.

      f) In December 2012,  JEM  kidnapped  a  senior  military  officer  in
         Sudan's White Nile.

      g) SRF/JEM continued fighting in South and North Darfur and South  and
         North Kordofan.

      h) In January 2013, JEM militants allegedly clashed with the  Army  in
         Sudan's South Darfur.

      i) In February/March 2013, JEM  were  engaged  in  fighting  in  South
         Sudan, fighting Sudanese forces in South Kordofan and North Darfur.

      j) In April 2013, the Claimant's faction of  JEM,  fought  the  Bashar
         faction of JEM.  The latter had signed the DDPD, a  position  which
         the Claimant's faction of JEM opposed.

      k) In May 2013, JEM continued fighting under the umbrella of the  SRF,
         publicly stating their objective of toppling the current regime.

      l) In July 2013, attacks on government forces in both North and  South
         Kordofan were undertaken by JEM.

30. The report sets out how the international community view  the  Claimant
    and his organisation.

      a) With regard to the Claimant's own actions, the United Nations Panel
         of Experts' report of February 2013 confirmed that JEM  operated  a
         large base of about 800 fighters inside South Sudan  and  that  the
         Claimant had travelled to the region  from  London  on  a  passport
         provided by Uganda, and had made frequent visits  to  South  Sudan.
         The report  also  notes  that  the  Claimant  had  previously  been
         interviewed by the panel whilst he was in  the  United  Kingdom  in
         June 2012 and that he had also flown to  Entebbe  using  a  Ugandan
         passport in July 2012.

      b) Following  the  Claimant's  application  for  entry  clearance,  he
         attended a conference along with the leader of the Sudan Liberation
         Movement, senior members of the  SRF  and  representatives  of  the
         United Nations mission in Darfur in Arusha.  The parties reiterated
         their commitment to peace in the context of a negotiated settlement
         in a holistic solution rather than those set out in the DDPD.   The
         SRF coalition has a clear objective of  overthrowing  the  Khartoum
         government using all available means, including force.  The  United
         Nations concludes that the fighting that has resulted constitutes a
         major obstacle to the implementation of the DDPD. and the  Claimant
         urges the international community, in November 2012, not to  assist
         with the financing of reconstruction projects in Darfur.

      c) The US State Department report for 2012 accuses all parties to  the
         conflict in  Darfur,  South  Kordofan  and  Blue  Nile  States,  of
         perpetrating torture and other abuse including the  obstruction  of
         the  work  of  humanitarian  organisations,  the  displacement   of
         civilians and  the  abuse  of  internally  displaced  persons.   In
         respect of Darfur, the  US  State  Department  report  states  that
         during the year (all) those  fighting  in  the  area  killed  other
         combatants and civilians and also raped civilians.

      d) In July 2013, the United Nations Security Council called on all the
         non-signatory armed groups, of which  the  Claimant's  is  one,  to
         refrain from impeding the implementation of the (DDPD), and in that
         context condemned the killing of Mohammed Bashar and other  members
         of his splinter movement who had signed the DDPD,  and  the  taking
         captive of several others, by the forces of JEM/(Claimant's name).

      e) In short, the  United  Nation's  Security  Council  deplores  armed
         groups such as JEM/(Claimant's name) for refusing to join the  DDPD
         process and condemns their actions aimed at forcing  the  overthrow
         of the government of Sudan, and urges them to adopt  the  basis  of
         the DDPD and agree upon a permanent ceasefire.

31. Mr Wilding took me to  a  section  headed  "Evidence  of  international
    crimes". He explained that,  although  the  evidence  for  the  matters
    therein dated back to 2003/2004 and, given the finding that  there  was
    not reliable evidence of individual responsibility necessary to find an
    Article 1F ground of exclusion, as per the Special Cases Directorate  -
    War Crimes Case Research and Analysis  report  conclusion  prepared  on
    17th May 2012 and appearing (excerpt of conclusion only) at page 221 of
    the Claimant's original bundle, so that individual culpability was  not
    relied upon,  it gave a  flavour  of  the  organisation,   and  so  the
    associations of  the  Claimant.  The  report  notes  that  overall  the
    evidence looked at referenced rebel forces from JEM  being  responsible
    for serious violations of human  rights  and  humanitarian  law,  which
    could amount to war crimes. In  particular,  murder  of  civilians  and
    pillage were  found  to  exist,  although  not  to  be  widespread  and
    systematic, as were allegations of attacks on  civilians  and  civilian
    villages, unlawful killings, and taking of  hostages  including  relief
    workers.

32. In February 2012, JEM abducted 50 peacekeepers  whom  the  organisation
    confirmed had been taken hostage because of having entered territory of
    JEM without permission.  They were released within 48 hours.

33. JEM abducted five Turkish engineers in North Darfur in  September  2011
    and subsequently released them in 2012.

34. The US State Department report for 2012 confirmed that JEM continued to
    hold six Sudanese hostages and continued to recruit child soldiers.

35. The Claimant has been raising funds for his organisation in the  United
    Kingdom.

36. Although the Claimant has travelled abroad to take part in peace talks,
    they have not resulted in JEM signing a peace agreement.

37. Mr Wilding  submitted  that  the  conclusions  in  the  assessment  and
    recommendation,  that  the  Claimant  is  a   leader   of   a   violent
    insurrectionary army committed to overthrowing the Sudanese government,
    is established.   The final conclusion is as follows:

         "The commission of international crimes by JEM forces  does  appear
         to be relatively  sporadic.   However,  there  is  no  evidence  to
         suggest the subject has done anything to punish  the  perpetrators.
         It is considered that the subject has been  aware  of  the  actions
         undertaken by his forces.  He has held the leadership of the  group
         for what is considered to be  a  significant  period,  including  a
         leading position in the SRF during which time international  crimes
         have been perpetrated in all the States of  Darfur.   He  confirmed
         that he has contact with JEM field commanders.  The UN  has  stated
         that JEM/SRF continues to be a major obstacle to peace in Darfur."

38. In response Mr Lee, again argued that the State's decision that Article
    1(F) did not apply was determinative. There was an express exclusion in
    352 for those whose conduct fell short of the Article 1F  threshold  in
    the substantive rule and no other provision for exclusion  was  in  the
    Rule itself. That should be the full extent of the  ambit  to  exclude.
    Rule 320(19) should not apply because to apply it circumvents Rule 352.
     Accordingly Rule 320 (19) has no relevance. He suggested that  as  the
    Rule had no relevance to other types of spousal applications, eg  under
    Appendix FM. It should not have relevance here. Far  from  being  in  a
    worse position than others, as the Claimant is, the usual view is  that
    refugee spouses should have entry facilitated, and have a  less  strict
    regime.

39.  Mr Lee's valiant effort is entirely misconceived.  Whilst,  under  the
    Rule, conduct found sufficient to warrant an Article  1F  exclusion  is
    very likely to also fall foul of 320(19), it cannot  be  said,  simply,
    that the reverse position is true. Mr Lee invited me none the  less  to
    adopt the approach of Judge Andonian, when, at [19] of his decision, he
    regarded the ECO's reliance on 320(19) as a means of circumventing  the
    requirement at 352A(iii,) which states that  the  applicant  for  entry
    clearance must show that  s/he  would  not  fall  for  exclusion  under
    Article 1F. Mr Lee invited me to interpret the rules  as  meaning  that
    exclusion could only be on that  basis.  That  approach  is  in  error,
    mistaking the legal framework. The rule at  320  specifically  excludes
    reliance on general grounds of refusal in some categories, but  not  in
    applications under 352A. Nor is Mr Lee right to say that if this was an
    ordinary Appendix FM spousal application instead  of  a  paragraph  352
    refugee reunion application, that the issue would not  arise,  so  that
    the rule should be read down to equate "conducive" with Article  1F  on
    that basis. It is right that Rule 320 states  that  subparagraph  (19),
    along with others, are dis-applied in Appendix FM applications, however
    the  requirements  at   Appendix   FM   have   equivalent   suitability
    requirements. Mr Lee has provided no authority  that  those  here  with
    refugee status can expect  less  stringent  provisions  in  respect  of
    "conducive" issues, than other spouses or partners, and I  can  see  no
    reason for that to be the case.

40. Mr Lee took me to paragraph 6 of Judge Andonian's  decision  where  the
    Judge notes the Claimant's evidence that the Sudanese government forces
    have been regarded as corrupt and have been accused of  genocide,  even
    by the United Kingdom government.  He reminds me  that  Judge  Andonian
    took a robust view concluding:

     "I take the view that the Claimant was endeavouring to bring  about  a
    better life for those in the  Sudan  and  was  protesting  against  the
    current corrupt government".

41. Mr Lee submitted that  in  so  concluding,  Judge  Andonian  must  have
    accepted the Claimant's evidence set out in the Judge's  decision  that
    the Sudanese had embarked on a campaign of  disinformation  seeking  to
    persuade  governments  that  indigenous-based   Darfuri   groups   were
    terrorists and criminals, rather than defending the  indigenous  people
    of Darfur from genocide, and further that there  had  been  efforts  to
    split the Darfuri rebel groups by promising positions of power in a new
    government. Mr Lee pointed out that the Judge goes on to note that  the
    Claimant's wife and children were granted asylum based  on  threats  to
    the Claimant from the Sudanese regime, and that the Sudanese regime had
    made unfounded  allegations  against  him  which  had  been  thoroughly
    investigated by a number of independent bodies and rejected.

42. Mr Lee submitted that in marked contrast with the  ECO's  view  of  the
    Claimant is the evidence that David Cameron urged  that  he  be  issued
    with a travel document on the basis that he was viewed  as  a  positive
    force for change, and that  he  be  facilitated  to  attend  the  peace
    negotiations  in  2012.  Contrary  to  the  ECO's  position   in   this
    application, in the past she has not only provided  the  Claimant  with
    interim travel documents to allow him to attend  meetings  abroad,  but
    also facilitated his re-entry to the  United  Kingdom  as  recently  as
    2012, despite the fact  that  his  travel  document  had  expired,  and
    despite much of the evidence upon which she now relies.

43. Mr Lee submitted that the Ugandan authorities plainly considered him to
    have an essential role, because they  gave  him  a  passport  and  have
    facilitated his travel and residence in their country.

44. In addition, there is the character reference of his witness, a  former
    British army officer who, on his own evidence, supports the  Claimant's
    opposition to the Sudanese government, and describes  the  Claimant  as
    being instrumental in drawing up policies for JEM which condemn the use
    of child soldiers and are considered by the officer to be balanced  and
    moderate.

45. In respect of 320(19), the ECO's reliance  on  the  Claimant's  use  of
    deception in the immigration chronology  falls  away  in  light  of  my
    findings above.

46. The significant  issue  is  whether  the  evidence  of  the  Claimant's
    involvement in JEM is sufficient  to  justify  exclusion  on  conducive
    grounds.

47. The ECO's submission is that even taking account that the Claimant  has
    not been shown to have any individual responsibility in respect of  the
    matters assessed in the ECO's report of May 2012, or as at the date  of
    decision, which is the relevant date here,  i.e.   November  2013,  the
    simple fact that he is, a joint founder and longstanding member of  the
    JEM leadership, taking his place at its pinnacle following the death of
    his brother in 2012, is the concern,  because  of  the  nature  of  the
    organisation  in  light  of  its  aims,  and  its  history  of  violent
    insurrection.

48. The ECO has concluded that to allow the Claimant  entry  would  not  be
    conducive to the public good. I give weight  to  her  view,  given  her
    responsibility for international affairs. However, I am  not  bound  by
    it, and I must make up my own  mind.  Mr  Lee  invited  me  to  take  a
    positive view of the  Claimant's  involvement  in  politics,  as  David
    Cameron had done and as reflected in Judge  Andonian's  assessment.  He
    did not seek to persuade me that the Judge's conclusions were  findings
    of fact that bound me. I have already explained  why  Judge  Andonian's
    assessment of the Claimant made  in  the  context  of  whether  conduct
    warranted exclusion under Article 1F and an erroneous misdirection that
    it was not open to the ECO to revisit  political  involvement  so  that
    using 320(19) was an unlawful method of circumventing  the  substantive
    Rule at 352A.  I am satisfied that his evaluation is infected  by  that
    erroneous perspective.

49. Whilst I count positively  the  Prime  Minister's  endorsement  of  his
    attitude and role in the Sudanese peace talks in 2012, that position is
    weakened by the evidence that the United Nations clearly finds that his
    organisation, in the end, has come  to  stand  in  the  way  of  peace,
    despite the optimism with which the then Prime  Minister  had  regarded
    him. Politics is a changing environment and  what  a  politician  holds
    good at one moment does not necessarily hold good subsequently. Further
    the travel documentation dispute in which Mr  Cameron's  comments  were
    made is a context of the Claimant seeking  facilitation  of  travel  to
    enable him to leave the UK, including to attend to  matters  concerning
    his brother's death and participate in peace talks, is in  the  context
    of the UK's obligations not to unduly interfere with people's rights to
    live their lives whilst processing their asylum claims, and so involved
    international protection issues. That is an entirely  different  kettle
    of fish from the consideration of whether someone should re-enter,  not
    in the context of an asylum claim, but  of  an  application  under  the
    rules, and where the question is whether or not it  is  not  conducive,
    and if not, whether family  and  private  life  matters  in  any  event
    require it.

50. Mr Lee argued that for the Claimant to take a different view  from  the
    United Nations as to the way forward for peace, and to refuse  to  sign
    up to the DDPD, is not a reason to exclude. However, that  is  to  cast
    the consideration too narrowly, and in particular gives  no  regard  to
    the evidence that the use of force makes JEM an insurgent militia,  not
    simply an opposing party. Similarly, that the Ugandan  authorities  are
    prepared to facilitate his arrangements in the context of peace  talks,
    is no more than a recognition, in line with the evidence of  the  ECO's
    report, that peace without  the  SRF,  and  in  that  context  JEM,  is
    unlikely because of the size of the areas and populations of where they
    are in control.

51. Standing back and looking at the evidence in  the  round  the  negative
    evidence outweighs the positive.  the Claimant's  alleged  non-approval
    of actions of JEM, such as the use of child soldiers, does not distance
    himself from the organisation:  he is the head of it, he is inseparable
    from it. As at the date of decision the Claimant was  the  pinnacle  of
    JEM.  Whatever  the  ills  of  the  Sudanese  government,  JEM's  clear
    commitment to overthrow the government  by  any  means  necessary,  its
    engagement in armed insurrection, as well as the evidence that JEM,  as
    run by the Claimant, is considered by the United Nations as an obstacle
    to  peace  because  of  the  reality  of  its  response  to  the  peace
    negotiations, is sufficient to satisfy me, on balance,  that  to  grant
    him entry clearance is not conducive to the public good.  In  short  it
    would mean that he could live  in  the  UK,  with  the  opportunity  to
    conduct his work as the leader of JEM, i.e. heading an  insurrectionary
    military force, from the UK. That is a position which I am satisfied is
    not conducive to the public good.

52. There remains the question of discretion. In  light  of  the  preserved
    findings in respect of family life, and the interference  the  decision
    poses to the intended future development of family  life,  the  parties
    are in agreement that Article 8 is  engaged.   It  is  debateable  that
    where, as here, the Rules based appeal must  fail  in  any  event,  the
    issue of discretion,  argued  for  on  Article  8  grounds,  is  better
    considered in this context, or in the context of Article 8. The general
    grounds of refusal rules contain a  discretion.  The  question  of  the
    exercise of discretion must include an assessment and evaluation of all
    the relevant factors brought forward by the  parties,  including  those
    associated with Article 8, and the outcome must be Article 8 compliant,
    which in the instant case, the representatives' agreed,  amounts  to  a
    consideration of the fifth question in Razgar, that of proportionality.
     Certainly it was  not  suggested  to  me  that  when  considering  the
    position under Rule 19, that if I did not find  it  right  to  exercise
    discretion in favour of the Claimant, that there was something  in  his
    or his family's circumstances that warranted a different  result  under
    Article 8 ECHR.

53. I bring forward my findings in respect of the Rules at 320(19) above.

54. I return briefly to  the  mandatory  refusal  under  320(3).   In  that
    regard, I reject Mr Wilding's contention that  the  inability  to  meet
    this  strict  formal  documentary  requirement,  because  the  ECO  had
    retained his Sudanese passport, operates to carry significant weight in
    the exercise of discretion. Mr Wildings insistence that the failure  to
    meet the formal documentary  requirements  should  carry  determinative
    weight in an exercise of discretion even  allowing  that  I  found  all
    other arguments   unestablished is merely a distraction, which  I  deal
    with merely because he would not let it go.  Even in 2013, which is the
    relevant date  of  consideration  here,  the  importance  of  qualified
    Article 8 rights was plainly understood to  the  point  that  a  formal
    documentation requirement would not,  reasonably,  be  enough,  without
    more, to prevent family  reunion.  The  Rule  makes  no  provision  for
    applications  from  those  who  have  documentary  difficulties.  I  am
    fortified in my approach by the fact that it has since been amended  to
    do so.

55. In respect of the mandatory grounds of refusal under 320(7A),  I  found
    against the ECO to the point that I find  that  the  Claimant  has  not
    exercised deception in the context of this application relating to  the
    use of the Ugandan passport. I  find  Mr  Wilding's  assertion  that  I
    should consider it adverse that the Claimant chose to have  and  use  a
    Ugandan passport which has false misrepresentations on it adds  nothing
    in this context, not least because it receives  adequate  consideration
    in the Rules.

56. I have not been taken to anything specific in the family  circumstances
    as at November  2013,  the  date  of  my  consideration,  that  carries
    significant weight in the evaluation. The skeleton  argument  does  not
    make reference to any family circumstances, but only the history of the
    application, and the finding that there has been no dishonesty  in  the
    provision of the passport, and the technical nature of the Rule  320(3)
    refusal. .

57. In assessing the family and private life rights  of  the  Claimant  and
    those of his family I bring forward the positive findings in respect of
    Rule 352A, to the point that the Claimant meets the requirements of the
    Immigration Rules of family reunion with a family member  with  refugee
    status. He  meets  the  requirements  of  the  rules  relating  to  the
    subsistence of his family life. He has a longstanding relationship with
    his wife, and they have seven children. He lived with his  wife  whilst
    he was in the UK. Their preference and intention is  to  cohabit  in  a
    marital home in the UK.

58. The relationship has been  conducted  in  the  context  of  significant
    periods of separation not least whilst the Claimant has attended to his
    role in JEM, and more recently, once his travel document expired,  been
    unable to return to the UK.

59. The relationship has continued after the Claimant left the UK in  2012,
    and has been maintained by the usual methods  of  modern  communication
    between his leaving and the date of decision in 2013.

60. As at the date of decision, I am told that his wife and seven children,
    all adults, are here with refugee status, from  which  I  presume  that
    they had all been granted limited leave, as refugees, of 5  years,  and
    that they all anticipate as at December 2013 that, if they  so  choose,
    the UK will likely be their permanent home.

61. They have shown themselves able to travel to see the Claimant in  third
    countries.

62. I do not treat the finding that the  Claimant  has  not  been  excluded
    under Article 1F as a positive matter.  Similar to circumstances  where
    the fact that one has not committed a crime, or can speak  English,  or
    is able to maintain oneself, it is at best a neutral matter  reflecting
    an absence of adverse evidence rather  than  amounting  to  a  positive
    accolade or reason to warrant entry.

63. Standing back and looking at the evidence in the round,  including  the
    reasons why I have found that exclusion  is  conducive  to  the  public
    good, and bearing in  mind  the  qualified  nature  of  the  Article  8
    obligation, I am satisfied that  refusing  entry  clearance  so  as  to
    enable the Claimant to live here, including to enjoy his family life in
    this country, as he and  his  wife  and  family  would  prefer  it,  is
    proportionate.

64. Taking all matters into account, and for the reasons set out  above,  I
    conclude that the negative factors outweigh the positive and decide not
    to exercise discretion in favour of the Claimant.

Notice of Decision

65. The Secretary of State's appeal is  allowed.   The  decision  of  Judge
    Andonian allowing the Claimant's appeal is set  aside.   I  remake  the
    decision dismissing the appeal.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge


