
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/01303/2015
     OA/01305/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 25th February 2016                    |On 21st March 2016                |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER



                                   Between

                        thambipillai sivasubramaniam
                         parameswary sivasubramaniam
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                      Entry Clearance Officer - CHENNAI

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Singer, Counsel, instructed Sreeharans Solicitors
Southall
For the Respondent:    Mr E Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants and each of them are citizens of Sri Lanka  whose  dates
    of birth are recorded  as  23rd  August  1943  and  11th  January  1953
    respectively.  They are husband and wife. In September 2014, they  made
    application for entry  clearance  to  the  United  Kingdom  a  view  to
    settlement as the adult dependent relatives of their son  and  sponsor,
    Mr  Sivasoruban  Sivasubramaniam,  pursuant  to  Appendix  FM  of   the
    Immigration Rules with. On 4th December 2014  decisions  were  made  in
    each case to refuse the applications which refusals were upheld on 26th
    February 2015 after review by an Entry Clearance Manager.

 2. The appellants appealed and on 6th July 2015 their appeals  were  heard
    by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Gribble sitting at Birmingham.  The
    focus of the appeal was  upon  E-ECDR.2.4  and  2.5  which  provide  as
    follows:

          4. The applicant or, if the applicant and their partner  are  the
             sponsors' parents or grandparents,  the  applicant's  partner,
             must as a result of age, illness or disability  require  long-
             term personal care to  perform everyday tasks.

          5. The applicant or, if the applicant and their partner  are  the
             sponsors' parents or grandparents,  the  applicant's  partner,
             must be unable, even with the practical and financial help  of
             the sponsor, to obtain the required  level  of  care  in  [Sri
             Lanka] because:

               a) it is not available or there is no person in that country
                  who can  reasonably provide it; or

               b)  it was not affordable.

 3. Appendix FM-SE paragraphs 34 and 35 provide:

         34.  Evidence that, as a result of age, illness or disability,  the
             applicant requires long-term personal  care  should  take  the
             form of:

             (a)  Independent medical evidence that the applicants physical
                or mental condition means that they cannot perform everyday
                tasks, and

             b) This must be from a doctor or other health professional.

         35.  Independent evidence that the applicant is unable,  even  with
             the practical and financial help of the sponsor in the UK,  to
             obtain the required level of care in the  country  where  they
             are living should be from:

              (a) a central or local health authority;

              (b) a local authority; or

              (c) a doctor or other health professional.

 4. Judge Gribble considered the Appellants' witness  statements,  listened
    to the evidence of the Sponsor and his sister but came to the view that
    the Appellants had not proved their case.  She formed the view that the
    Appellant's evidence was unreliable  because  of  the  use  of  certain
    phrases  in  their  witness  statements;   she   pointed   to   certain
    inconsistencies in the evidence  and  additionally  found  the  medical
    evidence insufficient.  However she did find having regard to paragraph
    2.5(b) that such care has might have been required was not  affordable.
    Having considered the matter under the immigration rules she then  went
    on to consider  the  wider  application  of  Article  8  ECHR  but  not
    satisfied with the evidence generally she dismissed the appeal  on  all
    grounds.

 5. Not content with that decision by Notice dated  12th  August  2015  the
    Appellants and each of them made application for permission  to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal. There were five grounds, which I summarise:

      i) The judge erred in law by unfairly  and  wrongly  ruling  that  the
         Appellant's  medical  professionals  could  not  be  said   to   be
         independent on the basis that the experts  had  been  treating  the
         appellants;

     ii) Insufficient weight was given to the medical evidence;

    iii) The approach taken by the judge to the witness  statements  of  the
         appellants on the basis of the idiomatic language used was unfair;

     iv) abandoned;

      v) The judge erred in her approach to her consideration of  the  wider
         application of Article 8 by failing, in particular to  find  family
         life. (I observe that it was not  suggested  by  the  Secretary  of
         State that the judge should not have gone on to consider the  wider
         application of Article 8 in this case.

 6. On 2 January  2016  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Shimmin  gave
    permission to appeal on all grounds although the focus of his grant was
    upon the approach  taken  by  Judge  Gribble  to  the  independence  or
    otherwise of the medical professionals.

Was there an error of law?

 7. At paragraph 36 of her Decision and Reasons, Judge Gribble stated:

       "The medical  evidence  filed  with  the  application  is  from  the
       Appellant's treating clinicians. This is clear  from  their  letters
       whereby they refer to 'my patient'. They are not therefore providing
       'independent' medical evidence as required  by  Appendix  FM-SE  and
       therefore on that basis alone, at the  date  of  the  decision,  the
       requirements of the rules were not met."

 8. Clearly, [what] an expert should not be is a  "hired  gun".  An  expert
    should not provide a report as if he or she is a second  advocate.  The
    expert must stand back and make his or  her  objective  findings  based
    upon what he or she is told  and  what  he  or  she  observes.  However
    provided the expert does not simply accept without more what he or  she
    is being told but exercises his or her judgment then there is no reason
    why an expert should not be regarded as independent. If authority  were
    required for  that  proposition  then  I  would  refer  to  R  (on  the
    application of AM) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2012]
    EWCA Civ 521.  More particularly, what is required from an  expert  has
    long been established since the Ikarian Reefer [1993] 2  Lloyds  Report
    68 in which Creswell J set out the requirements at paragraph 20 of  his
    judgment. He put them thus.

         "The duties and responsibilities of expert witnesses in civil cases
         include the following:

         1.   Expert evidence presented to the court should be,  and  should
             be  seen  to  be,  the  independent  product  of  the   expert
             uninfluenced as to  form  or  content  by  the  exigencies  of
             litigation.

         2.   An expert witness should provide independent assistance to the
             court by way of objective  unbiased  opinion  in  relation  to
             matters within his expertise...An expert witness in  the  High
             Court should never assume the role of an advocate.

         3.   An expert witness should state the facts or  assumptions  upon
             which his opinion is based.  He should not  omit  to  consider
             material  facts  which  could  detract  from   his   concluded
             opinion...

         4.   An expert witness  would  make  it  clear  what  a  particular
             question or issue falls outside his expertise.

         5.   If an expert's opinion is not properly researched  because  he
             considers that insufficient data is available, then this  must
             be stated with an indication that the opinion is no more  than
             a provisional one...

         6.   If after exchange of reports, an expert  witness  changes  his
             view on a material matter...such a change of  view  should  be
             communicated...to  the  other  side  without  delay  and  when
             appropriate to the Court.

         7.    Where  expert  evidence   refers   to   photographs,   plans,
             calculations...these must be provided to the opposite party at
             the same time as the exchange of reports."

 9. I observe in passing that in the case of Lord Arbinger -v- Aston (1873)
    17 LREQ 358  374 the judge stated:

         "Undoubtedly there is a natural bias to  do  something  serviceable
         for those who employ you and adequately remunerate you. It is  very
         natural, and it is so effectual that  we  constantly  see  persons,
         instead  of  considering   themselves   witness   rather   consider
         themselves as the paid agents of those who employ them."

10. It is against that observation and that sort of case that the  guidance
    in the Ikerian Reefer was given but the important point is that nowhere
    in the guidance is there the suggestion that simply because  an  expert
    witness is treating an individual they cannot be  independent.   It  is
    simply that there are occasions when the judge must  exercise  caution.
    The first ground is clearly made out but because Judge Gribble went  on
    at paragraphs 37 and 43 of her Decision and Reasons to proceed  on  the
    alternative basis of the medics in  fact  having  provided  independent
    evidence, the issue of materiality arises and so I go  on  to  consider
    the second ground.

11. In considering the second ground,  and  not  withstanding  the  caution
    which I have acknowledged is to be exercised by a judge when  examining
    the medical evidence of doctors reporting on their patients,  there  is
    the real risk of "confirmation bias"  which  must  equally  be  guarded
    against. By this I mean that by having formed the view that the  medics
    are not neutral the judge then, unconsciously, looks for  the  evidence
    that demonstrates the lack of independence. I am  concerned  that  this
    appears to have occurred in this case and am reinforced in that view by
    the way the Judge then approached the Appellants  own  evidence,  which
    takes me to the Third ground.

12. At paragraph 44 of her Decision  and  Reasons  Judge  Gribble  said  as
    follows:

         "It is inevitable in appeals of this  nature  that  I  cannot  hear
         directly from the appellants. However I  do  have  statements  from
         them. I comment that it is clear that they  have  been  drafted  by
         professional representatives and do not contain their own words  or
         experiences. For example, the second appellant  says  her  and  her
         husband's safety is being 'incredibly  compromised'  and  uses  the
         phrase  'psychologically  distressed  which  I  find  are  odd  and
         legalistic forms of words for an elderly woman who  does  not  have
         English as a first language to use. Whilst this may be to an extent
         expected, I do treat the statements with some caution  and  in  the
         absence of satisfactory independent evidence of the extent of their
         difficulties and why these create a difficulty with personal care I
         regret I cannot place much weight  on  their  own  views  of  their
         problems."

13. I do not ignore the manner in which litigation generally is  conducted.
    It is perfectly proper and not at all unusual for professional advisors
    to draft witness statements. Provided the witness statements have  been
    drafted based upon the  instructions  that  have  been  given  and  the
    witness then signs the witness statement adopting the evidence as their
    own, the fact that it has been drafted by someone else, all the more so
    if English is not their  first  language,  should  not  mean  that  the
    witness  statement  should,  as  appears  to  have  occurred  here,  be
    discounted without more.

14. In addition to those witness statements, Judge  Gribble  also  had  the
    original applications in which the  appellants'  cases  were  set  out.
    Those applications were signed and so those they were as much  evidence
    in the case as were the witness statements.

15. The difficulty that I have is that despite Mr Clarke's valiant  efforts
    to persuade me otherwise, I find that it cannot be known what view  the
    judge would have taken of the medical evidence if she had not been what
    appears to be so cynical about the evidence generally  by  taking  into
    account improper considerations.  The report of  Dr  Shehan  Ladd  with
    respect to the first appellant speaks of daily  assistance  needed  for
    some of the activities which are undertaken and there is a report  from
    Dr Murujanandan which speaks of the Second Appellant  gradually  losing
    memory with age related memory loss affecting her day-to-day activities
    such that she is unable to manage her activities on her own.

16. The evidence is to be looked as a piece even if the evidence is  to  be
    provided in the  specified  form  as  required  by  the  Rules.  In  my
    judgement it was open to the judge to come to a different view  on  the
    medical evidence and it may be that she would have  done  had  she  not
    been concerned about the evidence of the appellants in  the  manner  in
    which she describes her concerns at paragraph 44.

17. Mr Clarke sought to persuade me that the error was  not  material.   He
    pointed to the judge's observations that there had been inconsistencies
    which at first he suggested had been inconsistencies in the evidence of
    the Sponsor but in fact that is clearly not correct because the example
    given  at  paragraph  46  relates  to  the  Appellants.  Whether  these
    "inconsistencies" would have  been   thought  to  have  been  quite  so
    significant had the judge taken a different  view  of  the  appellant's
    witness statements cannot be known and it is for  that  reason  that  I
    find the error material.

18. In the circumstances the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  must  be
    set aside. It is not necessary for me to consider in detail  the  final
    ground though necessarily, it too is made out.

Remake or remit?

19. I have to consider whether in the circumstances  the  decision  can  be
    remade but  in  my  judgement  it  cannot  be  done  without  a  proper
    consideration of the evidence in the First-tier Tribunal  with  a  view
    being taken as to the extent of the inconsistencies, if any.

20. Both parties were content for the matter to be remitted to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal were I to find an error of  law.  Having  regard  to  the
    Senior President's Practice Direction concerning these matters, I agree
    that this would be the proper course.  Both  parties  agreed  that  the
    finding that the care could not be afforded should be preserved.

21. In the circumstances the matter will be remitted to  Birmingham  for  a
    rehearing not before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Gribble.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material error  of  law.
The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed. The decision of the  First-tier
Tribunal is set aside to be remade in the First-tier  Tribunal  by  a  Judge
other than Judge Gribble.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker

