
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/01583/2015
                                                               OA/01588/2015
                                                               OA/01589/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 10 October 2016                       |On 12 October 2016                |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                BASEERAHT [A]
                                 ZAINAB [A]
                                 FATIHAT [A]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr M Aslam, Counsel, instructed by Ineyab Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. These are linked appeals against the  decision  of  Judge  of  First-tier
   Tribunal K  Swinnerton  whose  promulgated  decision  of  07  April  2016
   dismissed the Appellants' appeals against  the  Respondent's  refusal  to
   grant them entry clearance on 25 November 2014 under paragraph 297 of the
   immigration rules (which sets out the requirements for  indefinite  leave
   to enter the UK as children of a parent present and settled in the UK).

Background

2. The Appellants, who are nationals of Nigeria and who were all  minors  at
   the date of the appealed decisions, applied for entry clearance  to  join
   their father,  [IO]  (the  sponsor),  on  the  basis  that  he  had  sole
   responsibility for them. The sponsor and the  mother  of  the  Appellants
   were divorced in November 2004 and the sponsor was awarded custody of the
   children. The Appellants mother entered into a relationship  with  a  new
   partner in 2005 but this new partner did not want the Appellants to  live
   with him and their mother and objected to her even meeting her  children.
   The sponsor entered the United Kingdom in late 2008  and  the  Appellants
   were left under the  care  of  their  uncle  in  Nigeria,  the  sponsor's
   brother.

3. The Respondent refused the applications because it was not clear  whether
   the Appellants' mother still had any  involvement  in  their  lives,  and
   because  the  evidence  of  telephone  call  logs  did  not  sufficiently
   demonstrate that the Appellants and the sponsor had  been  communicating.
   The Respondent was not satisfied that the sponsor had sole responsibility
   for the Appellants or that there would be adequate accommodation  in  the
   UK without recourse to public funds. The Respondent was of the view that,
   as  the  sponsor  left  Nigeria  in  2008,  there  would  be  no  further
   interference with the  family  life  between  the  Appellants  and  their
   sponsor.

The First-tier Tribunal's decision

4. The FTT judge heard evidence from the sponsor, who  adopted  his  witness
   statement. In his oral evidence the sponsor stated, inter alia, that  the
   mother of the Appellants only saw them once or twice a year. The  sponsor
   stated that the Appellants had  been  at  a  new  boarding  school  since
   February 2016. The sponsor explained that he had only returned to Nigeria
   once, in  2013,  because  of  the  cost.  The  sponsor  claimed  that  he
   telephoned the Appellants almost every day. The sponsor confirmed that he
   lived with his current wife and has a boy  aged  five  and  a  girl  aged
   seven.

5. The judge noted  that  the  sponsor  had  been  granted  custody  of  the
   Appellants on his divorce  from  their  mother,  and  that  the  mother's
   affidavit of 9 November 2015 indicated that she visited her  children  in
   school during term times and arranged meetings in  restaurants  or  parks
   during holidays because of her partner's objection  to  her  meeting  her
   children. The mother stated in her affidavit that she was concerned about
   the  welfare  of  her  children.  The  judge  did  not  accept  that  the
   Appellants' mother only saw them once or twice a  year  since  2004.  The
   judge found that  the  affidavit  of  the  mother  did  not  support  the
   sponsor's evidence and  she  concluded  that  the  mother  had  a  closer
   relationship with her children then was  asserted  by  the  sponsor.  The
   judge noted that since 2008 the sponsor's brother had been  the  guardian
   of the Appellants  and  that  the  day-to-day  decision-making  had  been
   exercised by the sponsor's brother.  The  judge  made  reference  to  two
   letters from the Lagos State (Junior) Model College, dated 12 April  2013
   and 3 June 2013, which related to the first and third Appellants but  not
   the second  Appellant,  but  did  not  accept  that  these  letters  were
   sufficient to show that the  sponsor  exercised  sole  responsibility  in
   respect of the education of the Appellants. The judge  noted  that  there
   was no more recent documentation from that  particular  school  and  that
   there was no documentation from the new school at  which  the  Appellants
   now attended. The judge additionally noted that the first Appellant  was,
   at the date of the judge's decision, aged 18 and an  adult  and  that  no
   documentation had been provided as to whether or not she  was  continuing
   with her education.

6. The judge noted  the  evidence  relating  to  money  transfers  from  the
   sponsor to his brother and accepted that financial support  was  provided
   by the sponsor for the benefit of the Appellants. Having  regard  to  the
   telephone logs the judge accepted that there has been contact between the
   sponsor and the Appellants. The judge accepted that the  sponsor  resides
   at a flat at [ - ]. In conclusion the judge was  not  satisfied,  on  the
   balance of probabilities, that the sponsor had  sole  responsibility  for
   the Appellants. She did not accept that  the  sponsor  made  all  of  the
   important decisions in the lives of the Appellants  and  did  not  accept
   that the evidence supported a finding that  the  sponsor  had  continuing
   control and direction of the upbringing of the Appellants. In so  finding
   the judge reiterated  that  the  Appellants  uncle  exercised  day-to-day
   decision-making and responsibility for the Appellants and that the mother
   of the Appellants still played a part in their  lives.  The  judge  found
   that the requirements of paragraph 297 of the immigration rules  was  not
   met and that the decision did not breach article 8 ECHR.

The grounds of appeal

7. The grounds contend that  the  judge  failed  to  properly  consider  the
   mother's affidavit dated 19 November 2015 in assessing the issue of  sole
   responsibility. In her affidavit the mother stated that she was initially
   concerned about the welfare of the Appellants when the sponsor was  going
   to enter the UK in October 2008 but that the  sponsor  explained  to  her
   that the children would be living with their uncle. The mother  confirmed
   that, since separation from the sponsor, he has been  solely  responsible
   for the care of the children and it was he  who  made  the  decisions  in
   relation to the children. In her affidavit the mother stated that she was
   unable to provide the emotional, moral, and  financial  support  for  her
   children and that her present partner would not  allow  her  to  see  the
   Appellants and that she had to devise secret means to  see  them  without
   him knowing. The grounds further contend that the judge failed to  follow
   the   principles   enunciated   in   TD   (Paragraph   297(i)(e):   "sole
   responsibility") Yemen [2006] UKAIT 00049, and in  particular,  that  the
   day to day responsibility for a child's welfare exercised by somebody  in
   the child's  home  country  does  not  prevent  the  parent  having  sole
   responsibility within the meaning of the immigration rules.  The  grounds
   additionally contend that the judge's assessment of the letters from  the
   Lagos State (Junior) Model College was legally  inadequate  and  that  no
   consideration at all had been given to a letter from  St  Joseph  Medical
   Center, dated 27 August 2014, which suggested that the  sponsor  was  the
   main  contact  in  relation  to  any  medical  issues  relating  to   the
   Appellants. Permission was granted on these grounds.

Discussion

8. Having heard submissions from both representatives at the  error  of  law
   hearing I indicated to the parties that I was satisfied that the decision
   of the FTT was vitiated by a number of material errors of law.

9. The first legal error relates to the failure by  the  judge  to  consider
   the letter from the Appellants' family doctor written on 27 August  2014.
   In this letter the doctor indicated that he was the family doctor to  the
   sponsor and was also responsible for any health/medical issues concerning
   the Appellants. The doctor stated that he had been communicating with the
   sponsor on several occasions and that the sponsor was the main contact on
   "any medical report/progress needed." The letter goes on  to  claim  that
   the Appellants need to be close  to  their  father  as  his  absence  was
   leading to them being brought repeatedly to the  hospital  and  that  the
   distance between them and  their  father  placed  a  big  strain  on  the
   Appellants. Although the  latter  assertions  were  unparticularised  and
   vague the letter was, prima facie, reliable in relation  to  the  earlier
   assertion regarding the sponsor being the 'main contact'. The  judge  did
   not however refer to the  letter  or  undertake  any  assessment  of  its
   contents. This  letter  was  capable  of  constituting  support  for  the
   sponsors claimed sole responsibility. By failing to consider this  letter
   the judge failed to take into  account  a  relevant  consideration.  Such
   failure amounts to an error of law.


10. At paragraph 83 of the decision the judge  refers  to  the  two  letters
   from the Lagos State (Junior) Model College,  notes  that  these  letters
   were written at about the time of the sponsor's visit to Nigeria in 2013,
   and concludes that the letters were insufficient to show that the sponsor
   exercised  sole  responsibility  in  respect  of  the  education  of  the
   Appellants. There is however no consideration by the judge of the content
   of the letters and no further reasoning is provided by her to support her
   conclusion. The letter dated 12 April 2013 was addressed to  the  sponsor
   at his UK address and invited him to a meeting to discuss  his  children.
   The letter refers to 'several conversations' that the school had with the
   sponsor relating to the welfare and academic situation of the Appellants.
   The letter expressed concern that the children had  not  been  picked  up
   from their boarding school accommodation on time at the close  of  school
   for holidays. The letter refers to the absence  of  anyone  visiting  the
   Appellants  during  the  school  designated  visiting  days.  The  letter
   referred to the regular failure of the Appellants' uncle to pick them  up
   at the appropriate time and the impact that  these  factors  had  on  the
   Appellants' health and well-being. The  letter  dated  3  June  2013  was
   written  following  a  meeting  between  the  sponsor  and   the   school
   authorities and outlined the agreement that had been reached between  the
   sponsor and the school. These  letters  were,  prima  facie,  capable  of
   constituting support for the sponsor's claim to have sole  responsibility
   for his children. As such it was incumbent on the judge, in rejecting the
   letters as being incapable of providing such support,  to  give  adequate
   reasons. I am not satisfied that the judge has  adequately  engaged  with
   the content of the letters or given adequate reasons for concluding  that
   the  letters  do  not  support  the  sponsor's   claim   to   have   sole
   responsibility.

11. I am additionally concerned that the judge relied on the absence of  any
   evidence from the Appellants' new boarding school, which they started  in
   February 2016, in concluding that, at the  date  of  the  decisions,  the
   sponsor  did  not  have  sole  responsibility  for  the  Appellants  (see
   paragraph 83). This was an entry clearance appeal in respect of decisions
   made on 25 November 2014. As such, the judge had to consider the facts as
   of the date of the decisions and was not entitled to  take  into  account
   post-decision evidence  that  did  not  address  the  factual  matrix  in
   existence at the date of the challenged decisions  (see  DR  (ECO:  post-
   decision evidence) Morocco* [2005] UKIAT 00038). The judge's concern with
   post-decision events is also apparent at paragraph  84  where  she  notes
   that the first Appellant was 'now' aged 18  and  an  adult  and  that  no
   documentation had been provided as to whether or not she  was  continuing
   with her education. This suggests that the judge has not  considered  the
   appeals on the basis of the  facts  in  existence  at  the  date  of  the
   decisions.


12. At paragraph 82 the judge finds that the day to day decision  making  in
   respect of the  Appellants  has  been  exercised  by  their  uncle.  This
   observation is repeated at paragraph 90 of the  decision.  Other  than  a
   reference at paragraph 57 of the decision, in the  context  of  recording
   the submissions that were made at the hearing, the judge does  not  refer
   to the Tribunal decision in TD. At paragraph 52 of TD the Upper  Tribunal
   provides guidance  on  the  approach  to  take  to  assessments  of  sole
   responsibility. This guidance includes the following:

    vii. In the circumstances likely to arise, day-to-day responsibility
    (or decision-making) for the child's welfare may necessarily be shared
    with others (such as relatives or friends) because of the geographical
    separation between the parent and child.

    viii. That, however, does not prevent the parent having sole
    responsibility within the meaning of the Rules.

13. It is insufficiently  clear,  having  holistic  regard  to  the  judge's
   decision, that she was guided by the principles  enunciated  in  TD.  The
   judge appears  to  have  concluded  that  the  day-to-day  responsibility
   exercised by the Appellants uncle was, on its own, sufficient to  prevent
   the sponsor from having sole responsibility within  the  meaning  of  the
   rules. In the absence of any other clear reasoning  by  the  judge  I  am
   satisfied that she has erred in law in her legal approach.

14. Finally, at paragraphs 79 and 80 the judge rejects  the  sponsors  claim
   that the mother of the Appellants only saw them once or twice a year  and
   concludes that the Appellants' mother  has  a  closer  relationship  with
   them. In reaching this conclusion the judge relies on paragraph 5 of  the
   mother's affidavit which states that her new partner  did  not  want  the
   Appellants to visit her and that she had to visit them in  school  during
   term times or had to arrange meetings with them  outside  her  home.  The
   affidavit does not however state the frequency with which the Appellants'
   mother would see them. At paragraph 7 of the affidavit the mother  states
   that the sponsor has been  solely  responsible  for  the  care,  welfare,
   accommodation and decision-making of the children. At paragraph 9 of  the
   affidavit the mother states that her present partner would not allow  her
   to see the children and that she had to devise secret means to  see  them
   without him knowing. In the reasoning section of her decision  the  judge
   makes no reference to the assertions contained in paragraphs 7 and  9  of
   the affidavit. The judge appears  to  rely  on  certain  aspects  of  the
   affidavit  to  support  her  conclusion  that  the   mother   does   have
   responsibility for the important decisions in the children's  lives,  but
   does not consider or engage with other aspects of the same affidavit that
   suggested that she does not have such responsibility. I additionally note
   that one of the issues raised in the school letter dated  12  April  2013
   was the absence of  any  visits  to  the  Appellants  during  the  school
   designated visiting days,  which  would  tend  to  support  the  sponsors
   assertion that the mother of the  Appellants  rarely  saw  them.  It  was
   incumbent on the judge to  resolve  this  conflicting  evidence  and  her
   failure to do so constitutes an error of law.


15. I have identified a number of legal errors in the  above  paragraphs.  I
   am satisfied that the cumulative effect of these errors are  such  as  to
   render the decision unsafe  and  that  the  legal  errors  are  therefore
   material.


16. In light of the material errors identified, and  with  the  acquiescence
   of both representatives, I find  that  the  most  appropriate  course  of
   action is to remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh
   hearing.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal decision does contain material errors of law.

The matter will be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  considered  a
fresh before  a  judge  other  than  judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  K
Swinnerton.


No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]                               11 October 2016
Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum

