
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/01723/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London                  |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 15 April 2015                              |On 17 April 2015             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                                 JIAYI ZHENG
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - BEIJING
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr W Tan, West 12 solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a national of China, appealed to the First-tier Tribunal
    against the decision of the ECO dated 7  January  2014  to  refuse  her
    application for entry clearance to  settle  in  the  UK  as  the  child
    dependant of her parents. The  ECO  considered  the  application  under
    paragraphs 297, 301  and  320  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Oxlade dismissed the appeal under the Rules and on human
    rights grounds and the appellant now appeals with  permission  to  this
    Tribunal.

 2. There  are  two  main  issues  in  this  appeal.  Firstly  whether  the
    appellant's mother, having Discretionary Leave  to  remain,  meets  the
    requirements of paragraph 301 (i) (a) of the  Immigration  Rules  which
    provides;

         "301. The requirements to be met by a person seeking limited leave
         to enter or remain in the United Kingdom with a view to settlement
         as the child of a parent or parents given limited leave to enter or
         remain in the United Kingdom with a view to settlement are that he:

             (i) is seeking leave to enter to accompany or join or remain
             with a parent or parents in one of the following
             circumstances:

                  (a) one parent is present and settled in the United
                  Kingdom or being admitted on the same occasion for
                  settlement and the other parent is being or has been given
                  limited leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
                  with a view to settlement;..."

 3.  The  second  issue  is  whether  the  appellant  'can,  and  will,  be
    accommodated  adequately  without  recourse   to   public   funds,   in
    accommodation which the parent or parents own or occupy exclusively' in
    accordance with paragraph 301 (iv).

 4. The evidence before the First-tier Tribunal was  that  the  appellant's
    father came to the UK in 2002 and claimed asylum. His  application  was
    refused but he was granted Indefinite Leave to Remain in 2011.  In  the
    meantime his wife, the appellant's mother, left China in 2008  to  join
    her  husband,  leaving  the  appellant  behind  in   China   with   her
    grandmother. The appellant's parents subsequently  had  three  children
    born in the UK. The appellant's wife was granted Discretionary Leave to
    Remain in the UK in 2012 on the basis of their children who  were  born
    in the UK who are British nationals [10]. Her leave to remain  was  due
    to expire in February 2015. The appellant's parents bought a  house  in
    the UK in 2013.

Error of Law

 5. In the First-tier Tribunal it was contended on the  appellant's  behalf
    that her mother's Discretionary Leave  to  Remain  amounts  to  limited
    leave to remain. The Judge found as follows at paragraph 30;

         "It was accepted by both representatives that "limited  leave"  was
         not defined in the definition section of the  Rules;  no  authority
         was drawn to my attention. I note that the Rules themselves provide
         for a range of circumstances where a successful  application  could
         give rise to either leave to enter/remain  for  settlement  and  in
         others limited leave. Logically it follows that  limited  leave  is
         something which is granted  under  the  Rules  themselves.  In  the
         Appellant's mother's case, her leave  was  discretionary,  and  so,
         outside the Rules. I am not satisfied that this could  properly  be
         described as "limited" leave, so that  the  Appellant  cannot  meet
         r301 (i) (a)."

 6. It is contended on the appellant's behalf in the grounds of  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal that the Judge erred in deciding that  Discretionary
    Leave could not be limited leave to remain. The respondent  submits  in
    the Rule 24 response that Discretionary  Leave  is  not  limited  leave
    given 'with a view to settlement'  and  that  this  clearly  refers  to
    spousal leave where subsequent applications will likely  lead  to  ILR.
    This was the view taken by Mr Melvin in his written submissions and  at
    the hearing before me.

 7. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal rely on the decision in  SM
    & Another v SSHD [2013] EWHC 1144 (Admin) where Holman J said;

         "15.     Section 3(1)(b) of the Immigration Act 1971, which  it  is
         not necessary to reproduce verbatim, provides that where  a  person
         is not a British Citizen (which these claimants are not) "he may be
         given leave to enter the United Kingdom (or,  when  already  there,
         leave to remain in the United Kingdom) either for a limited or  for
         an indefinite period".  It  is  pursuant  to  section  3  that  the
         Secretary of State may give leave to remain in application  of  the
         Immigration Rules, and also, as  in  this  case,  by  exercising  a
         discretion outside the rules.

         ...

         36.      The exercise  of  the  overall  discretion  under  section
         3(1)(b) of the Immigration Act 1971 involves making  at  least  two
         discrete discretionary decisions: whether to give leave  to  remain
         at all; and if so, whether for  a  limited  or  for  an  indefinite
         period. If the decision is to give leave for a limited period, then
         a third discretionary decision is  how  long  that  limited  period
         should be. Further discretionary decisions  may  fall  to  be  made
         under section 3(1)(c) which relates to attaching conditions but  it
         is not in point in the present case."

 8. Mr Tan also relied  on  the  details  of  the  respondent's  policy  on
    Discretionary Leave set out at paragraphs 24-27 of the decision in  SM.
    He  submitted  that  this  shows  that  the  respondent's   policy   on
    Discretionary Leave details different standard periods of Discretionary
    Leave and non-standard  periods.  He  submitted  that  the  appellant's
    mother was granted Discretionary Leave for  a  period  of  three  years
    which is in line with the standard period for a grant of  Discretionary
    Leave under Article 8. The  guidance  states  that  a  person  normally
    becomes eligible for consideration for settlement after completing  six
    continuous years of Discretionary Leave.  Mr  Tan  submitted  that  the
    prospect of settlement is within the architecture of the  Discretionary
    Leave policy.

 9. The version of the guidance cited in SM is from 2009. Whilst Mr  Melvin
    submitted that this is not the current guidance or that  applicable  at
    the time of the appellant's mother's grant of  Discretionary  Leave  he
    did not produce the  relevant  policy  and  submitted  that  there  was
    nothing on this issue before the First-tier Tribunal Judge and that  it
    was for  the  appellant  to  submit  the  appropriate  version  of  the
    guidance.

10. In considering this matter I rely on section 3 of the  Immigration  Act
    1971 from where the power to grant leave to remain is derived.  Limited
    leave to remain is leave to remain which is for a limited,  as  opposed
    to an indefinite, period. There appears to be no further definition  of
    limited leave to remain. The First-tier Tribunal Judge cannot therefore
    be right in her conclusion that limited leave  can  only  be  something
    that is granted under the Rules as it relates to the  duration  of  the
    leave rather than the source of the leave.  I  am  therefore  satisfied
    that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  erred  in  law  in  reaching  that
    conclusion. As this is goes to the heart of the  appellant's  case  the
    error is material and I therefore set aside the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal and remake it.

Remaking the decision

11. When I indicated my decision that the First-tier Tribunal Judge made an
    error of law Mr Melvin requested that I consider adjourning to  convene
    a panel to consider this issue. I have considered his request but I  am
    satisfied that the respondent has had sufficient notice of  this  issue
    and sufficient time to prepare submissions. I am  also  satisfied  that
    the issue is sufficiently clear and that I have enough evidence  before
    me on which to remake this decision.

12. At the hearing before me Mr Tan said that he had been  given  a  letter
    addressed to the appellant's mother which appeared to indicate that she
    had been granted leave to remain as a refugee. However Mr  Melvin  said
    that this does not accord with  the  status  document  or  Home  Office
    records. Mr Tan indicated that he was content to proceed to  the  basis
    that the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal as to the  appellant's
    mother's status was correct.

13. In considering whether the appellant's mother in this  particular  case
    has 'limited leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom with a view
    to settlement' under paragraph 301 (i) (a) I take account of the nature
    of the Discretionary Leave granted. The evidence before the  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  was  that   the   appellant's   mother   was   granted
    Discretionary Leave on the basis of her children born in the UK who are
    British citizens. This is not disputed by  the  respondent.  Mr  Melvin
    submitted that the appellant's mother should apply for limited leave to
    remain as a spouse. However he indicated that she could not  switch  to
    that status but would have to make  such  an  application  out  of  the
    country.

14. In her witness statement the appellant's mother said that  she  planned
    to convert her status to settled status when  she  is  able  to.  I  am
    satisfied that, in the absence of a definition  to  the  contrary,  the
    ordinary meaning of the phrase 'limited leave to remain' 'with  a  view
    to settlement' must encompass Discretionary Leave where it is issued in
    circumstances such as these and where there  is  a  structure  for  the
    grant of settlement,  an  intention  to  apply  for  settlement  and  a
    likelihood,  in  the  absence  of  a  change  of  circumstances,   that
    settlement would be granted on the basis of  the  appellant's  mother's
    family circumstances.

15. I am therefore satisfied that the appellant's mother has limited  leave
    and that the appellant's parents therefore  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 301 (i) (a).

16. The First-tier Tribunal Judge also found that the appellant  could  not
    meet the accommodation  requirement  in  paragraph  301  (iv).  I  have
    considered the evidence before me  in  relation  to  the  accommodation
    issue. The appellant's parents own their own  home.  They  submitted  a
    letter and report from Property Link E17 dated  5  February  2015.  The
    report states that the  property  is  in  good  satisfactory  condition
    externally and internally with two reception rooms, a kitchen/diner and
    a bathroom on the ground floor, two bedrooms  and  a  bathroom  on  the
    first floor and a third bedroom in the loft. The report  confirms  that
    the property will provide sufficient accommodation for the appellant on
    her arrival in the UK. I am satisfied on the  basis  of  this  evidence
    that the  appellant  can  be  adequately  accommodated  in  the  UK  in
    accordance with paragraph 301 (iv).

17. As I am satisfied that the  appellant  can  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 301 of the Rules I need not consider the other provisions  of
    the Rules referred to in the ECO's decision.

18. The appellant also appeals on the basis that the decision breaches  her
    right to family life under Article 8. As  I  have  allowed  the  appeal
    under the Rules I do not need to consider Article 8 as the  appellant's
    circumstances are covered by the Rules. However in the event that I  am
    wrong in my interpretation of  'limited  leave'  as  encompassing   the
    Discretionary Leave  granted  to  the  appellant's  mother  I  consider
    Article 8 for completeness in accordance with  the  guidance  given  by
    Lord Bingham in R v SSHD ex parte Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.

19. Given the appellant's age I accept that there is  family  life  between
    her and her parents and siblings. I accept on the basis of the evidence
    of ongoing contact, financial support and visits from her parents  that
    the family life is subsisting. The decision to refuse  entry  clearance
    interferes with that family life. In light of my findings above I  find
    that such interference is not in accordance with the law.

20. In considering proportionality I attach weight to  the  fact  that  the
    appellant's age, she is 15 years old and has been  separated  from  her
    family since her father left China in 2002 and her mother  in  2008.  I
    acknowledge that this was the choice made by her parents, in particular
    when her mother left in 2008. There is no evidence before me to suggest
    that it is not in the  appellant's  best  interests  to  be  with  both
    parents. Whilst she has been living with her grandparents in China  and
    doing well, the appellant's mother said in oral evidence in the  First-
    tier Tribunal that she worries about the appellant and the  ability  of
    her grandparents to take care of her. The evidence  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal is that the appellant would prefer to be with her parents
    and is sad that she is not with them. I acknowledge too that it may  be
    difficult for the appellant to adapt to a  new  culture  and  education
    system in the UK. But she will have the  support  of  her  parents  and
    siblings and there is  no  evidence  that  it  would  be  in  her  best
    interests to be separated from them against her wishes. I am  therefore
    satisfied that it is in the appellant's best interests to be  with  her
    parents and siblings.

21. I also consider that very significant weight should be attached to  the
    fact that either there is a  lacuna  in  the  Rules  in  terms  of  the
    definition of 'limited leave' or an overly  narrow  interpretation  has
    been applied by the ECO in this case.  This  has  lead  to  significant
    delay for the appellant in that a decision was made over a year ago  to
    refuse her application for entry clearance to join her  family  in  the
    UK. I also attach weight to the fact that the  appellant's  mother  may
    not be able to obtain 'limited leave' with a view to  settlement  under
    the Rules (if that is what paragraph 301 requires) without leaving  the
    UK and therefore leaving her husband and three children. This cannot be
    a reasonable expectation in the circumstances.

22. In all of the circumstances I am satisfied that  the  decision  of  the
    respondent to refuse entry clearance in this case is not  proportionate
    to the legitimate public aim in this case.

Conclusion:

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on point of law.

I set the decision aside and remake it by allowing the appeal.



Signed      Date: 16 April 2015

A Grimes

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


