

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/01609/2013
                                                               OA/01620/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 1 April 2014 and 5 June 2014                 |On 13 June 2014            |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                      entry clearance officer - manila
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                        1) miss aryel terese negrito
                         2) miss kyle angela negrito
                                                       Respondents/Claimants

Representation:

For the Appellant:         Mr P Nath (1 April) and Mr P. Deller (5 June
                             2014), Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondents/Claimants:  Mr D Gibson-Lee (1 April) and Ms Victor-
                             Mazeli (5 June), Counsel instructed by Lloyds
                             PR     Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Entry Clearance Officer appeals to  the  Upper  Tribunal  from  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal  allowing  the  claimants'  appeals
    against the decision by an Entry Clearance Officer to refuse them entry
    clearance as the dependants of a work permit holder with limited  leave
    to remain.  The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  anonymity  order,
    and I do not  consider  that  such  an  order  is  required  for  these
    proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The first claimant Aryel was  born  on  10  May  1995  and  the  second
    claimant, her sister, Kyle was born 15 December 1996.  They  were  aged
    17 and 15 respectively at the date of application.

 3. On 23 October 2012 an  Entry  Clearance  Officer  in  Manila  gave  his
    reasons for refusing both applications.  The grounds  of  refusal  were
    identical.  In the refusal  of  entry  clearance  notice  addressed  to
    Aryel, the first claimant, the Entry Clearance Officer noted that their
    mother in the UK had limited leave to remain there  until  March  2014,
    working as a staff nurse.  Therefore she needed to demonstrate that her
    mother had had sole responsibility for their upbringing.  But  she  had
    not shown this to be the case.  She had submitted  a  letter  from  her
    mother stating that their father - Dexter Negrito, lived with  them  at
    home and could not travel at this time to the UK as he was remaining in
    the Philippines to look after their  two  younger  sisters,  Athea  and
    Daena (aged 13 and 9 respectively).  Her mother  had  left  the  UK  in
    November 2005, and had been living there ever since.  Meanwhile,  their
    father had been responsible for their welfare and upbringing during her
    near seven year absence.  The Entry Clearance  Officer  also  raised  a
    concern about the adequacy of accommodation  for  the  first  claimant,
    given that she was going to become an adult in less than seven months.

 4. The claimants' grounds of appeal were settled by Lloyds PR  Solicitors.
    The issue was sole responsibility.  The  evidence  submitted  with  the
    application showed that the sponsor  had  provided  her  children  with
    food, clothing, and paid their household bills and  school  fees.   She
    also maintained almost daily contact with them either by  telephone  or
    via social media.  The ample documentary evidence of exchanges  between
    a loving, caring and devoted mother and her daughters, coupled with the
    financial assistance which she gave to her daughters, was determinative
    of the role that the sponsor played in the upbringing of her  children.
    The case of Cenir v Entry Clearance Officer [2003] EWCA Civ  572  could
    be contrasted on the facts.

 5. On 16 May  2013  an  Entry  Clearance  Manager  gave  his  reasons  for
    upholding the refusal decision in respect of the first  claimant.   She
    did not meet the sole responsibility requirement.  There was  no  doubt
    that her mother played a role in her life, but  the  family  was  still
    together and she lived with her father.  At best her mother could argue
    she had shared responsibility, "and it is fair to assume that,  as  the
    parent who cares for her on a day-to-day  basis,  her  father  has  the
    major role."

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The claimants' appeals came before Judge Keane sitting at Taylor  House
    in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  8  November  2013.   There  was   no
    representative for the Entry  Clearance  Officer  in  attendance.   The
    judge received oral evidence from the sponsor and another witness.

 7. In her witness statement, the sponsor confirmed that she was married to
    Dexter Negrito, and that they had four children.  She had  continuously
    and fully supported them in a number of ways.  She regularly sent money
    to her family through a money remittance service.  She also sent  money
    on a monthly basis to cover  ordinary  living  expenses  and  household
    bills.  She had been responsible for the tuition fees  in  relation  to
    her daughter Aryel, while she was studying  at  university  in  Manila.
    She also paid for the education of her  two  youngest  daughters.   Her
    daughter Kyle was funded by her university.

 8. She maintained daily contact with her children, especially  her  eldest
    daughter Aryel.  Since being in the UK, she endeavoured to  travel  and
    visit her children at least once every year.

 9. Her husband had been without work for around two years.   He  had  just
    returned to work in July 2013.  He  worked  as  an  engineer,  and  was
    required to travel around the country.  He lived with the  two  younger
    daughters, while the other two lived in school.  He got  to  see  Aryel
    and Kyle on a fortnightly or monthly basis.  She had all  the  parental
    responsibility in relation to her two oldest  daughters.   Her  husband
    did not provide for them  at  all,  and  he  could  confirm  that.   In
    relation to the two youngest daughters, she employed a nanny who stayed
    at the home on a permanent basis in order to look after them.

10. In her evidence, Mrs Murdock said the sponsor was  a  hands-on  mother.
    She had been involved in day-to-day decisions affecting  the  claimants
    and family affairs generally.  She emphasised that  the  claimants,  as
    adolescent females, had far reaching demands which needed to be met  in
    order that they became responsible young women.

11. In his subsequent determination, the judge found that the  sponsor  had
    had sole responsibility for  the  upbringing  of  the  claimants.   His
    reasoning was fourfold.  Firstly, the phrase "sole responsibility"  was
    intended  to  reflect  a   situation   where   the   primary   parental
    responsibility for the child's upbringing rested  to  all  intents  and
    purposes with one parent and was a factual matter to  be  decided  upon
    all the evidence.  Secondly, he had not heard or read evidence from  Mr
    Dexter Negrito.  The Entry Clearance Officer had  placed  weight  on  a
    letter written by Mr Dexter Negrito in support of the applications  for
    entry clearance.  Mr Negrito confirmed that the claimants resided  with
    him, and the judge inferred that this was during the  school  holidays.
    Plainly, Mr Negrito did not dispute the sponsor's  claim  to  have  had
    sole responsibility for the upbringing of the  claimants,  and  he  was
    plainly amenable to the applications for entry  clearance  being  made.
    Thirdly,  the  sponsor  and  Mrs  Murdock  had  provided  comprehensive
    evidence of the circumstances of the claimants, and  their  contentions
    of fact were supported by the documentary evidence.  Finally,  evidence
    was not presented which fairly and properly permitted the drawing of an
    inference that any material contention advanced by the sponsor  or  Mrs
    Murdock was untrue.  A finding that it was Mr Dexter  Negrito  and  not
    the sponsor who had conduct over  day-to-day  decisions  affecting  the
    claimants could not be based on any fact or evidential foundation:

         I was left with the  evidence  of  the  sponsor  and  Mrs  Murdock,
         strongly corroborated by the documentary evidence to which  I  have
         referred and that evidence all pointed to a single  finding  namely
         that day-to-day  decisions  affecting  the  [claimants]  have  been
         arrived at by the sponsor, financial and moral support to them  has
         been exclusively extended by her and that it is to the sponsor  and
         not to Mr Dexter Negrito that the claimants look for  guidance  and
         support.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

12. The Specialist Appeals Team settled an application  for  permission  to
    appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   They  argued  that  the  judge  had
    materially erred in law failing to have regard  to  TD  (Yemen)  [2006]
    UKAIT 00049 in making his findings on sole responsibility.   He  should
    have proceeded  from  the  starting  point  that  both  parents  shared
    responsibility  for  their  child's  upbringing.   The  fact  that  the
    claimants lived with their father during the school holidays  indicated
    that he was involved in their upbringing.  The judge had failed to give
    adequate  reasons  for  his  finding   the   father   did   not   share
    responsibility for the children's upbringing with the sponsor.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

13. On 26 February 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge Reed  granted  permission
    to appeal for the following reasons:

         The judge has  not  referred  to  TD  in  the  determination.   The
         guidance given at paragraph 52(4)  states:  'Wherever  the  parents
         are, if both parents are involved in the upbringing of  the  child,
         it  will  be  exceptional  that  one  of  them   will   have   sole
         responsibility'.  The judge acknowledged the evidence submitted  in
         support of the appeal included a letter from the father in which he
         said that the children live with him 'it was to be inferred  during
         the school holidays'.   The  judge  has  failed  to  give  adequate
         reasons as to why the sponsor had sole responsibility as opposed to
         this being shared with their father.

The Hearing on 1 April

14. At the hearing before me, Mr Nath developed the argument raised in  the
    grounds of appeal.  In reply, Mr Gibson-Lee  drew  my  attention  to  a
    number of passages in TD (Yemen) upon which he relied.  He also took me
    through the evidence that was before the  judge,  including  a  witness
    statement from Dexter Negrito dated 27 October 2013.  He submitted that
    the judge had given adequate reasons for finding that the  sponsor  had
    sole responsibility for the claimants,  and  the  findings  were  fully
    supported by the evidence.

15. I reserved on the question of whether there was  a  material  error  of
    law; and, if so, whether the decision could  and/or  should  be  remade
    without a further hearing.




Reasons for finding an error of law

16. I consider  that  the  following  paragraphs  in  TD  are  particularly
    pertinent to the issue which is before me:

         45. To  understand  the  proper  approach  to  the  issue  of  sole
             responsibility, we begin with the situation where a child  has
             both parents involved in its life.  The starting point must be
             that both  parents  share  responsibility  for  their  child's
             upbringing.  This would be the position  if  the  parents  and
             child lived in the same country and we can see  no  reason  in
             principle why it should be different if one parent  has  moved
             to the United Kingdom.

          46. In order to  conclude  that  the  UK  based  parent  had  sole
             responsibility for the child, it would be  necessary  to  show
             that the parent abroad had abdicated  any  responsibility  for
             the child and was merely acting at the  direction  of  the  UK
             based parent and  was  otherwise  totally  uninvolved  in  the
             child's upbringing.  The possibility clearly cannot  be  ruled
             out: Alagon provides an example of this exceptional  situation
             and turns upon an  acceptance  by  the  judge  of  the  wholly
             unusual situation that the father was 'doing nothing  for  the
             child beyond the bare fact of living with  her  on  reasonably
             good terms'.

17. The significance of the letter from the  sponsor  referred  to  in  the
    refusal decision was that she was explaining  why  the  claimants  were
    going to be travelling to the United Kingdom unaccompanied.  The reason
    was that their father, who was in the Philippines with them, could  not
    accompany them as he needed to stay and  look  after  her  two  younger
    daughters.  The Entry Clearance Officer reasonably understood from  the
    sponsor's letter that  their  father  had  some  involvement  in  their
    upbringing, and this was not an exceptional case where the parent  left
    behind  in  the  country  of  origin  had  completely   abdicated   any
    responsibility.  The significance of the grounds of appeal to the First-
    tier Tribunal is that the claimants' solicitors  did  not  advance  the
    case that the father had abdicated responsibility.  They also  did  not
    put in any evidence pointing to an abdication of responsibility.

18. It was only at the appeal hearing that the  sponsor  tendered  evidence
    which was  arguably  to  the  effect  that  the  father  had  abdicated
    responsibility for the upbringing of his two oldest daughters.  In  the
    light of the fact that this was a new case so far as the respondent was
    concerned, it is reasonable to question whether the approach adopted by
    the judge was entirely  fair.   In  effect,  he  said  that  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer could not complain if he, the judge, made findings in
    favour of the claimants in  circumstances  where  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer had not sought to interview them or their father, and where the
    evidence tendered by the sponsor  had  not  been  cross-examined.   But
    there  was  no  controversy  over  the  sponsor's  involvement  in  the
    upbringing of the children.  There was no controversy over  her  having
    shared responsibility, which was all the evidence had hitherto  showed.



19. The judge's attention was not directed to the relevant passages in  TD,
    and so the judge was not reminded that the claimants had to prove  that
    they were in an exceptional situation,  where  the  parent  abroad  had
    abdicated any responsibility for them and  was  merely  acting  at  the
    direction of the UK based parent; and was otherwise totally  uninvolved
    in the child's upbringing.

20. Mr Gibson-Lee submits that it does not matter that the  judge  did  not
    make a self- direction to this effect, as he gave adequate reasons  for
    finding that the sponsor had  sole  responsibility  and  therefore,  by
    necessary implication, that  the  father  had  abdicated  all  parental
    responsibility.  However, on analysis,  the  judge's  finding  to  this
    effect is based on flawed reasoning and he has also  wholly  failed  to
    take into account a highly material document.

21. The judge's reasoning is flawed because he refers to a letter  from  Mr
    Negrito which he says is quoted by the Entry Clearance Officer  in  the
    refusal notice.  In fact, the Entry Clearance  Officer  quoted  from  a
    letter which came from the claimants' mother.  It  was  the  claimants'
    mother who confirmed that Mr Negrito lived with the claimants  at  home
    and could not travel to the UK as he was remaining in  the  Philippines
    to look after the two younger sisters.  The significance of the judge's
    misattribution of the letter to the father, rather than to the  mother,
    is that he asserts that in this letter Mr Negrito did not  dispute  the
    sponsor's claim to have had sole responsibility for the  upbringing  of
    the claimants.  As the letter was in fact written by the  sponsor,  the
    declaration that the claimants live  with  their  father,  without  any
    qualification whatsoever, tends to undermine the proposition  that  the
    father is not involved in their upbringing.  Furthermore, as the letter
    comes from the mother, not the father, it  is  not  evidence  that  the
    father accepts the sponsor's claim that she has had sole responsibility
    for the upbringing of the claimants.

22. More egregiously, the claimants' bundle for  the  hearing  contained  a
    letter from the father which he  apparently  wrote  shortly  after  the
    refusal decision.  Since the judge  says  that  he  has  not  read  any
    evidence from the father, it  would  appear  that  he  overlooked  this
    letter entirely.  Mr Gibson-Lee submits that the letter  is  consistent
    with the father having  abdicated  responsibility  for  the  two  older
    children, although the father  does  not  say  so  in  explicit  terms.
    However,  I  consider  that  the  letter  is  susceptible  to   another
    interpretation, which is more consistent with the father having  shared
    responsibility for the upbringing of the claimants, than the  opposite.
    In paragraph 6 he says that his new job (as of July 2013) requires  him
    to travel out of town for more than a week at a  time,  and  he  cannot
    possibly look after the four children "all in my custody" and his  wife
    has to relieve him of this responsibility.  In paragraph 7 he  says  he
    has therefore asked Donna to look after the two eldest daughters:  they
    are growing vulnerable young adults and need close  parental  guidance,
    especially from a mother.  He is  not  coping  with  all  the  parental
    pressures at the moment.

23. In paragraph 31 of TD, the  Tribunal  discussed  the  Court  of  Appeal
    decision in Cenir v Entry Clearance Officer.   Mr  Gibson-Lee  drew  my
    attention to the following passage in the  judgment  of  Buxton  LJ  at
    paragraph 10 where he stated:

         The general guidance is to look at whether what has  been  done  in
         relation to the upbringing has been done under the direction of the
         sponsoring settled parent.

24. It will be noted that in the letter from the father, he  does  not  say
    that he is acting under the direction of the sponsoring settled parent.
     He does not say that the initiative for the  claimants  joining  their
    mother in the UK has come from the mother,  with  him  being  simply  a
    passive bystander.  On the contrary, the thrust of his evidence is that
    he has asked the mother to take on the responsibility of looking  after
    the claimants in the United Kingdom.  So it  follows  that  he  is  the
    parent who has made a decision about the upbringing of  the  claimants.
    He has decided that it is in their best interests, and  also  his  own,
    for the two older children to join their mother in the UK.  He is  thus
    purporting to exercise parental responsibility.

25. In conclusion, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is vitiated by a
    material error of law, such that it should be set aside.  The nature of
    the error of law is such that the findings of fact made  by  the  judge
    cannot safely be preserved, and it would not be fair to either party to
    seek to remake the decision without giving the sponsor the  opportunity
    to give further evidence, and to be cross-examined on such evidence.

The Hearing on 5 June

26. Following my error of law ruling on 10 April 2014, a further hearing in
    the Upper Tribunal took place before me to  re-make  the  decision.  My
    directions for the continuation hearing were that none of the  findings
    of fact on sole responsibility  would  be  preserved;  it  was  not  in
    dispute that the sponsor is involved in the claimants' upbringing,  and
    so  further  evidence  to  establish  that  the  sponsor   has   shared
    responsibility was unnecessary and would  not  be  admitted;  but  both
    parties had permission to both parties to adduce evidence that was  not
    placed before the First-tier Tribunal strictly limited to the issue  in
    controversy (sole  responsibility  on  the  part  of  the  sponsor  and
    abdication of all responsibility by  the  father  as  at  the  date  of
    decision),  such evidence to be provided to the Upper Tribunal  and  to
    the other party not less than seven days before the resumed hearing  in
    a paginated and indexed bundle.

27. At the outset of the hearing, Ms Victor-Mazeli confirmed  that  no  new
    evidence on the issue in controversy had  been  filed  with  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

28. Ms Victor-Mazeli tendered the sponsor for cross-examination.   She  was
    questioned extensively about the letter signed by the children's father
    on 31 October 2013, which was addressed to the Tribunal.  It was put to
    her that it was only after her husband got a new job in July 2013  that
    he found it difficult to look after all four children.  She answered it
    was all her decision all her money, and she decided  what  to  do,  and
    what not to do.  She was asked to clarify Dexter's role.  She  answered
    they did not really communicate as  he  was  upset  with  her  for  not
    sending the money for the family directly to him.  She would  send  out
    money on a monthly basis, and after two weeks he  would  complain  that
    the money had run out.  This was four years ago.   He  was  more  upset
    because the children were following her instructions.   But  yes,  they
    had stayed married.  The two oldest children were attending  university
    and staying in a dormitory during the week.  They went home at weekends
    to do the shopping.  The children always had a nanny.  Also her  mother
    stayed with the children from time to time.  It was put to her that her
    witness statement for the hearing in the First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
    include an allegation that her husband had misused the money which  she
    had remitted.

29. In answer to questions for clarification purposes from me, the  sponsor
    said she did not think that Dexter had lied in the letter which he  had
    written to the Tribunal.

30. In re-examination, the sponsor said her husband was  not  working  when
    the application was made.  He had been out of  work  for  three  years.
    She was asked whether her husband was looking after the children.   She
    answered that he was there.  He was benefiting from all the money  that
    she was sending.  Even now that he was working, he could not afford  to
    pay the internet bill.  She sent money to him directly until 2008.  But
    as he was not handling it properly, since then she had sent  the  money
    direct to her eldest daughter.  She continued:

         For me, he doesn't care at all.  It is just a formality that he  is
         there.

31. In his closing submissions on behalf of the Entry Clearance Officer, Mr
    Deller  submitted  a  distinction  had  to  be  drawn  between   shared
    responsibility  and  sole  responsibility,  and  also  between  primary
    responsibility and sole responsibility.  It was  not  enough  that  the
    sponsor should be primarily responsible for the children's  upbringing,
    by virtue of her historic role as the sole breadwinner for  the  family
    and her close involvement with the  lives  of  her  daughters,  through
    regular communication with them.  It would have to be shown that at the
    time of decision their  father  had  completely  disappeared  from  the
    scene, and was no more than a ghost presence in the house.

32. In reply, Ms Victor-Mazeli reminded me  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge had received supporting evidence from Mrs Murdock to  the  effect
    that the sponsor was a hands-on mother.  She submitted that  the  judge
    had sufficient evidence before him to find that the  sponsor  had  sole
    responsibility for her two elder daughters, irrespective of the  letter
    from the father.  He was not making day-to-day decisions with regard to
    the older children, because they  were  at  boarding  school.   He  was
    misappropriating the money which his wife  was  sending,  and  she  was
    financially responsible for everything.  The judge below had found  the
    sponsor to be a credible witness, and she  invited  me  to  accept  her
    evidence that she had had sole responsibility for the upbringing of her
    two daughters at the date of the refusal decision.

Discussion and Findings

33. The letter from the children's father, which the judge  below  ignored,
    changes the complexion of  this  case.   The  contents  of  the  letter
    contradict much of the sponsor's testimony. But at the  same  time  the
    sponsor does not claim that her  husband  has  said  anything  in  this
    letter which is false.

34. In paragraph 3 of the letter, Mr Negrito confirms  that  his  wife  has
    been sending money for the family's basic needs since the time that she
    left the Philippines to work in the United Kingdom in 2005.  He goes on
    to say that she calls "us" almost every day to see how "we" are  doing,
    and that "we" communicate with her in various ways,  including  through
    face time video and Skype. This is not indicative of a breakdown in the
    relationship between husband and wife.

35. In paragraph 5, Mr Negrito, who is a civil engineer,  reports  that  he
    has been gainfully employed in a construction project since July  2013.
    He says he finds it very hard coping with four children, especially the
    two oldest daughters and attending to their needs.  He says  he  thinks
    he has lost parental control over the two older children as  they  live
    outside the house and more often they will not follow his instructions,
    and will only listen to their mother.

36. This aspect of Mr Negrito's evidence chimes with some of  the  evidence
    given by the sponsor.  But losing parental control  of  the  two  older
    children because (on their mother's insistence) they  will  not  follow
    their father's instructions, is  not  the  same  as  an  abdication  of
    parental responsibility.

37. At paragraph 6 of his letter, Mr Negrito says that his new job requires
    him to travel out of town for more than a week, and he cannot  possibly
    look after all four children "all in my custody" and that his wife  has
    to "relieve me from this responsibility."

38. As submitted by Mr Deller, it needs to  be  borne  in  mind  that  this
    letter is written a year after the date of the  refusal  decision,  and
    what matters is the state of affairs appertaining at the  date  of  the
    refusal decision.  The clear thrust of the letter is that at  the  time
    of the refusal decision, and indeed up until the date  of  this  letter
    and  beyond,  Mr  Negrito  regards  himself  as   exercising   parental
    responsibility for all four daughters.

39. This message is reinforced by the contents of paragraph 7 of the letter
    where Mr Negrito says as follows:

         I therefore ask Donna to look after her two eldest daughters ... as
         they are growing vulnerable young adults and needs  close  parental
         guidance, especially from a mother.  I am not coping with all  this
         parental pressures at the moment and it is costing me my job and my
         life as a whole.  I can't tell you everything in detail.

40. It  is  impossible  to  reconcile  the  sentiments  expressed  in  this
    paragraph with the sponsor's disparaging portrayal of  her  husband  as
    someone who does not care at all for his  children,  and  is  merely  a
    lodger in the house taking the benefit of  her  financial  remittances,
    and having no involvement at all in the  upbringing  of  the  children,
    including the two older daughters.

41. Most pertinently, the sponsor does not deny the truth of  Mr  Negrito's
    claim that he asked her to take the two older daughters off his  hands.
    So the biggest single decision  about  the  children's  upbringing  has
    ostensibly been made by the father alone, not at the direction  of  the
    sponsor.

42. There are clearly strains in the relationship between husband and wife,
    and it is for that very reason  that  the  sponsor's  portrayal  of  Mr
    Negrito and his relationship with the children must be approached  with
    caution.  Despite the strains in the relationship, the couple are still
    married.  Moreover, the photographic evidence in the claimants'  bundle
    presents a happy family unit, with Mr Negrito being no less a  presence
    in the family than the sponsor.  Given the various  different  ways  in
    which the sponsor communicates with  the  family  in  the  Philippines,
    including by face time video calls and Skype, the Facebook messages  in
    the claimants' bundle can only give  a  very  partial  picture  of  the
    content of such communications.  In addition, only some of the Facebook
    messages are in English.   But  there  are  discernible  references  to
    "daddy," such as on 29 January 2011 when the sponsor sent the following
    message: "ask daddy kung paano?"

43. The Facebook messages are indicative of shared responsibility. I do not
    consider that they advance the case that at the date of application  or
    the date of decision the sponsor was exercising sole responsibility for
    the upbringing of the claimants.

44. I also do not consider that the evidence of Mrs  Murdock  advances  the
    appellant's case on this  issue.   She  is  the  first  cousin  of  the
    sponsor, and thus the two claimants are  her  nieces.   She  says  that
    Donna is left with no choice because her husband "cannot look after all
    of them."  She says the children have far-reaching demands  as  growing
    up young women, and Donna has to be  there  physically  to  guide  them
    through their journey to adolescence.  The witness  statement  provides
    no support for the proposition that hitherto Donna's  husband  has  not
    been looking after the claimants, or has not hitherto  been  exercising
    some parental responsibility for them.

45. There is no mention of a nanny in the  Facebook  communications,  which
    include communications with the younger daughters.  There is no mention
    in the letter from Mr  Negrito  of  the  household  expenses  including
    payment for a nanny.  But even if the sponsor has  been  paying  for  a
    nanny to look after the children since  she  left  the  Philippines  in
    2005, this has no bearing on the issue in controversy.   The  claimants
    have long since outgrown the need for a nanny, and the  presence  of  a
    nanny in the household to  provide  day-to-day  care  for  the  younger
    children does not constitute an abdication of  parental  responsibility
    by either of the two parents.

46. In conclusion, I find that the claimants have not discharged the burden
    of proving that at the date of the refusal decision  their  mother  was
    exercising sole responsibility for their upbringing.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law,  and
accordingly the  decision  is  set  aside  and  the  following  decision  is
substituted: the claimants' appeals against the refusal of  entry  clearance
are dismissed.






