

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/01805/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                    |Determination Promulgated|
|On 13 November 2014                    |On 17 November 2014      |
|                                       |                         |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                 SONIA WAHID
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, ISLAMABAD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      None
For the Respondent:     Ms Johnstone (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  She has  appealed  against
         the respondent's decision to refuse her entry clearance as a spouse
         dated 20 November 2012.




Procedural history



      2. This is a matter that has previously been considered by  First-tier
         Tribunal  Judge  Brunnen  in  a  determination  promulgated  on  29
         November 2013, in which the appellant's appeal was dismissed.   The
         appellant appealed against this decision  on  the  basis  that  the
         Judge failed  to  take  into  account  all  the  relevant  evidence
         supporting the subsistence of the parties' marriage and also argued
         that the Judge failed to  take  into  account  a  mistake  of  fact
         regarding  the  sponsor's  employment.    Judge   Osborne   granted
         permission on 25 March 2014, observing  that  the  Judge  may  have
         given insufficient weight to the documentary evidence and failed to
         refer to GA (Subsisting marriage) Ghana [2006] UKAIT 00046.


      3. The matter now comes  before  me  to  decide  whether  or  not  the
         determination contains an error of law.


Hearing

      4. There was no appearance on behalf of the appellant, either  by  her
         representative or the sponsor.


      5. Ms Johnstone asked me to dismiss the  appeal.   I  now  provide  my
         reasons for dismissing the appeal.


Findings

      6. Judge Brunnen made it clear that he considered all the  documentary
         evidence [6].  He specifically  referred  to  evidence  of  contact
         before him [10] including phone cards [12] and letters /cards [13].
          He also took into account money transfers.   I  am  not  satisfied
         that the Judge failed to take into account the relevant documentary
         evidence.


      7. Judge Brunnen observed that the phone  accounts  ran  to  some  211
         pages yet they were not marked to show the relevant  calls  and  he
         was provided with no analysis  of  them.   Although  Judge  Osborne
         observed that Judge Brunnen could have invited Counsel to take  him
         through the phone records, I do not consider his failure to  do  so
         amounts to an  error  of  law.   The  burden  of  establishing  the
         subsistence of the marriage rests on the appellant.  Counsel  could
         have drawn the Judge's attention  to  the  relevant  phone  records
         during the course of the sponsor's evidence.  The practice by  some
         representatives of simply including pages and  pages  of  telephone
         records  without  any  short  analysis  or  explanation  of   their
         relevance in an  accompanying  document  or  witness  statement  is
         unhelpful.


      8. In any  event,  Judge  Brunnen  indicated  that  'there  are  other
         decisive issues  in  this  appeal'  and  he  did  not  consider  it
         necessary to devote hours to conducting an analysis  of  the  phone
         records.  Judge Brunnen clearly did not  accept  that  the  parties
         were able to demonstrate as  at  the  date  of  decision  that  the
         appellant met the relevant  requirements  on  maintenance  and  has
         given adequate reasoning for this [17-22].  Judge Osborne  has  not
         made any observations about this aspect of the appeal or  explained
         why permission should be granted in relation to the subsistence  of
         the marriage issue if  the  relevant  requirements  on  maintenance
         could not be met in any event.


      9. The grounds submit  that  the  Judge  erred  regarding  maintenance
         because he failed to take into account  the  explanation  that  the
         sponsor had mistakenly said  his shop failed in April 2012 when  it
         actually failed in March 2013.  This submission entirely  fails  to
         address the Judge's observation that 'he took care to  ensure  that
         the sponsor was not confused as to the date...'  [18].   The  Judge
         was entitled to consider a letter from Yaqub & Co as  being  of  no
         probative value for the reasons he provides [19].


     10. It follows from  the  Judge's  findings  that  any  argument  under
         Article 8 was bound to fail as he made clear [25].


     11. The grounds amount to no more than a disagreement with the  Judge's
         findings and I dismiss the appeal.


Decision

     12. I find that there was no error of law in the decision of the First-
         tier Tribunal decision and I do not set it aside.



Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
14 November 2014

