

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)     Appeal Number: OA/01517/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Columbus House, Newport                             Decision and
Reasons Promulgated
|On 27th November 2014                         |On 1st December 2014         |
|                                              |                             |
|                                              |                             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HARRIES

                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                           MRS SWETA CHIRAG MEHTA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:  Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:  Not represented


                            DECISION AND REASONS

  1. The appellant in the Upper Tribunal  is  the  entry  clearance  officer
     (ECO).  He was on 12th September 2014 granted permission to  appeal  to
     the Upper Tribunal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
     Bell (the Judge). She allowed the appeal of the respondent,  Mrs  Sweta
     Chirag Mehta, in a determination promulgated on 22nd July 2014, against
     the ECO's decision to refuse her entry clearance as the dependant of  a
     Tier 2 Migrant.
  2. The matter was accordingly listed before  me  for  initial  hearing  to
     determine whether the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved  the
     making of an error on a point of law. However, at  the  outset  of  the
     hearing, before the  disposal  of  the  proceedings,  the  Home  Office
     Presenting Officer, Mr Duffy, gave oral notice  of  withdrawal  of  the
     ECO's case in accordance with Rule 17(1)(b) of the  Tribunal  Procedure
     (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008.   Since  the  initial  refusal  of  her
     application Mrs Mehta has been granted a visa  and  her  entry  to  the
     United Kingdom is accordingly no longer opposed.


  3. There is no provision for a party to withdraw  its  appeal  before  the
     Upper Tribunal.  However, Rule 17  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
     Tribunal) Rules 2008 provides for a party to withdraw its case, or  any
     part of it, before the Upper Tribunal with the consent of the Tribunal.
     The written notice or oral representation of the party serves only,  in
     accordance with Rule 17(2), as notice of withdrawal of the case  before
     the Upper Tribunal and takes effect  only  when  Upper  Tribunal  gives
     consent in accordance with Rule 17(2) as follows:


         Withdrawal(a)
         17.-(1) Subject to paragraph (2), a party may give notice of the
         withdrawal of its case, or any
         part of it-


             a) [ ] by sending or delivering to the Upper Tribunal a
                written notice of withdrawal; or


             (b) orally at a hearing.


         (2) Notice of withdrawal will not take effect unless the Upper
         Tribunal consents to the
         withdrawal except in relation to an application for permission  to
         appeal.


  4. The Upper Tribunal gives consent to the withdrawal of  the  appellant's
     case and decision of the First-tier Tribunal now stands unchallenged so
     that the appeal before the Upper Tribunal falls to be dismissed.


Notice of decision


  5. The appeal before the Upper Tribunal is dismissed and the  decision  of
     the First-tier Tribunal therefore stands.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014


    The  position  remain  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  no   such
    direction.


Signed

J Harries

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Harries
Date:  30th November 2014
