

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/01703/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                   |Determination Promulgated |
|On 04 December 2014                      |On 11 December 2014       |
|                                         |                          |

                                   Before

              The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey and
                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Holmes


                                   Between

                                  HAWA BIBI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, ISLAMABAD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant:    Ms F  McCrae  (of  Counsel),  instructed  by  Halliday  Reeves
             Solicitors
Respondent:   Mr J Kingham, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan,  now  aged  19  years.   Her
    appeal originates  in  a  decision  of  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer,
    Islamabad (the "ECO") dated 20 December 2013, whereby  her  application
    for entry clearance to the United Kingdom for  the  purpose  of  family
    reunion was refused.  Her ensuing appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (the "FtT")  was  dismissed.   She  appeals  with  permission  to  this
    Tribunal.

Decision of the ECO

 2.  The  decision  of  the  ECO  states,  firstly,  that  the  Appellant's
    application for "family reunion entry clearance" was  considered  under
    paragraph 352A of the Immigration Rules. This provision  of  the  Rules
    specifies the requirements to be satisfied by a person seeking leave to
    enter or remain in the United Kingdom as the spouse or civil partner of
    a refugee.  They are as follows:

         "(i) the applicant is married to or the civil partner of  a  person
             who is currently a refugee granted status as  such  under  the
             Immigration Rules in the United Kingdom; and


         (ii) the marriage or civil partnership did not take place after the
             person granted asylum left the country of his former  habitual
             residence in order to seek asylum; and


         (iii)    the applicant would not be  excluded  from  protection  by
             virtue of Article 1F of the [Refugee Convention] if he were to
             seek asylum in his own right; and


         (iv) each of the parties intends to live permanently with the other
             as his or her spouse or civil  partner  and  the  marriage  is
             subsisting; and


         (v)  if seeking leave to enter, the applicant holds a valid  United
             Kingdom entry clearance for entry in this capacity."


    The ECO's  refusal  decision  was  based  on  an  assessment  that  the
    Appellant is not married to her sponsor, a person with  refugee  status
    in the United Kingdom.  The decision was articulated in these terms:


         "You claim that you  are  married  to  your  sponsor,  however  the
         circumstances around your marriage are not clear.  You  state  that
         you were in a relationship before your sponsor left Afghanistan and
         were engaged on  02  June  2006.   To  demonstrate  this  you  have
         provided an engagement certificate.  I note that the date  on  this
         certificate is 01 February 2011, suggesting that you obtained  this
         document some years after your engagement.  You have  not  provided
         any other evidence, such as original documents, to demonstrate that
         you were married or in a relationship  at  this  time  as  claimed.
         Furthermore,  ...........   you  claim  to  have  been  married  in
         Pakistan on 01 February 2011, around two years after  your  sponsor
         left Afghanistan. You have not provided any  evidence,  such  as  a
         marriage certificate or photos [sic], to demonstrate you married as
         claimed."


    This assessment gave rise to the  conclusion  that  the  Appellant  had
    failed to provide satisfactory evidence that she  was  married  to  her
    sponsor or that they had been in a relationship prior to his  departure
    from Afghanistan.  The requirements of paragraph 352A(i) and (ii) were,
    therefore, not satisfied.

Decision of the FtT

 3. The First-tier Tribunal (the "FtT") dismissed the  Appellant's  appeal.
    As recorded in the determination,  the  evidence  which  it  considered
    included the testimony of the sponsor, who claimed  that  the  partners
    had become engaged in  2006  when  they  were  aged  16  and  13  years
    respectively.  He asserted that they had undergone a marriage  ceremony
    in 2011.  The determination further records:

         "He ..............  claimed that, in his asylum proceedings, he had
         not mentioned that he was married or engaged because  he  was  only
         engaged .....  he also suggested that toothache and a headache  had
         an affect [sic] on his interview. Since  2011,  the  Appellant  had
         been living with his family in accordance with  tradition.  He  had
         visited her again in 2013, during which time  she  conceived  their
         child and the baby was born recently.   He  said  that  he  was  in
         contact with his wife  on  a  daily  basis  through  Skype  and  by
         telephone."

    The sponsor further claimed that the engagement ceremony in  2006  took
    the form of a "Nikah". He acknowledged that there were  no  photographs
    of the asserted 2011 marriage ceremony and that he  did  not  know  the
    name of the Mullah who conducted same.  He asserted that he remained in
    Pakistan for two months  following  this  ceremony.   In  evidence,  he
    produced a document professing to be the original "Nikah"  certificate.
    He accepted that he had left Afghanistan in 2009.

 4. The FtT decided as follows:

    (i)  The parties were married in 2011, as claimed.


    (ii) There is a child of the marriage.


    (iii)    The marriage is subsisting.


    (iv)  However,  paragraph  352A(ii)  was  not  satisfied,  since  their
         marriage postdated the departure of the  sponsor  from  Afghanistan
         for the purpose of seeking asylum.


    Notably, the Appellant's representative was asked by the FtT to address
    the clear evidence of both parties to the marriage  that  between  2006
    and 2011 they considered themselves engaged, not married.  In response,
    he submitted that both had wrongly interpreted the effect of  the  2006
    ceremony.  The Judge rejected this  submission.  His  key  finding  was
    expressed in the following terms:


         "....  I am not satisfied that the  Appellant  has  shown,  on  the
         balance of probabilities, that the 2006 Nikah  was  sufficient  for
         the parties to have contracted a valid marriage."

    The appeal was dismissed accordingly.

APPEAL TO THIS TRIBUNAL

 5. The grant of permission to the Upper Tribunal is focused on [11] of the
    determination of the FtT, which is in the following terms:

         "[The Appellant's representative] made no submissions to  me  under
         Article 8.  It  was  not  suggested  in  the  Appellant's  skeleton
         argument that she could meet the requirements of Appendix FM of the
         Rules and no compelling circumstances were  identified  to  warrant
         consideration of Article 8 on conventional grounds.  In all of  the
         circumstances, I  could  not  allow  the  appeal  on  human  rights
         grounds."

    Permission to appeal was granted in the following terms:

         "The grounds .....  maintain that the Judge erred in law by failing
         to consider the Appellant's appeal on human rights grounds  outside
         of the Rules ...


         Given the Judge's finding that the couple had a subsisting marriage
         .....  and taking into account that Article 8  was  raised  in  the
         Appellant's skeleton argument, it  is  arguable  that  the  Judge's
         failure to give any  consideration  to  Article  8  amounted  to  a
         material error of law."


    Permission to appeal was granted accordingly.

 6. On behalf of the Appellant, Ms McCrae acknowledged that the key passage
    in the decision of the FtT is that reproduced in [5] above.  Ms  McCrae
    had no instructions as to whether, at the hearing, there had  been,  in
    substance,  a  concession  by  the  Appellant's  former  representative
    relating to the Article 8 ground.  Her submission mirrored the terms of
    the grounds of appeal.  She did not develop  any  argument  as  regards
    materiality.

 7. Issue was joined between the parties in the Rule 24 Notice on behalf of
    the ECO, in the following terms:

         "......  It is accepted that Article 8 was .... properly raised  in
         the Appellant's skeleton argument and as such it fell for the Judge
         to determine all matters relied on in the grounds.  In this  regard
         the Respondent will submit that had the  learned  Judge  considered
         the Article 8 appeal, he would have been bound to have  found  that
         the decision on Article 8  was  not  disproportionate  in  all  the
         circumstances of the case."

    This suggested that the issue to be determined by this Tribunal is  one
    of narrow dimensions, which we formulate  thus:  was  the  acknowledged
    error of law on the part of the  FtT,  consisting  of  its  failure  to
    address  and  determine  the  Article   8   ECHR   ground   of   appeal
    comprehensively,  material?   However,  the  argument  advanced  by  Mr
    Kingham  was  (in  terms)  that,  properly  construed,  [11]   of   the
    determination indicated that the Article 8 ground of appeal had  indeed
    been considered by the FtT and was rejected.

Conclusion

 8. We elicited from both representatives confirmation  that  there  is  no
    dispute  about  the  statement  at  the  beginning  of  [11]   of   the
    determination. Had this  been  contentious,  it  should  properly  have
    emerged in the grounds of appeal, where it is not mentioned. From  this
    starting point, our first conclusion is that  what  the  Judge  records
    bears all the hallmarks of  a  realistic  and  unavoidable  concession,
    namely that the Article 8 ground, while alive on paper (per  paragraphs
    18 - 20  of  the  grounds  of  appeal),  had  no  genuine  prospect  of
    succeeding.  As we observed, at every tier of the legal system,  issues
    frequently crystallise when cases are listed for hearing.  In the  cold
    light of the courtroom, extravagant, hopeful and speculative  pleadings
    frequently dilute or disappear altogether.  In practice, in  the  field
    of immigration and asylum, this is rarely  accompanied  by  any  formal
    late amendment of the grounds of appeal. We are satisfied that this  is
    what  occurred  in  the  present  case.   Accordingly,  based  on  this
    analysis, it was not incumbent on the Judge to determine the Article  8
    ground, as it was no longer being actively advanced.

 9. Further, and in any event, we are satisfied that the Judge  did  indeed
    address his mind to the Article 8 ground.  This assessment follows from
    the clear statement in [11] of the determination that (a) there was  no
    suggestion that the Appellant could satisfy the  relevant  requirements
    of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  (b)  further,  "....  no   compelling
    circumstances were identified to warrant consideration of Article 8  on
    conventional grounds".   In argument, Ms McCrae acknowledged,  frankly,
    that this  discrete  passage  presented  a  difficult  hurdle  for  the
    Appellant to overcome. Given our analysis, the grant of  permission  to
    appeal implodes.

10. Finally, in the further alternative, the appeal cannot succeed  on  the
    freestanding ground that if neither of the conclusions rehearsed  above
    is tenable, the Appellant's Article 8 case could  not,  viewed  in  the
    most favourable light and at its absolute zenith, have succeeded in any
    event. Given the applicable principles, which are now well settled,  it
    was on any showing doomed to failure, come what may. Stated succinctly,
    Article 8 ECHR does not entitle this couple to settle as man  and  wife
    in the United Kingdom.

Decision

11. It follows that we dismiss the appeal and affirm the  decision  of  the
    FtT.



                                                           Bernard McCloskey

                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                     Date:  04 December 2014
