

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/01147/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|on 21 July 2016                     |on 25 July 2016                       |
|                                    |                                      |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Najmus Sehar MINHAS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)


                                                                  Respondent

For the appellant (the SSHD):     Mr M Matthews, Senior Presenting Officer

No appearance for the respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The parties are as above, but the rest of this determination refers  to
    them as they were in the FtT.

 2. The SSHD appeals against a decision  by  FtT  Judge  Debra  H  Clapham,
    promulgated on  21  December  2015,  allowing  the  appellant's  appeal
    against refusal of entry clearance.

 3. On 16 June 2016 the UT issued notice of the hearing on  21  July  2016.
    Copies were sent both to the solicitors then representing the appellant
    and directly to her in Pakistan.

 4. By letter dated 22 June 2016 those solicitors advised the UT that  they
    had withdrawn from acting and that they had  advised  her  urgently  to
    seek new representation.

 5. Nothing has since been heard from the appellant or from  anyone  acting
    on her behalf.

 6. Mr Matthews advised that  the  SSHD  had  heard  from  the  appellant's
    sponsor, her former husband, that the marriage had broken down, and had
    written to solicitors enquiring whether the case was to  be  withdrawn.
    He exhibited a copy of the decree of divorce from the SSHD's file.   He
    suggested that the case might be resolved on the basis of withdrawal by
    the appellant.  Alternatively, he submitted that the  decision  on  the
    merits should be reversed.

 7. The provisions of rule 17 do not fit the case, because  the  UT  has  a
    record only of solicitors withdrawing from acting, not of withdrawal of
    the case.

 8. The appellant has not responded to the notice  of  hearing  or  to  the
    advice  that  (if  she  wished  to  proceed)  she  should  seek   other
    representation urgently.  The notice of hearing stated:

           'If you neither attend nor submit representations, the  tribunal
           may conclude that you are no longer interested in  pursuing,  or
           as the case may be, opposing this appeal.'

 9. I conclude that the  appellant  offers  no  opposition  to  the  SSHD's
    grounds of appeal to the UT.  Those  grounds  have  merit.   The  judge
    erred by saying that the evidence offered by the SSHD was generic only.
     It was generic in parts (as it was bound to be) but in other parts  it
    was specific to the certificate which  the  SSHD  found  to  have  been
    dishonestly obtained.  The error was material.  The FtT decision is set
    aside.  It falls to be remade in the UT, based on  the  evidence  which
    was led in the FtT.  That evidence was enough to make  out  the  SSHD's
    case.  There was nothing to consider on the other side.

10. The decision is remade thus:  the appeal, as originally brought by  the
    appellant to the FtT, is dismissed.

11. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


            [pic]


            21 July 2016
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




