
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/01848/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 10 December 2014                           |On 7 January 2015            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                     THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE CARR DBE
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY

                                   Between

                                 ANA AL WADI
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Moran, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a 73 year old citizen of  Syria,  a  widow,  currently
    living alone in Turkey, having fled the war in Syria.  She appeals  the
    decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Malik  who,  in  a  decision
    promulgated  on  6  August  2014,  dismissed  her  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision to refuse  her  entry  clearance  as  the
    dependent relative of her son who has  refugee  status  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

 2. We summarise the facts so far as material as follows. The appellant has
    been living as part of her son's  household  since  the  death  of  her
    husband in 2010.  She and her only son had fled to Turkey  in  2013  to
    escape the civil war in Syria.  It appears that her five daughters  and
    their families remained in Syria. Her son made his way  to  the  United
    Kingdom to claim asylum, arriving in the United  Kingdom  on  1  August
    2013.  He was granted five years leave to remain here as a  refugee  on
    13 September 2013.

 3. The appellant, alongside her  daughter-in-law  and  two  grandchildren,
    applied to the British Consulate in Istanbul on  2  December  2013  for
    entry clearance to join her son in the United Kingdom  as  a  dependent
    relative of a person with limited leave to  enter  and  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom as a refugee under Section ECDR of Appendix FM   of  the
    Immigration Rules.  All of the family apart  from  the  appellant  were
    granted United Kingdom visas  on  5  December  2013.   The  appellant's
    application, however, was refused on 7 January 2014 on the  basis  that
    she did not  satisfy  the  requirements  of  paragraph  319(5)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  Those Rules were not in fact in force at  the  time
    having then already been replaced by Section ECDR of Appendix FM.   But
    the Entry Clearance Officer went on to reason that  the  appellant  had
    not provided any evidence to show she was a widow. The Entry  Clearance
    Officer was not satisfied that she was financially   dependent  on  her
    son  and  in  any  event  maintenance  and   accommodation   and   care
    requirements were  not  met.  The  Entry  Clearance  Officer  was  also
    satisfied that the decision to refuse entry was in the  exercise  of  a
    firm and fair immigration policy and was not disproportionate.

 4. Although as we have recorded, paragraph 319(5) of the Immigration Rules
     was  not in force as  the  material  time,  it  was  conceded  in  the
    appellant's application and in her appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    that she did not  meet  the  financial  accommodation  requirements  at
    ECDR3.1 of Appendix FM  at the time of  application.   To  this  extent
    therefore  the  error  in  application  of  the  Immigration  Rules  is
    immaterial.

 5. A review of the Entry Clearance Officer's decision  took  place  on  27
    July 2014,  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's  decision  being  on  that
    occasion maintained.  We note that by the time of the  hearing  of  the
    appellant's appeal on 22 August 20134  the  accommodation  requirements
    were in fact in place but there was still, it is accepted, a  shortfall
    of the minimum requirements as calculated in  accordance  with  the  KA
    (Adequacy of maintenance) [2006] UKAIT 00065.

 6. The appellant sought to rely on Article 8 of the European Convention on
    Human Rights to argue that she should  nevertheless  be  granted  leave
    outside the Immigration Rules.  The appeal in the  First-tier  Tribunal
    was under Section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002 as amended.

 7. The Tribunal Judge heard oral evidence from the appellant's son via  an
    interpreter.  In her ruling the judge  set  out  in  great  detail  his
    evidence as to the appellant's position :  in particular as to her poor
    health, even though she was not in pressing need of medical  treatment,
    her  need  for  help  with  everyday  tasks,  his  sisters'   desperate
    circumstances in Syria, the fact that he was the only one realistically
    able to look after the appellant, the appellant's difficult position in
    Turkey, the fact that he had found a flat in London where the appellant
    could stay with him and his family,  his guilt at leaving the appellant
    alone and his  request  for  compassionate  treatment.   He  also  gave
    evidence that the Turkish family with whom  the  appellant  was  living
     had asked indirectly for her to leave and that, whilst he would make a
    fresh application once he had a job, that could  take a long  time  and
    the appellant's situation was very bad.  We have also in the course  of
    this hearing been  taken to the witness statement  of  the  appellant's
    son relied on below as well.

 8. The judge was satisfied that the  appellant's  son  was  essentially  a
    credible witness.  She was satisfied to the required standard that  the
    appellant's son was granted leave  to  remain  in  this  country  as  a
    refugee and that the appellant was a widow.  She was satisfied that the
    appellant had knee and spine problems even though she was not  in  need
    of any immediate medical treatment.  She could obtain medical treatment
    in Turkey if she was sent money.  The judge accepted that the appellant
    had  lived  with  her  son  since  her   husband's   death   in   2010.
    Significantly,  given  the  current  conditions  in  Syria,  the  judge
    accepted that it would be  unreasonable  to  expect  the  appellant  to
    return there.  She accepted that the appellant's son was  a  tenant  of
    property where the appellant could reside.  She said and accepted  that
    the son of the appellant was not in work   but  that  he  was  actively
    looking for  work.

 9. At paragraph 38 of her determination the judge said  this:

         "Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 640
         (IAC) says that 'After applying the requirements   of  the   Rules,
         only if there may arguably be good ground  for  granting  leave  to
         remain outside them is it necessary for Article 8 purposes to go on
         to  consider  whether  there  are  compelling   circumstances   not
         sufficiently recognised under them'."

10. She went on at paragraph 39 to 41 to explain her conclusion that in her
    judgment  there  were  no  compelling  circumstances  not  sufficiently
    recognised under the Rules and so dismissing the appeal on human rights
    grounds.  In reaching that conclusion she referred to  the  appellant's
    location in Turkey and to the fact that her son  and  his  family  with
    whom she previously lived are now  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  would
    naturally wish to be reunited.  But she went on to say that whilst  the
    separation would inevitably have  an  impact  on  them,  there  was  no
    reasonable  evidence  before  her  to  suggest  that  the   appellant's
    situation in Turkey was such that there were  compelling  circumstances
    not recognised by the Rules. She went on to rehearse the  evidence   of
    the sponsor as to the appellant's position in Turkey and in relation to
    medical evidence and her medical condition. She referred  to  the  fact
    that the appellant's son could telephone the appellant once or twice  a
    week.

11. In relation to permanency of separation, she referred to the fact  that
    the son was currently looking for a job and that there was  nothing  to
    suggest that a fresh application could not be  made  by  the  appellant
    once the son had secured employment or that the delay in doing so would
    be unduly harsh.

12. The essential ground on this  appeal  is  that  the  judge  misdirected
    herself in law as to the applicability of Gulshan in this case  and  by
    failing as a result to conduct a  proportionality  exercise.   This  in
    turn led the judge, it is said, to  give  insufficient  weight  to  key
    factors in the appellant's case.  Reliance is placed in  particular  on
    R(MM) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 985.
    The appellant says that Gulshan, the  guidance  of  which  as  we  have
    recorded the judge expressly adopted, was decided  in  the  context  of
    EX.1 of Appendix FM.  That constitutes  an  inbuilt  exception  to  the
    application of the Immigration Rules with the aim of covering Article 8
    considerations within those Rules.

13. In  this  case,  however,  there  was  no  such  exception  within  the
    Immigration Rules analogous to EX.1.  Thus it  is  submitted  that  the
    compelling circumstances test in Gulshan and also of course Nagre which
    applies to Article 8 claims where an exception is already provided  for
    in the Rules is of no  application.

14. If wrong about this, the appellant says that nevertheless  there  still
    does have to be a proper consideration of the proportionality  test  in
    accordance with Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  ex  parte
    Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 and Huang v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2007] UKHL 11, whether or not the relevant Section  of  the
    Immigration Rules constitutes a complete code for Article 8 purposes  :
    see R(MM) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA  Civ
    985, in particular at paragraph 135

         "Where the relevant  groups  of  IRs  upon  a  proper  construction
         provides a compete code for  dealing  with  a  person's  Convention
         rights in the context of a particular IR  or  statutory  provision,
         such as in the  case  of  foreign  criminals,  then  the  balancing
         exercise and the way the various  factors  are  to  be  taken  into
         account in an individual case must be done in accordance with  that
         code, although references to exceptional circumstances in the  code
         will  nonetheless entail a proportionality exercise.   But  if  the
         relevant group of IRs is not such  as  a  complete  code  then  the
         proportionality test will be more at large  albeit  guided  by  the
         Huang tests and UK and Strasbourg case law."

15. The appellant says that the judge failed to carry out such an exercise,
    simply applying the compelling circumstances test,  which  is  narrower
    and materially different to a proportionality exercise.   And  this  in
    turn led her to give insufficient weight to key relevant factors in the
    appellant's case as follows.

      a) The appellant had lived as part of the  sponsor's  household  since
         2010 so family life was particularly strong.

      b) She had already been dependent on her sponsor  for  a  considerable
         period before the application was made.

      c) The refusal involved the breaking up of  an  existing  family  unit
         rather  than  the  formation  of  a  new   one   due   to   changed
         circumstances.

      d) The appellant is a refugee living alone in a foreign country  where
         she does not speak the language, has no personal  or  social  ties,
         extremely limited financial resources, no right  of  residence  and
         restricted access to essential services with no prospect  of  being
         able to return to her home country due to the brutal ongoing  civil
         war, and finally

      e) The current accommodation and care arrangements in  place  for  her
         are temporary only in  nature  and  extremely  precarious.  She  is
         dependent on the charity of strangers for survival.

16. Even if a compelling circumstances test is right, says  the  appellant,
    finally there are such compelling circumstances.

17. For the respondent, Mr Kandola frankly accepts  that  while  there  may
    have been an error in applying the Gulshan test in the way it  was,  in
    the light of superseding case law, such an error was not material.   If
    one reads through the judgment it  is  not  possible  to  identify  any
    feature that is not  adequately  considered  which  could  lead  to  an
    Article 8 claim  succeeding.   Reliance  is  placed  in  particular  on
    paragraph 20 of The Queen on the application of Oludoyi  and  others  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2014]  UKUT  00539  (IAC).
    Everything, so it is submitted, for the defendant was considered,  what
    more was there to be done? Thus any error there may have been  was  not
    a material one.

18. The law has been clarified since  the  decision  below.   We  refer  in
    particular to R(Oludoyi) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    [2014] UKUT 00539 (IAC) considering R(MM  and  others  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department.   At paragraph 20 of Oludoyi  the  court
    said this:

         "There is nothing in Nagre, Gulshan or Shahzad that suggested  that
         a threshold test was being suggested as opposed to making it  clear
         that there was  a need to look at the evidence to see if  there  is
         anything which has not already been adequately  considered  in  the
         context of the IRs and which could lead to a successful  Article  8
         claim.  If, for example, there is some feature which has  not  been
         adequately considered under the IRs but  which cannot on  any  view
         lead to the Article  8  claim  succeeding,  when  the  individual's
         circumstances are considered cumulatively, there is no need  to  go
         any further.  This does not mean that a threshold  or  intermediate
         test is being applied,  these  authorities  must  not  be  read  as
         seeking to qualify or fetter the  assessment  of  Article  8.   The
         guidance must he read in  context  and  not  construed  as  if  the
         judgments are pieces of legislation."

19.  In our judgment, and understandably given the absence of  guidance  as
    set out in Oludoyi the judge erred in  applying  a  threshold  test  in
    reliance on Gulshan as she did and erred in failing to carrying  out  a
    proportionality assessment  by reference to  standard  features.    The
    application  of  a  compelling  circumstances  test  without  more  was
    insufficient.

20. The real question is whether or not  this  was  a  material  error  and
    whether on carrying out a full proportionality assessment  there  would
    have been a different result.

21. In our judgment, it was a material  error.  Consideration  of  all  the
    material information might have led to  a  different  result.   We  are
    particularly struck by the fact that the appellant is a refugee  living
    alone in a foreign country where she does not speak the  language,  has
    no personal or social ties, extremely limited financial  resources,  no
    right of residence and restricted access to essential services with  no
    prospect of being able to return to her home country.

22. We reject the submission  for  the  respondent  that  the  judge  below
    considered everything for the purpose of a proportionality  assessment.
    This was a factor in particular which the judge did not appear to  take
    into account, at least not expressly.

23. We therefore set aside the decision on human rights grounds.

24. At the invitation of the appellant we proceed immediately to remake it.
     We are invited to do so on the basis of the submissions now  made  for
    the appellant by reference to the findings of fact made by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge by  reference  to  the  witness  statement  of  the
    sponsor which was essentially accepted as credible and we  consider  so
    far as necessary the five stage test in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.  We  are
    satisfied on the facts of this case that  there  is  sufficient  family
    life such as to  engage   Article  8.  the  second,  third  and  fourth
    questions in Razgar, likewise fall to be answered in the affirmative.

25. The real question is whether or not the lack of respect for family life
    that  the refusal would represent would amount  to  a  disproportionate
    interference and would be disproportionate to the legitimate public end
    sought to be achieved.  In  considering  this  question  we  take  into
    account the considerations set out in paragraph 5A of the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended with effect  from   28  July
    2014.

26. As we have now indicated in clear  terms,  we  are  influenced  by  the
    appellant's position in Turkey and her status there.  Additionally,  we
    consider the factors identified in the appellant's grounds  of  appeal,
    namely the strength of the family life and the fact that she  had  been
    dependent on her son for a  considerable  period  of  time  before  the
    application was made.  We also take into  account  the  fact  that  the
    refusal involved the breaking up of an existing family unit and we take
    into  account  the  precarious  nature  of  the   appellant's   current
    accommodation position.

27. On remaking the decision we therefore reach  the  conclusion  that  the
    refusal would amount to a lack of respect for family life that would be
    disproportionate to the legitimate  public  end.   We  would  therefore
    allow the appeal.

28. We therefore set aside the decision on  human  rights  grounds  and  we
    remake it so as  to  allow  the  appeal  against  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer's decision to refuse entry clearance on human rights grounds.

29. The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not make an anonymity  direction.  We
    have not been asked to and in the absence of any explanation as to what
    good reasons there might be we do not make such a direction.






Signed                                  Date


The Honourable Mrs Justice Carr

