
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/01413/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 3 March 2014                                 |On 26th March 2014         |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON



                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                              mr basanta limbu
                       (Anonymity direction not made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding
For the Respondent:    Mr R Jesurum


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The parties are referred to as they were in the First-tier Tribunal  so
    that hereafter Mr Limbu  is  the  appellant  and  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer is the respondent.  The appellant is a citizen of Nepal who was
    born on 30 December 1990.  He applied to settle in the  United  Kingdom
    as the dependent son of a former Gurkha soldier.  The  application  was
    made on 16 August 2012 under paragraph EC-DR.1.1 of Appendix FM of  the
    Immigration Rules and the Home Secretary's policy as  outlined  in  IDI
    Chapter 15  Sec.2A  para  13.2  as  updated  on  12  March  2010.   The
    application was refused and the appellant appealed.   Included  in  the
    grounds of appeal is one that the decision breached his Article 8  ECHR
    rights.   The  judge  hearing  the  appeal  dismissed  it   under   the
    Immigration Rules but allowed it under Article 8.

 2. The Entry Clearance Officer appealed the decision and at a hearing on 6
    November 2013 a panel comprising Mr Justice Cranston and I found errors
    of law in the determination and  by  our  decision  promulgated  on  27
    November 2013 gave reasons for so finding, set aside the  decision  and
    listed the appeal for a resumed hearing before me.

 3. Mr Jesurum did not choose to call oral evidence.  Submissions were made
    by both representatives.

Background

 4. The background is set out in the error of law determination but what we
    said there is largely repeated here with some additions.

 5. The appellant was born on 30 December 1990 and is one of three children
    of his mother and father.   The  appellant's  sister  was  born  on  27
    September 1993 and the appellant's brother was born on 21 August  1996.
    The appellant's father was born in 1940 in Nepal.  He married his first
    wife in 1957 and the following year, 1958, he joined the  British  Army
    as a Gurkha, serving until June 1971.  There  were  two  sons  of  that
    marriage, both of whom now live independent lives in Nepal, one born in
    1963, the other in 1970.  The father served in India, Malaysia,  Borneo
    and Hong Kong.  On his discharge in 1971 his commanding  officer  wrote
    of his exemplary  military  conduct  and  his  twelve  years  of  loyal
    service, during which he saw active service in Borneo.

 6. The father's first wife died in 1980 and he married  his  current  wife
    (born on 20 February 1960) in June 1981.   After  the  changes  in  the
    policy relating to the settlement of Gurkhas, the  father  applied  for
    settlement in the UK which was granted on 3 May 2010.  According to his
    statement the  father  then  sponsored  his  wife  and  the  two  minor
    children's applications and they were granted settlement on 20  January
    2011.  It appears that the father, wife and one minor  sibling  of  the
    appellant entered the UK in June 2011 for settlement and  have  resided
    in the United Kingdom since then, with the appellant's  sister  joining
    them on 10 September 2011.  It was not until 16 August  2012  that  the
    appellant applied for  entry  clearance.   According  to  the  father's
    statement, after saving the required money he sent the application  fee
    to the appellant, the application was then made but the application was
    refused on 5 December 2012.

 7. The father is severely sight impaired (blind).  Neither he nor his wife
    works.  He receives pension credit; in 2011 it was �158.82 a week.   He
    receives an attendance allowance, which in 2012 was �51.85 a week.   He
    rents a ground floor flat in Aldershot.  His wife supports  him  within
    the house but she does not speak English and is illiterate.   The  wife
    is reliant on help to do basic things such as  shopping  and  assisting
    her husband to attend hospital appointments.  The two younger  children
    were students at the time of the proceedings before the judge.

 8. The appellant is single and unmarried.    According  to  the  telephone
    interview record he has two paternal uncles who live  in  Nepal  and  a
    maternal uncle, but he has not met all of them for a long time.  He has
    half-siblings born in 1963 and 1970 respectively, but again he has  not
    met them for a long time.   He  used  to  live  with  his  parents  and
    siblings in the family home in Siddhapokhri.  He moved from there since
    the other family members settled in the UK to live  with  a  cousin  in
    Kathmandu.  The appellant collects his father's Nepalese  army  pension
    to pay the rent, pay for his  school  and  for  all  his  other  living
    expenses.  In February 2013 the appellant was attending the  Centennial
    Higher Secondary  School  studying  grade  12  as  a  hotel  management
    student.  He explained to the Entry Clearance Officer  that  there  had
    been a gap of two years in his study from 2010 to 2012 when he had been
    assisting his family apply for settlement.   He  also  told  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer that he himself had decided to move from Siddhapokhri
    to Kathmandu.  He has regular contact with his  parents  through  Skype
    and Facebook "once a day".  In reply to a question about whether he had
    ever worked he said that he had not because he would not get a good job
    with the qualifications that he currently had.

 9. In the refusal letter dated 5 December 2012 the Entry Clearance Officer
    referred to the Immigration Rules, Appendix FM, and concluded  that  he
    was not satisfied that the appellant would  be  adequately  maintained,
    accommodated and cared for in the United Kingdom  without  recourse  to
    public funds: paragraph E-ECDR.3.1.  There had been no  explanation  as
    to how the rent was paid in Aldershot, but  that  was  most  likely  to
    derive from public funds.  Therefore he  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant would be adequately accommodated without recourse  to  public
    funds.  Notwithstanding the policy regarding ex-members of HM Forces in
    IDI Chapter 15 Sec 2A para 13.2, the Entry Clearance Officer said  that
    it was not  clear  what  the  exceptional  circumstances  were  in  the
    appellant's case.  The Entry Clearance Officer  said  that  he  had  no
    reason to doubt the valuable service the father had given when  in  the
    British Army, but the appellant had shown  nothing  exceptional  beyond
    the normal relationship between parents and adult children.   This  was
    not sufficient of itself under the Rules.  The appellant  had  returned
    to education after a gap of two years and  that  would  provide  better
    employment opportunities for him  in  Nepal.   His  father's  financial
    support was not unexpected when he was a student.  His father  had  the
    support of his mother and siblings.

10. The Entry Clearance Officer said that he could see nothing which  would
    lead  him  to  conclude  that  there  were  particular  bonds  in   the
    appellant's case leading to the engagement of  Article  8.   There  was
    nothing to indicate that the appellant was not  capable  of  living  an
    adult life.  It was his father's decision to split the  family  in  the
    full knowledge that the appellant would not  automatically  qualify  to
    join them.  The maintenance and accommodation requirements of the Rules
    were intended to maintain effective immigration control.

11. The review by the Entry Clearance Manager dated  30  April  2013  noted
    that no further evidence had  been  submitted  to  address  the  points
    raised in the refusal letter.  The Entry Clearance Manager restated the
    reasons given by the Entry Clearance Officer.  He also noted that there
    were no guarantees that the father would have taken up the  opportunity
    to settle in the United Kingdom immediately on his discharge,  if  that
    had been available.  The historic injustice and its  consequences  were
    accepted.  The appellant had stated that he had  not  worked  in  Nepal
    because his qualifications did not allow him  to  obtain  a  good  job,
    which indicated that work was available but he had chosen not  to  take
    it.

12. In his witness statement the appellant said that he felt lonely without
    his family and that the relatives he had in Nepal were  not  considered
    close.  In Nepal he had taken his father to medical appointments.   His
    father said in his witness statement that, given that he had  lost  his
    eyesight he had relied on the appellant for help.   His  wife  was  not
    able to assist and his younger children were very  young.   The  father
    was reliant on the goodwill of  some  of  the  ex-Gurkha  community  to
    assist and it would be much better  if  his  son  were  in  the  United
    Kingdom where members of the family could support each other on a daily
    basis.  He was worried about his son since the  family  unit  had  been
    broken.  His hope was to be reunited again.  It was a close family  and
    the separation was causing suffering.  The father also said:-

         "Had I been allowed to apply for settlement in the  United  Kingdom
         upon my army discharge, I  would  have  applied  together  with  my
         family.  However I was never given the opportunity  until  recently
         after the Justice Gurkha campaign."

13. I mention at this point that the appellant made a previous  application
    for entry clearance at the same  time  as  his  father  in  2010  which
    application  was  refused  on  24  September  2010  but  not  appealed.
    According to the father's statement the appellant was  refused  because
    he was already over age and the  father's  wife  had  not  applied  for
    settlement at the same time.

14. The father in his statement said also that the appellant is single  and
    unmarried and is financially dependent on  the  father  who  sends  him
    money for his  maintenance  and  rent.   The  arrangement  whereby  the
    appellant rents a room in his cousin's  house  in  Kathmandu  was  only
    meant to be temporary as the father wanted the appellant  to  join  him
    and the family in the UK.  In the Gurkha culture an unmarried child  is
    the responsibility of the  parents  and  hence  is  the  father's  full
    responsibility.  The appellant is reliant on his father  for  financial
    support and his father reliant on him for physical support.  The father
    was completely looked after by the appellant as the two minor  children
    were very young at the time.  Those children are full-time students and
    are still young and as such they cannot help him.   His  wife  supports
    him within the house but she herself is reliant on  help  to  do  basic
    things such  as  grocery  shopping  and  helping  him  attend  hospital
    appointments.  The father and his  wife  are  very  worried  about  the
    appellant.  The family unit has been broken up  and  they  hope  to  be
    reunited again.  It is a very close family and the continued separation
    is causing suffering to all and is breaking the tight family unit.

The Error of Law Hearing

15. The error of law hearing determination identifies four areas  of  error
    in the First-tier Tribunal's reasoning as to why the appeal was  to  be
    allowed.  These are:-

      a) the causation/reasons point;

      b) blindness and family life;

      c) Immigration Rules, policy and Article 8;

      d) inability to meet maintenance requirements.

16. As to (a) the causation/reasons point, we had this to say:-

         "15. In giving the judgment of the Court of  Appeal  in  Gurung  (R
             (Gurung) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2013]
             EWCA Civ 8) Lord Dyson had  approved  paragraph  15  of  Patel
             (Patel v Entry Clearance Officer (Mumbai) [2010] EWCA Civ  17)
             but said later in the judgment, at paragraph 42, that if an ex-
             Gurkha 'can show that, but  for  the  historic  injustice,  he
             would have settled' in the UK at the time when  his  dependent
             (now) adult child would have been able to accompany him  as  a
             dependent child, that was a strong  reason  for  deciding  the
             Article 8 proportionality issue in the adult  child's  favour.
             Mr Jesurum sought to dismiss this passage as obiter, in favour
             of what he contended is a causation test in  paragraph  15  of
             Patel."

          16. This is a difficult area of the law and  the  failure  of  the
             Presenting Officer to make any submission to us was unhelpful.
              The Patel test is open-ended ('would or  might  have  settled
             ...') whereas the 'but-for' test in Gurung  is  the  causation
             test frequently invoked in legal analysis.  In our view  while
             the adult child does not need to show the  father's  intention
             to settle at the date of discharge he must satisfy  the  'but-
             for' test if he  is  to  have  the  benefit  of  the  historic
             injustice in the proportionality exercise.  He must show  that
             the father would have settled here and that he would have been
             able to accompany him as a dependent child under the age of 18
             but for the historic injustice of exclusion.

         17.  In this case there is the passage in the  father's  statement,
             which we have quoted, about his intention to settle here.   As
             we  have  said  he  was  not  cross-examined  about  it.   His
             statement is that he would have applied for  settlement  'upon
             my army discharge' had he been able to do  so.   He  left  the
             Gurkhas in June 1971, over 40 years ago.  At that point he was
             still married to his first wife.  So the point the judge makes
             about  Gurkhas  serving  under  more  restrictive  conditions,
             giving less time with their families, had no  bearing  on  the
             father's current family, although it may  have  affected  him,
             his first wife and his sons by her.  The father  remarried  in
             1981 and the appellant was born in  December  1990,  in  other
             words, some twenty years after the father's discharge.  So for
             almost half the time since the father  left  the  Gurkhas  any
             intention on his part to settle here would not  have  been  an
             intention to  settle  with  the  yet,  as  unborn,  appellant.
             Moreover, there is no evidence  that  the  father  took  steps
             after 2004 when there was the discretionary policy for Gurkhas
             from which he might have benefited.  The judge  simply  passed
             over all these matters and this difficult area  of  causation.
             In our respectful view he was in error to do so."

17. As to (b) blindness and family life:-

         "18. The judge found that the father's blindness  led  to  what  he
             characterised as dependence between the appellant and him.  As
             Mr Jesurum correctly submitted, the judge did not find  family
             life simply because of the father's blindness.  He  also  said
             that the appellant was financially dependent on the father and
             cited Pun and others (Gurkhas -  policy  -  Article  8)  Nepal
             [2011] UKUT 00377 as  entitling  him  to  take  dependency  of
             choice  into  account.    He   also   found   dependence   for
             accommodation, and that the  appellant  and  the  father  were
             emotionally close.  Mr Jesurum submitted that  the  judge  was
             entitled to make the findings, particularly  in  view  of  the
             uncontested evidence, and that the grounds were an attempt  to
             relitigate the judge's conclusions.

         19.  The difficulty with the judge's findings is the lack of a real
             evidential base.   All  the  appellant  himself  said  in  his
             statement was that his father was blind, that as the eldest it
             was his responsibility to help him and that he accompanied his
             father to medical appointments.  The  latter  related  to  the
             position  in  Nepal.   The  father's  admittedly   uncontested
             evidence was also about what had been the position  in  Nepal:
             there he said that he was completely looked after by  his  son
             since his other two children were very young and his wife  was
             illiterate and not able to help.  None of  that  went  to  the
             situation since the father and the rest of  the  family  moved
             here.  Nor did it engage with  the  fact  that,  whatever  the
             capabilities of the wife, the appellant's sister was nearly 20
             years old at the time of the hearing, and the  other  son,  17
             years old.

         20.  We fail to see how the Kugathas (Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ  31)
             test of dependency can be met.  The emotional dependence  does
             not seem out of the ordinary, especially when the son  is  now
             22 (21 at the time of the hearing).   As  to  the  appellant's
             reliance on the father for maintenance, there is Lord  Dyson's
             observation in Gurung that this was normally to  be  expected.
             The Secretary of State's grounds suggest  that  the  appellant
             could obtain employment with his qualifications,  albeit  that
             the maintenance can continue if  he  wishes  to  continue  his
             studies.  In our view the  judge's  findings  that  there  was
             family life are flawed."

18. As to (c) Immigration Rules, policy and Article 8:-

         "21. In his refusal letter the Entry Clearance Officer  began  with
             the Immigration Rules and the IDI policy.  The judge  did  not
             engage with these Rules, although he stated that, consistently
             with the military covenant, paragraph 276X, SET 12.16 and  the
             IDI  did  not  require  maintenance  or  accommodation.   That
             weighed against  exclusion.   Mr  Jesurum  contends  that  the
             appellant had conceded that he was unable to qualify under the
             Rules and there was no need for the  judge  to  analyse  their
             application.

         22.  In our view the judge should have begun with the Rules and the
             policy.  The  proportionality  exercise  required  in  Article
             8(2), once family life is  established,  is  mediated  through
             these since they spell out the basis of  immigration  control.
             Paragraph 13.2  of  the  policy  refers  to  the  exercise  of
             discretion in  the  case  of  adult  children  in  exceptional
             circumstances.  This clear expression of public policy  should
             have gone with (in)  the  balance,  along  with  the  historic
             injustice if it was causative when  assessing  proportionality
             in Article 8(2)."

19. As to (d) inability to meet maintenance requirements:-

         "23. In seeking to uphold the judge's findings Mr  Jesurum  submits
             that the judge was plainly aware  of  the  family's  financial
             circumstances and gave adequate reasons for not affording them
             great weight.  Maintenance is not required in  an  application
             under the  rules  or  the  policy  that  relates  to  military
             families.   Given  that  the   judge   was   considering   the
             proportionality balance under Article 8(2), we fail to see how
             further demands on public resources  on  the  entry  of  adult
             children should not go into the balance."

The Resumed Hearing

20. Mr Jesurum filed a skeleton argument dated 10 December  2013  and  made
    oral submissions also.  Mr Wilding made oral submissions on  behalf  of
    the respondent.

21. Mr Wilding submitted that the relevant date to consider whether Article
    8(1) is engaged was the decision date of 5 December 2012.  By that time
    the appellant's father, mother and one sibling had been in the  UK  for
    some  eighteen  months  and  the  other  sibling  arrived   very   soon
    thereafter.  The evidence of emotional dependency  is  limited  to  the
    father's disability, namely his blindness.  He is looked after  in  the
    UK by family members.  There are the normal emotional ties between  the
    appellant and his parents, but  nothing  beyond  financial  dependency.
    The appellant is living and studying in Kathmandu fending for  himself.
    There is no suggestion that the father has been significantly  affected
    by the appellant not being around and this is not a case that hits  the
    threshold of engagement. On that basis all other matters fall away.

22. Mr Wilding further submitted that  if  I  found  that  family  life  is
    engaged there is the causation issue.  The evidence before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal was that the father would have settled soon after 1971 if
    he had been able to.  The appellant was not  born  until  twenty  years
    later and that is an important point as to how much  weight  should  be
    given to the historical injustice.  He made reference to the Patel  and
    Gurung points analysed in the error of law determination and  following
    Ghising and others (Gurkhas/BOCs: historic wrong; weight)  [2013]  UKUT
    00567  (IAC)  the  historical  injustice  point  was  not   necessarily
    determinative of the appeal.  On any view the appellant could not  meet
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules which are  a  declaration  of
    the Secretary of State's policy.  If the appellant was allowed into the
    country it is very likely that there would be further  demands  on  the
    public purse.  On a proper analysis great weight  should  be  given  to
    that fact given the importance of the  legitimate  aim  of  immigration
    control.

23.  In  response  Mr  Jesurum's  submissions  were  in  relation  to  what
    constitutes family life within the meaning of Article 8(1).  He took me
    to the root authority of Kugathas.   As  an  out  of  country  case  he
    accepted that for the remedy to be available by means of Article 8  the
    family life limb of Article 8 must be engaged. This is in  contrast  to
    an in country case where the appellant would fall under the  protection
    of Article 8 by reason of his private  life.   If  family  life  exists
    between the appellant and his parents who  are  in  this  jurisdiction,
    then it is the effect on Article 8 rights of the parents  under  Beoku-
    Betts [2008] UKHL 39 that engages the Convention because the appellant,
    being in Nepal, is outside the territorial  ambit  of  the  Convention.
    The test for family life between adults is that something  more  exists
    than normal emotional ties.  Although dependency is one way that family
    life can be established, it is  not  a  pre-requisite.   Sedley  LJ  in
    Kugathas accepted the submission that dependency  was  not  limited  to
    economic dependency and at [17] added:

         "But if dependency is  read  down  as  meaning  'support',  in  the
         personal  sense,  and  if  one   adds,   echoing   the   Strasbourg
         jurisprudence, 'real' or 'committed' or  'effective'  to  the  word
         'support', then it represents in my view the irreducible minimum of
         what family life implies".

24. The submissions continue that the  historical  background  is  relevant
    because the sponsor endured separation from his  family  by  reason  of
    service.  Although it is correct that the appellant had  not  yet  been
    born,  the  previous  separation  and  sacrifice  is  relevant  to  the
    subjective strength of the emotional bond felt by the sponsor now.  The
    manner in which the family came to be  separated  is  relevant  to  the
    assessment of family life and whether separation breaks previous family
    bonds.  Statute requires us to look at circumstances as at the date  of
    decision.  However, this cannot be dealt with in isolation and  a  raft
    of factors need to be taken into account, such as when  and  with  whom
    the appellant has resided in the past.  The appellant has not formed  a
    family of his  own  which  would  be  a  powerful  factor  to  indicate
    independence had he done so. It is trite law that separation  does  not
    bring family life to an end.  It is necessary to examine the sacrifices
    made by someone in the position of the father.  There is the subjective
    strength that he feels because of his hopes and wishes to have  all  of
    his family around him in his old age.  There is the  additional  factor
    of blindness and the requirement to be looked after  by  others.   This
    goes to proportionality, however, and not to the  existence  of  family
    life.

25. On the causation issue the Court of Appeal in Gurung held itself  bound
    by Patel.  There is nothing to suggest that the father's status may  be
    revoked, or  that  there  is  any  adverse  information  regarding  the
    appellant.  As per Gurung any distinction between his position and that
    of the BOC dependants in Patel is  therefore  of  little  weight.   The
    approach in Patel is  based  on  causation.   The  injustice  causes  a
    compensatory principle to operate.   For  the  sponsor  the  historical
    injustice lasted until 2009.  Although in the error of law judgment  at
    paragraph 17 there was said to be no  evidence  that  the  father  took
    steps after 2004 when there was the discretionary  policy  for  Gurkhas
    from which he might have benefited,  the fact  is  that  had  he  taken
    advice in 2004 he would have been told he could not  benefit  from  the
    then Rules and policy.  Nothing would have helped him until  2009  when
    the injustice was corrected, but by then the appellant was already over
    18.  Looking at Patel the test of causation is wider than in Gurung and
    it is not necessary for the appellant to  have  been  born  during  the
    father's service.  At paragraph 13 of Patel Sedley LJ notes that:-

         "Appellants - the present ones included -  are  typically  children
         who, but for their parents' legal inability to settle here  between
         1968 and 2002, would have either been born here  or  have  come  as
         minors in right of their parents."

    Although that judgment related to BOCs there cannot  be  one  rule  for
    Gurkhas and one for BOCs.  The uncontroverted evidence  of  the  father
    was that he would have settled in the UK at the first  opportunity  had
    there been a mechanism by which he  could  do  so,  or  words  to  that
    effect.  Although accepting that the terms of the Rules must  be  taken
    into account they are relevant but not determinative of the outcome  of
    an appeal.  He did not seek to go behind the recent  cases  of  Gulshan
    (Article 8 - new Rules  -  correct  approach)  [2013]  UKUT  00640  and
    Shahzad (Art 8: legitimate aim) [2014] UKUT 00085 (IAC).

26. As to maintenance the  father's  indigence  is  a  consequence  of  the
    historic  injustice.   None  of  the  Rules  or  policies  that  govern
    applications by former members of the Armed  Forces  require  proof  of
    ability to be adequately maintained or accommodated  other  than  those
    that concern children, which is for their protection, not that  of  the
    public purse.  The policy is consistent with the Military Covenant  and
    the recognition of the sacrifices that service entails.  Had the father
    been granted settlement when he was discharged from the Brigade in 1971
    he would have been entitled to work and his  army  record  suggests  he
    would have found gainful employment.  In Gurung [41]   the  court  held
    that the consequences of the historic injustice are such that it  is  a
    strong  reason  that  Article  8(1)  rights   should   be   vindicated,
    notwithstanding the potency of the countervailing  public  interest  in
    the maintenance of a firm immigration policy.  In  Ghising  [2013]  the
    Upper Tribunal clarified this  point  as  indicating  that  unless  the
    respondent relies on something more than the public interest the weight
    to be given to the historic injustice will normally require a  decision
    in the appellant's favour.  The weight to be given to any  burden  that
    the appellant may pose to public funds is diminished by the analysis of
    causation in that had the appellant's father not  been  wronged  it  is
    more likely than not that he would not require any  such  support  from
    public funds and he would in any event be entitled to  it  if  he  did.
    The potential risk to public funds is insufficient to tip  the  balance
    back in the respondent's favour and the appellant should be put in  the
    position he would have been but for the wrong.

27. Mr Wilding made no response to these submissions.

Article 8(1) - Family Life

28. Paragraph 46 of Gurung makes reference to paragraphs 50 to  62  of  the
    Upper Tribunal's decision  in  Ghising  [2012]  where  family  life  is
    discussed and says that it contains a useful  review  of  some  of  the
    jurisprudence and the correct approach to be adopted.   The  conclusion
    at paragraph 62 of Ghising [2012] is that "the  different  outcomes  in
    cases with superficially similar features emphasises  to  us  that  the
    issue under Article 8(1) is highly fact-sensitive".

29. The appellant bears the burden of proof of establishing that Article  8
    is engaged.  The facts in this appeal  are  not  in  issue  as  to  the
    circumstances pertaining in relation  to  all  family  members  at  the
    relevant dates of application.  It may be in the papers somewhere but I
    have not been able to ascertain the date that the  appellant  submitted
    his  first  application  for  entry  clearance.   He  says   that   the
    application was made at the same  time  as  his  father's  one.   Self-
    evidently therefore it was  made  some  time  prior  to  the  grant  of
    settlement  for  the  father  on  3/5/2010.   The   appellant's   first
    application was refused a few months later on 24/9/2010,  according  to
    his statement.

30. The appellant did not appeal that decision at that time  and  preferred
    to make a later application as explained in answer to questions at  40-
    42 of the telephone interview.  The  appellant's  mother  and  siblings
    were granted entry clearance and came to settle in the  United  Kingdom
    leaving the appellant on his own for more than  a  year  prior  to  him
    making a renewed application.  According to the appellant, when he  did
    make his application he used money from his father's pension to pay the
    visa fee.  His father says that after saving  the  required  monies  he
    sent the  application  fee  to  his  son.   Those  statements  are  not
    necessarily contradictory.  The reason given for the  delay  in  making
    the application was lack of funds.

31. The appellant moved to Kathmandu of his own volition and moved in  with
    and may still live with his cousin there.  At date of  decision,  which
    is the relevant date, he was  studying  and  sharing  the  cooking  and
    cleaning with that cousin.  He has a computer at  home  and  an  e-mail
    address, and  contacts  his  parents  once  a  day  through  Skype  and
    Facebook.  He watches TV, goes to church and has a  social  network  of
    friends.  If he comes to the United Kingdom he will try to go "in hotel
    line" as a waiter or driver.  There is in the  documentation  a  letter
    from the Gurkha Welfare Scheme, Area Welfare  Centre,  confirming  that
    the appellant is able to collect his father's pension. What he receives
    in this way provides him with sufficient upon  which  to  live,  I  can
    assume.  The telephone interview with the appellant indicates that  the
    father's army pension is around Rs.27,000 NPR and  the  appellant  uses
    all of that money.  When asked if "they" send money to him, and  if  so
    how much and how often, the appellant responded "No, they use (sic)  to
    send only at the time of need through IME Money Exchange  according  to
    requirement".  The father and his family in the United Kingdom  receive
    benefits and it is those benefits that  provide  the  family  with  its
    income.

32. The appellant receives his father's army pension  and  to  that  extent
    therefore he is economically dependent upon his father for his  ability
    to live.  I was not addressed as to whether the father and  his  family
    would receive more net income were the pension to be paid to the father
    here or receipt of that pension would merely lead to a reduction in the
    benefits that the family received.

Findings on the Engagement of Article 8(1) Family Life

33. The father says that he applied for settlement originally together with
    the appellant because  he  needed  the  appellant's  physical  support.
    Those applications were made before the remainder of  the  family  made
    their applications. Whereas I understand the point that  the  appellant
    was refused entry clearance previously because he  applied  before  his
    mother and brother and that was why he did not appeal, it is not  clear
    to me why he did not make the further application at the same  time  as
    they made their applications.  It seems unlikely that inability to  pay
    the application fee explains the delay unless it was shown that it  was
    not possible to raise the fee by  one  means  or  another  from  family
    members or others, perhaps by way of a  loan.   Also,  without  further
    explanation it is difficult to accept that it took in the region of two
    years to provide "enough documents about my  father  health  condition,
    education certificates and I have  provided  a  reference  letter  from
    pension welfare office that I am using my father pension".

34. The uncontroverted evidence in  the  father's  statement  is  that  the
    appellant's siblings are "being separated" from their elder brother and
    that they are a very close family. The continued separation is said  to
    be causing suffering to all the family  and  is  "breaking"  the  tight
    family unit. The father and his wife are under great stress without the
    appellant.

35. Having applied the appropriate burden and standard of proof I  come  to
    the finding that there is family life between  the  appellant  and  his
    parents and siblings in the UK. As per  paragraph  62  of  Ghising  the
    different  outcomes  in  cases  with  superficially  similar   features
    emphasises that the issue under Article 8(1) is highly  fact-sensitive.
    In essence I make the finding  that  there  is  family  life  for  many
    reasons. The original intention of the family was,  I  find,  that  the
    appellant would come to the UK with his father. This  is  because  they
    applied at the same time to settle and before the other members of  the
    family did so. As the eldest child the appellant would be  best  placed
    to look after his father in the short-term by helping  him  get  around
    and taking him to appointments etc.  as  he  had  done  in  Nepal.   In
    Ghising the evidence was that it is the custom  among  Nepalese  people
    for the youngest son to remain living  with  his  parents,  even  after
    marriage, to care for them when they become elderly.  That evidence was
    not challenged by the respondent.  The father's  younger  son  was  too
    young to carry out that function when he was  in  Nepal  and  therefore
    there is no reason to doubt that the appellant  himself  took  on  that
    role.  The appellant  can  write  and  read  English  but  has  trouble
    speaking it, so it is unclear to me how much help he would  have  been,
    but the intention that he would aid his father existed.  When it became
    clear through the refusal of the appellant's application that he  would
    not be going with his father, applications were made for  the  father's
    wife and children, their applications were granted and they came  as  a
    family leaving the appellant behind.  Although the appellant  made  the
    decision to move out of  the  village  and  live  with  his  cousin  in
    Kathmandu and he receives the whole of his income through  his  father,
    it has always been the family's intention  that  the  appellant  should
    join his family in the UK and they have only been  frustrated  in  that
    aim by the inability of the appellant to obtain  entry  clearance.   It
    was the family's intention that the separation would only be temporary.

36. Further evidence that there is family life such as  engages  Article  8
    (1) is also provided by the fact that the appellant relies  financially
    upon his father to provide income albeit that the income is provided by
    means of the father's army pension  and/or  benefits  received  by  the
    family in the United Kingdom. Although  there  are  some  matters  that
    point to the appellant's independence at or around the date of decision
    in that he had moved to Kathmandu to live in his uncle's home renting a
    room with his cousin. He was still studying at school despite  his  age
    and did not have a partner or any children. There is no reason to doubt
    that the contact between the appellant and family is  very  regular  by
    means of Skype and Facebook - the appellant says daily contact.

37. My conclusion is that although the family bonds may have been stretched
    by the passage of time they have not been severed and amount,  for  the
    above reasons, to family life over and above  what  might  normally  be
    expected between adult family members.

Article 8(2) consideration

38. Having established that Article 8 is engaged the respondent  bears  the
    burden of proving that the  interference  is  justified  under  Article
    8(2).  There appears to be no issue that the  respondent  can  lawfully
    refuse the appellant leave to enter and therefore the decision  is  "in
    accordance with the law" within the meaning of Article 8(2).  It is not
    in dispute either that the respondent's policy of  immigration  control
    in general is a  legitimate  aim  in  the  interests  of  the  economic
    wellbeing of the country and as is set out in paragraph 80  of  Ghising
    the public interest in a firm and fair system of immigration control is
    considerable.  However, in this appeal as with many others relating  to
    Gurkhas and their families, the appellant in  essence  submits  that  a
    fair and firm system of immigration control carries less weight because
    it has to be balanced against the  recognition  that  the  Government's
    past immigration  policy  in  respect  of  Gurkha  veterans  and  their
    families was unjust.

39. The father says at paragraph 15 of  his  statement  that  had  he  been
    allowed to apply for settlement in the UK upon his army  discharge  (in
    1971) he would have applied together with his family.  However, he  was
    never given the opportunity  until  recently.   As  has  been  observed
    earlier in this determination and upon the error of  law  hearing  that
    statement was not challenged.  Although we made reference to  the  fact
    that there is no evidence that the father  took  steps  to  seek  entry
    clearance after 2004 when the discretionary policy came into being, the
    fact is that had he applied he would have failed inevitably if  for  no
    other reason than that he was not discharged from  the  Gurkha  Brigade
    until after 1997. Although that it is not  a  complete  answer  to  the
    point that we made, it is one which in my finding leads me to  conclude
    that the earliest possible date that the father could have applied  was
    at about the time he actually did so in late 2009 or early 2010.

40. As to the causation point, Lord Dyson in paragraph  42  of  Gurung  had
    this to say:-

         "It follows that we do not accept the submission of Mr Drabble that
         the weight to be given to the  historic  injustice  in  the  Gurkha
         cases is just as strong as the weight to be given to the  injustice
         caused to the BOCs.  The fact that the right to settle  enjoyed  by
         Gurkhas is less secure than that enjoyed by the BOCs is a  relevant
         factor.  But it also follows that we do not agree with the UT  that
         the weight to be given is generally  'substantially  less'  in  the
         Gurkha cases.  If a Gurkha can show  that,  but  for  the  historic
         injustice, he would have settled in the  UK  at  a  time  when  his
         dependant (now) adult child would have been able to  accompany  him
         as a dependant child under the age of 18, that is a  strong  reason
         for holding that it is proportionate to permit the adult  child  to
         join his family now.  To that extent, the Gurkha and BOC cases  are
         similar.  That is why we cannot agree that, as a general rule,  the
         weight accorded to the injustice should be substantially  different
         in the two cases."  (My italics.)

    It is clear there that Lord Dyson was referring to those adult children
    being children that had already been born, hence that the Gurkha  would
    have settled when his dependent child would have been able to accompany
    him. He did not refer specifically to the position  of  those  children
    that were not born and who  therefore  would  not  have  been  able  to
    accompany him.

41. However, in paragraphs 13-15 of Patel Sedley LJ said the following:-

         "13. Thus in NH (India), where it  was  the  mother  who  had  been
             excluded and had finally  secured  British  citizenship,  this
             court held that the history was material to  the  question  of
             proportionality; the fact that the father could meanwhile have
             sought entry by voucher played no part  in  the  argument.  It
             needs to be remembered that what is at issue in these cases is
             not reuniting a family which was divided by the 1968 Act:  far
             too much time has gone by for  that  to  matter  save  in  the
             rarest cases.  Appellants - the present ones  included  -  are
             typically children who, but for their parents' legal inability
             to settle here between 1968 and 2002, would have  either  been
             born here or have come as minors in right of their parents.

         14.  You can set out to compensate for a historical wrong, but  you
             cannot reverse the passage of time.  Many  of  these  children
             have now grown up and embarked on lives of their  own.   Where
             this has happened, the bonds which constitute family life will
             no longer be there, and Article 8 will have no purchase.   But
             what may constitute an extant family life falls well short  of
             what constitutes dependency, and a good many adult children  -
             including children on whom  the  parents  themselves  are  now
             reliant - may still have a family life with  parents  who  are
             now settled here not by leave or by force of circumstance  but
             by long-delayed right.  That  is  what  gives  the  historical
             wrong a potential relevance to Article 8 claims such as these.
             It does not make the Convention a mechanism  for  turning  the
             clock back, but it does make both the history and its admitted
             injustices potentially relevant to the application of  Article
             8(2).

         15.  As the individual cases to which I now  turn  illustrate,  the
             effect of this is to reverse the usual balance  of  Article  8
             issues.  By the time they come to seek entry clearance,  adult
             children may well no longer be part  of  the  family  life  of
             British overseas citizens who  have  finally  secured  British
             citizenship.  If so, the threshold of Article  8(1)  will  not
             have been crossed and the proportionality  of  excluding  them
             will not be an issue.   If,  however,  they  come  within  the
             protection of Article 8(1), the balance of factors determining
             proportionality for the  purposes  of  Article  8(2)  will  be
             influenced, perhaps decisively, by the fact (if it is a  fact)
             that, but for the history recounted in NH (India), the  family
             would or might have settled here long ago."

42. It seems to me that Sedley LJ had in mind  just  such  a  situation  as
    exists in the  present  case.   We  are  dealing  with  facts  and  not
    speculation.  Had the father settled here many moons ago soon after his
    discharge from the Brigade of Gurkhas he may not have met  his  current
    wife or had the  children  that  he  has.  There  would  have  been  no
    application to make. The certainty, however, is that he did  marry  and
    but for the historic injustice would have settled here when he was able
    to.  That means that he would have done so at a time when the appellant
    had not been thought of or if he had by then been born  he  would  have
    been a dependant of  his  father  and  entitled  to  settle  with  him.
    Although we were concerned at the error of law hearing as we set out in
    paragraphs 15 to 17 of our determination, the inescapable conclusion is
    that had the continuing injustice been corrected at any time  prior  to
    the appellant's birth he would have been born in  the  United  Kingdom,
    and had it been corrected at any time during his minority he would have
    been entitled to settle along with his father.

43. After further argument and consideration therefore, although it  cannot
    have been the father's intention to settle  with  the  yet,  as  unborn
    appellant, he is entitled to have taken into account in the balance  of
    factors determining  proportionality  the  historic  injustice  to  his
    father, which injustice continued until such time  as  his  father  was
    granted entry clearance.



The Relevant Immigration Rules

44. I turn now to the Immigration Rules pertaining  to  an  application  of
    this type.  The appellant is applying for entry clearance as  an  adult
    dependent relative.  Section EC-DR of Appendix FM to the Rules set  out
    the requirements to be met for entry clearance as  an  adult  dependent
    relative.  The appellant is  outside  the  UK  and  has  made  a  valid
    application for entry clearance.  He does not fall for refusal  on  the
    grounds of suitability.  He has no convictions and has not  behaved  in
    any way that could lead to a refusal under such a requirement.  He  was
    refused because he did not meet the requirements of EC-DR1.1(d),  those
    requirements being set out in Section  E-ECDR  "eligibility  for  entry
    clearance as an adult dependent relative".  Then at E-ECDR1.1 reference
    is made to having to meet the eligibility requirements of paragraphs E-
    ECDR.2.1 to 3.2.

45. Applying the appellant's circumstances to the rules he is  the  overage
    son of the father (the sponsor) who is present and settled in  the  UK.
    The appellant does not as  a  result  of  age,  illness  or  disability
    require long-term personal care to perform everyday tasks and therefore
    does not meet the requirements of E-ECDR.2.4.  The  appellant  has  not
    provided evidence that he can be  adequately  maintained,  accommodated
    and cared for in the UK by the sponsor without recourse to public funds
    (E-ECDR.3.1). Refusal was also on the basis  that  although  a  tenancy
    agreement was submitted there was no independently verifiable  evidence
    that  the  father  is  the  sole  occupier  and  no  evidence  from  an
    independent  property  inspection  report  to  confirm  the  size   and
    suitability of the accommodation.  Because of this the Entry  Clearance
    Officer was not in a position to make a  judgment  as  to  whether  the
    property  would  become  statutorily  overcrowded  were  the  appellant
    additionally to live there.  This triggered a refusal under E-ECP.3.4.

The Immigration Departmental Instructions (IDIs)

46. The IDIs Chapter 15, Sec. 2A para 13.2 and Annexes A and B  which  were
    updated  in  March  2010,  and  are  therefore   applicable   to   this
    application, set out the policy referring to the exercise of discretion
    in the case  of  adult  children.   The  force  of  the  IDIs  is  that
    dependants over the age of 18 who are  not  otherwise  covered  in  the
    Guidance would normally need to qualify for settlement in the UK  under
    a specific provision of the Immigration Rules.

47. It is not in dispute that the appellant  does  not  meet  the  specific
    provision of the Rules which in his case would be under paragraph  317.
    The  IDIs  proceed  by  stating  that  in   exceptional   circumstances
    discretion may be exercised in individual cases where the dependant  is
    over the age of 18.  Annex A sets out  the  discretionary  arrangements
    for former Gurkhas discharged before 1 July 1997 and  states  that  the
    scheme recognises the unique nature of the service given by the Brigade
    of Gurkhas and is offered to them alone on an  exceptional  basis.   It
    applies to those who served in the Brigade of Gurkhas from January 1948
    when it became part of the British Army.  It  goes  on  to  state  that
    settlement applications from those former members  of  the  Brigade  of
    Gurkhas will normally be approved provided  that  they  served  for  at
    least four years in the Brigade and there  is  no  adverse  information
    about  them,  for  instance,  any  evidence  of  any  serious  criminal
    activity.  Discretion will then normally be  exercised  and  settlement
    granted in line with the main applicant for  spouses,  civil  partners,
    unmarried and same sex partners and dependent children under the age of
    18.  Then:-

         "Children over the age of 18 and other dependent relatives will not
         normally qualify for the exercise of discretion in  line  with  the
         main applicant and will be expected to qualify for leave  to  enter
         or  remain  in  the  UK  under  the  relevant  provisions  of   the
         Immigration Rules, for example under paragraph 317,  or  under  the
         provisions of Article 8  of  the  Human  Rights  Act.   Exceptional
         circumstances may be considered on a case by case basis.  For  more
         information on the exceptional circumstances  in  which  discretion
         may be exercised see Section 13.2."

48. However, the current version of Section 13.2 does not have  information
    or examples of what exceptional circumstances may be that would lead to
    discretion being exercised.  The earlier version of Section 13.2 is  in
    almost identical terms save that it contains a list of five factors  to
    which consideration should be given in assessing whether settlement  in
    the UK is appropriate.  As was noted  at  paragraph  10  of  Gurung  no
    explanation has been given to the court as to why this list was omitted
    from the March 2010 version.

49. As was further noted by paragraph 11 of Gurung  the  policy  should  be
    considered against the background of the Rules.  Paragraphs 276E  to  K
    of the Rules are specific to Gurkhas themselves and Rule 317  sets  out
    the requirements for the grant of indefinite leave to enter  or  remain
    to any applicant as the parent, grandparent or other dependent relative
    of a person present and settled in the UK.  These requirements  include
    that the applicant:-

         "(i)     is related to a person present and settled in  the  United
             Kingdom in one of the following ways ...

         (f)  the son, daughter, sister, brother, uncle or aunt over the age
             of 18 if living alone outside the United Kingdom in  the  most
             exceptional compassionate circumstances and  mainly  dependent
             financially on relatives settled in the United Kingdom".

50. There is no doubt in my mind that the historic injustice is a  relevant
    factor to be taken into account when  undertaking  the  proportionality
    balancing exercise.  The difficulty is in deciding what  weight  should
    be given to it.  In Gurung it  was  accepted  by  the  court  that  the
    historic injustice is only one of the factors to be weighed against the
    need to maintain a  firm  and  fair  immigration  policy.   It  is  not
    necessarily determinative.  If it were, the application of every  adult
    child of a UK settled Gurkha who establishes that he has a family  life
    with his parent would be bound to succeed.

51. There is much discussion in the later paragraphs in Gurung as  to  what
    differences there may be between the BOC cases given the fact that  BOC
    parents  who  suffered  historical  injustice  were  British  citizens,
    whereas Gurkhas are nationals of Nepal (it being a condition  of  their
    service that they remain Nepalese citizens throughout their service  in
    the British Army) or that  BOC  parents  had  or  should  have  had  an
    absolute and indefeasible right as British citizens to  settle  in  the
    UK, whereas Gurkhas are required to apply to settle here.  Further, the
    injustice suffered by the BOC parents was particularly grave  involving
    racially and then sexually discriminatory schemes to  their  detriment,
    whereas no equivalent injustice has been suffered by the Gurkhas.

52.  At paragraph 42 of Gurung the fact that the right to settle enjoyed by
    Gurkhas is less secure than that enjoyed by  the  BOCs  is  a  relevant
    factor.  However, the court found that it  followed  that  it  did  not
    agree with the Upper Tribunal that the weight to be given is  generally
    "substantially less" in the Gurkha cases.  It then  went  on  to  state
    that if a Gurkha can show that but for the historic injustice he  would
    have settled in the UK at a time when his dependent (now)  adult  child
    would have been able to accompany him as a dependent  child  under  the
    age of 18, that is a strong reason for holding that it is proportionate
    to permit the  adult  child  to  join  his  family  now.   That  is  as
    previously stated earlier in  this  determination.   So,  the  historic
    injustice  carries  weight  and  of  course  was  the  reason  why  the
    Immigration Rules and policy were framed in  relation  to  Gurkhas  and
    their families as they have been.  However, it  is  also  the  position
    that the Rules and policy have been framed to require that in the  case
    of adult dependent children there have to be exceptional  circumstances
    before an applicant is able to succeed.

53. In the proportionality exercise under Article 8(2) all factors have  to
    be taken into account such as the historic injustice and the  need  for
    fair and firm immigration control.  I have  referred  earlier  in  this
    determination to the passage of time and the fact that for almost  half
    the time since the father left the Gurkhas any intention on his part to
    settle here would not  have  been  an  intention  to  settle  with  the
    appellant, who was not yet born.

54. I have found that there is family life for the reasons  already  given.
    The appellant is apparently fit and healthy.  He  has  no  disabilities
    and is being maintained by his father to complete his education.   Once
    that  education  has  been  completed  there  may  well  be  employment
    opportunities for him.  He is living in a property with a cousin.  That
    property appears to have all the standard amenities.

55. It is for the respondent to prove that the decision  is  proportionate.
    I have considered the maintenance and  accommodation  points.   I  note
    that  maintenance  and  accommodation  is  not  normally  required  for
    military applications and that can be well-understood  in  relation  to
    Forces' members and their families, but these by  definition  would  be
    members as defined and would  not  include  adult  dependent  children.
    Although Mr  Jesurum  argues  that  if  the  father  had  been  granted
    settlement following discharge from the Brigade in 1971 he  would  have
    been entitled to work and his army record suggests he would have  found
    gainful employment  I find that  argument  is  too  speculative  having
    considered that more than 40 years have  passed  since  his  discharge.
    Thus I am  unable  to  conclude  that  the  historic  injustice  is  an
    operating factor in the father's indigence now  and  his  inability  to
    meet the accommodation requirements.

56. I have considered the Article 8 rights of the appellant's  parents  and
    siblings.  There is no great detail but as one could well  expect  they
    wish the appellant to join them here. There  is  no  challenge  to  the
    evidence of the father that they were a close knit family in Nepal  and
    that separation is causing suffering and distress to the family.  There
    is little reason to doubt that the added support of the appellant would
    be helpful to the father even if the father has the  added  support  in
    the United Kingdom from the Gurkha community. The father has  his  wife
    with him who is considerably younger than he is. There is  no  evidence
    that she has any health problems. Although she is said to be illiterate
    there is little reason to suppose that she is not of  support  to  him.
    The children were young at date of decision but  would  not  have  been
    entirely unable to help their father and mother  and  would  presumably
    have been educated in English so that language  difficulties  would  be
    less of a problem than otherwise might be the case.

57. There is a raft of recent cases in relation to Article 8  and  the  new
    Immigration Rules.  Suffice to say that the Rules themselves set out  a
    complete code, but the discretionary policy in relation to the  Gurkhas
    itself refers to the need for there to be exceptional circumstances for
    an adult dependent child of a Gurkha.

58.  What  exceptional  circumstances  therefore  apply?  As  was  said  in
    paragraph 41 of Gurung, in the discussion concerning the  suffering  by
    Gurkhas as compared with that suffered by the BOCs, the  crucial  point
    is that there was a historic injustice in both cases  and  the  comment
    was then made that this is  why  the  historic  injustice  is  such  an
    important factor to be taken into account in the balancing exercise and
    why the applicant dependent child of a Gurkha who has settled in the UK
    has such a strong claim to  have  his  Article  8(1)  right  vindicated
    notwithstanding the potency of a countervailing public interest in  the
    maintaining of a firm immigration policy.

59. In a discussion in Ghising and others  (Gurkhas/BOCs:  historic  wrong;
    weight) [2013] UKUT 00567 (IAC)  at  paragraph  59  onwards  there  was
    discussion in relation  to  that  paragraph  in  the  Court  of  Appeal
    decision  in  Gurung.   The  historic  injustice   issue   will   carry
    significant weight on the appellant's side of the balance and is likely
    to outweigh the matters relied on by the respondent where these consist
    solely of the public interest in maintaining a firm immigration policy.
     As is said in paragraph 60 of Ghising however, it can  immediately  be
    appreciated that there may be cases where appellants  in  Gurkha  cases
    will not succeed, even though their family life engages  Article  8(1).
    Examples are then given.  The point is made that being an  adult  child
    of a UK settled Gurkha ex-serviceman is therefore not a trump  card  in
    the sense that not every application by such a person  will  inevitably
    succeed.  That paragraph concludes that:-

         "But, if the Respondent is relying only upon  the  public  interest
         described by the Court of Appeal at paragraph 41  of  Gurung,  then
         the weight to be given to  the  historic  injustice  will  normally
         require a decision in the Appellant's favour."

    That appeal was an appeal decided on its  own  particular  facts  which
    were that the appellant in that case was born  whilst  his  father  was
    still serving in the Brigade of Gurkhas.  He had come to  this  country
    in 2007 as a student and his parents were granted indefinite  leave  in
    2009 following  the  changes  in  the  eligibility  rules  for  Gurkhas
    themselves, but the point is made that the historic  injustice  carries
    significant weight.

60. This is finely balanced.  In most cases the  requirement  of  firm  and
    fair immigration control outweighs the respect due to family  life  but
    that requirement may be outweighed by the weight to be  given  to  that
    family life where there has been historic injustice.  The clock  cannot
    be turned back to allow those family members who  now  have  their  own
    families or lead independent  lives  to  come  to  the  United  Kingdom
    following the righting of the historic injustice. The converse is true,
    however, that those who do not have their own families or have not  yet
    otherwise formed an independent life have in their favour the  historic
    injustice suffered by their fathers. The weight to  be  given  to  that
    matter is significant as discussed  in  Ghising  and  Gurung.  In  this
    appeal the respondent cannot point to matters over and above the public
    interest in maintaining  a  firm  immigration  policy  to  support  the
    refusal of leave to enter. That policy in the particular  circumstances
    of this appeal is not sufficient to show that the  decision  to  refuse
    entry clearance is proportionate. There is  family  life  that  engages
    Article 8(1) and but for the historic injustice the appeal  would  fail
    under Article 8 (2). As it  is  this  appellant  succeeds  because  the
    historic injustice suffered by the father carries more weight than  the
    applicable immigration policy and the appellant  benefits  accordingly.
    It is the historic injustice that makes the circumstances exceptional.

Decision

61. This is an appeal where the First-tier Tribunal judge erred in law  for
    the  reasons  given.   Viewed  in  the  round  and  after  a   thorough
    examination of the particular circumstances I have found that there  is
    family life under Article 8(1)  ECHR  and  that  the  decision  of  the
    respondent to refuse the appellant entry clearance is  disproportionate
    to the legitimate aim sought to be achieved.  Therefore  the  appellant
    succeeds under Article 8(2).

62. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge has been  set  aside  but
    for different reasons the appeal is allowed.

63. No anonymity direction has been sought or made previously  and  in  day
    particular circumstances of this appeal I see no need to make one.



Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton

