
IAC-FH-aR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/02356/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 23 December 2014                           |On 20 January 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                  MISS PATTIYAGE DEVINDI NAYANTHARA PEIRIS
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Kannangara, Counsel, instructed by Jade Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss C Johnstone, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka  born  on  14  September  2011.
    She seeks entry clearance  into  the  United  Kingdom  as  the  adopted
    daughter of her parents both British citizens. She was  adopted  on  20
    January 2012 following the due procedure and evaluation of the evidence
    by the competent authority in Sri  Lanka.   It  is  by  virtue  of  the
    Adoption (Recognition of Overseas Adoptions) Order  2013,  an  adoption
    which is recognised as an overseas adoption by the United Kingdom.

2.   The appellant first applied for entry clearance on 23  April  2012  and
    her application was refused on 23 July  2012.   That  refusal  was  not
    appealed.  The second application  was  made  on  7  January  2013  and
    refused on 13 May 2013.  It was conceded by the respondent subsequently
    that that had  been  erroneously  considered  under  Appendix  FM.   Re
    consideration of that application  was  made  but  was  refused  on  12
    December 2013 after an interview with the appellant's  adoptive  mother
    on 12 November 2013.

3.   The reason for the refusal on 12 December 2013 was because the  parents
    had not obtained a certificate of eligibility from  the  Department  of
    Education as required by paragraph 309B of the Immigration Rules.

4.   The appellant sought to appeal against that refusal, which appeal  came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Thanki on 19 August 2014.  The  appeal
    was dismissed both as to the Immigration Rules and as to Article  8  of
    the ECHR.

5.   Permission to appeal was granted, however, and thus  the  matter  comes
    before me in pursuance of that permission.

6.   The submission which is made  by  Mr  Kannangara,  who  represents  the
    appellant and her parents, is that  is  a  certificate  of  eligibility
    should not be required for those adoptions that are recorded under  the
    Adoption  (Recognition  of  Overseas  Adoptions)   Order   2013.    The
    requirement for eligibility is one made and processed by the Department
    of Education.  It was the same department which  put  in  the  Adoption
    (Recognition of Overseas Adoptions) Order 2013

7.   It is contended that paragraph 309B, as inserted into the  Rules  on  6
    September 2012, refers to prospective adopters  requiring  them  to  be
    assessed as suitable to adopt by a competent  authority.   It  was  the
    same department which put in  the  Adoption  (Recognition  of  Overseas
    Adoptions) Order 2013.

8.   It is further contended  that  paragraph  309B  refers  to  prospective
    adopters requesting them to be assessed  as  suitable  to  adopt  by  a
    competent author in the UK.  In this case the parents of the  appellant
    have adopted her and the adoption is  recognised  under  the  Order  of
    2013.  It is submitted that it makes very little sense for an  adoption
    to be recognised yet further requirements are made concerning it.

9.   Miss Johnstone, who represents the respondent, invites me to find  that
    that is a requirement under the Rules and it is to be  followed  unless
    and until it is to be revoked.  She draws my attention also to the last
    sentence  of  paragraph  309B  which  provides  "The   certificate   of
    eligibility  must  be  provided  with  all  entry  clearance   adoption
    applications  under  paragraphs  310-316F".   The  obvious  route   for
    application to be made for a child seeking indefinite  leave  to  enter
    the United Kingdom as an adopted child of a parent is paragraph 310 and
    thus the requirement for a certificate of eligibly must be seen  as  an
    additional requirement that has been posed.

10.  I share the concern of Mr Kannangara as to the real purpose behind  the
    extension of the certificate of eligibility to paragraph 310.  It is to
    be  recognised,  however,  as  indeed  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    recognised, that it is  important  that  the  welfare  of  children  be
    considered and that the United Kingdom is entitled to impose a  minimum
    requirement upon those seeking to bring children into the jurisdiction.
      It may well be that although  certain  adoptions  are  recognised  as
    such, nevertheless the United  Kingdom  may  feel  itself  required  to
    impose further investigations upon those families who choose to come to
    the United Kingdom.

11.  It is however somewhat difficult to reconcile 309B  with  the  Adoption
    (Recognition of Overseas Adoptions) Order 2013, particularly  when  for
    the purposes of paragraph 309A a de facto adoptions would seem  not  to
    have been  caught  by  the  same  stringent  requirements  as  overseas
    adoptions made through the proper judicial channels.

12.  It may, however, be that concerns have been expressed that  prospective
    adopters  were   intentionally  circumventing  legislative   safeguards
    introduced in relation to international adoption  in  recent  years  by
    choosing to adopt children in the countries listed in the  1973  Order.
    Various options canvassed by government during the  consultation  would
    show that there was support  for  the  idea  that  the  1973  Order  be
    replaced with an order that recognised adoptions made in a country that
    is implemented in the  1993  Hague  Convention  on  the  Protection  of
    Children  and  completion  in  respect  of  inter  country   adoptions.
    Seemingly therefore the countries that are in the 2013 order are  those
    that are signatories to that Convention.

13.  The Order of  2013  came  into  force  on  3  January  2014  after  the
    implementation  of 309(B).  It may  well  be  that  the  inter-relation
    between 309B and the Order will need to be considered elsewhere.

14.  For the present purposes, however, as indeed Miss  Johnstone  indicated
    309(B) is  in  operation  and  controlling  paragraph  310.   In  those
    circumstances it seems to me that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was
    entitled to act upon  it  in  the  way  that  she  did  dismissing  the
    immigration appeal.

15.  However, it seems to me that both the Entry Clearance  Officer  in  the
    decision and the Immigration Judge in her determination, have been over-
    optimistic in the calculation of the time that it would take to  obtain
    the certificate of eligibility and the difficulties which are placed in
    front of  the  adoptive  parents  in  so  doing.   Although  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer purports to look at the wellbeing of the child as the
    paramount consideration, little regard was given to the best  interests
    of the adoptive parents  and  of  their  rights  and  responsibilities.
    Acknowledgment has been given to the delay of nearly a year  caused  by
    an erroneous decision.

16.  The starting point for a proper consideration of Article 8 it seems  to
    me comes first of all from the date of the adoption, namely 20  January
    2012.   This  was  before  the  implementation   of   paragraph   309B.
    Ordinarily had matters gone according to plan the application under 310
    could have proceeded given, that by virtue  of  the  previous  Adoption
    (Recognition of Overseas Adoptions) Order 2013,  the  adoption  in  Sri
    Lanka would have been one in accordance with the decision  taken  by  a
    competent administrative authority or court in her country of origin or
    country in which she is resident being a country whose adoption  orders
    are recognised by the United Kingdom.

17.  It is not  a  case,  therefore,  of  either  of  the  adoptive  parents
    choosing to ignore the requirement to get a certificate of  eligibility
    before going to Sri Lanka to adopt the child, that requirement was  not
    then present.

18.  Both parents are British citizens who, prior to the adoption lived  and
    worked in the United Kingdom, the country where they choose to live and
    are entitled to live.  The husband has given up work  in  order  to  be
    with appellant.  His wife continues to work but, as was made  clear  in
    her evidence to the Tribunal, that has created  difficulties  for  her.
    Indeed as is noted in paragraph 16 of the determination  she  had  been
    placed on  notice  that  absence  may  lead  to  her  employment  being
    terminated.

19.  It was also noted the evidence of the adoptive mother in  paragraph  10
    of the  determination.   She  relied  upon  her  witness  statement  as
    evidence-in-chief and gave evidence in English.  She has contacted  the
    London Borough of Harrow to obtain a certificate of eligibility and was
    told that she would have to register, pay a substantial fee and have to
    wait a long period before it is established if they are suitable.

20.  In the context of that evidence I find that the approach taken  by  the
    judge in paragraph 27 towards Article 8 is manifestly defective.  I was
    asked to recognise the difficulties faced by the adoptive  parents  and
    the period of time  that  they  would  have  to  spend  away  from  the
    appellant  living  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  order  to  obtain  the
    certificate of eligibility which they seek.  It is  no  answer  to  the
    difficulties which they face to speak of a temporary basis.

21.  In those  circumstances  I  find  that  analysis  to  be  defective  as
    distorting the proper consideration of proportionality and I  therefore
    set that finding aside for error of law and proceed to remake it.

22.  I heard further evidence from Mrs Peiris, the adoptive mother.

23.  She and her husband are British citizens, having lived  in  the  United
    Kingdom since 2004.  She works as a systems engineer and  has  done  so
    for many years.   To date she has managed to work for the company  from
    Sri Lanka with a few visits to the United Kingdom but that situation is
    becoming untenable and she fears that if she does not return  full-time
    to the  United  Kingdom  to  continue  her  work  she  wiill  lose  her
    employment.

24.  When in the United Kingdom her husband worked in  Iceland  Stores.   He
    gave up his work in order to be with the appellant in  Sri  Lanka.   He
    too would welcome a return to work and further income into the family.

25.  She and her  husband have been living  with  their  grandmother  and  a
    nanny bringing up the appellant.  The grandmother is, however, 82 years
    old and the witness did not consider  that  it  would  be  sensible  or
    reasonable to leave the appellant with her whilst she and  her  husband
    return to the United Kingdom.  She has made enquiries as to the  length
    of time that it will  take  to  obtain  the  necessary  certificate  of
    entitlement from the local authority, having been told that  that  will
    take up to eight months.  It is a requirement that  both  she  and  her
    husband reside in the  United  Kingdom  for  the  full  length  of  the
    assessment.  The situation has placed both in an  impossible  position.
    Given the age of the appellant neither consider that it would be in the
    interest of the child to leave her and return  to  the  United  Kingdom
    without her. Without the certificate they cannot return  to  begin  any
    process to resolve the situation.

26.  Miss Johnstone, on behalf of the respondent, submits that there  is  no
    breach of Article 8 rights in this case because the parents are  living
    with their daughter in Sri Lanka.  The Secretary of State  is  entitled
    to impose the requirement of a certificate of eligibility.

27.  Having considered  the  matter  and  particularly  the  most  important
    factor that the adoption took place before the  implementation  of  the
    immigration Rule, I do not find that the parents of the  appellant  are
    seeking to circumvent the requirements imposed to obtain a  certificate
    of eligibility.  At the  time  that  the  adoptions   took  place  that
    requirement as set out under  paragraph  309B  was  not  in  existence.
    Indeed, it may be considered that the length of time which the  parents
    have been living with the appellant since the adoption is  nearly  such
    as to satisfy the Rules as to de facto adoption in any case as set  out
    under paragraph 309A.

28.  When considering Article 8 I bear in mind the interests of all  parties
    and that includes the parents of the appellant.  No challenge has  been
    made to the genuineness of the  adoption or of the  concern  which  the
    adoptive parents have for the appellant.  Nothing has  been  raised  to
    cause doubt as to their suitability as adoptive parents subject to  the
    issue of the certificate of eligibility.

29.  I find that, were they to leave the appellant in Sri Lanka  and  return
    to the United Kingdom for the purposes of obtaining the certificate  of
    eligibility that would not be in the best interests of  the  appellant.
    It is clearly a very important time in the child's life  to  bond  with
    the parents and I accept the evidence that has been presented that  the
    process to obtain such a certificate is a lengthy one. I find that such
    prolonged  separation  would  be  harmful   to   the   child's   proper
    development.

30.  I am reminded of the hardship that  has  been  caused  financially  and
    emotionally to the parents in being separated from the United  Kingdom,
    a country to which they are entitled to reside.  There is no indication
    that they are seeking to circumvent  the  requirement  but  are  merely
    placed in an  impossible  position  as  to  how  to  meet  it.   It  is
    unfortunate  that  the  original  application  was  not  successful  or
    appealed but I do consider that the length of time in which this matter
    has failed to be resolved is an exceptional and compelling circumstance
    in this situation as are the obstacles placed in  the  way  of  British
    citizens to resolve the matter and to comply with the Rules.

31.  I bear in mind the interest of immigration  control  but  balance  that
    against the  damage caused to the integrity of the  family  unit  as  a
    whole.

32.  I find in the circumstances therefore that  the  decision  to  withhold
    leave to enter is in the circumstances disproportionate.  It is  always
    open of course to the Entry Clearance Officer to  make  that  grant  of
    leave  conditional  upon  the  fulfilling  of  circumstances  such   as
    obtaining the certificate of eligibility, unless a de facto adoption is
    now deemed to have taken place.

33.  In the circumstances therefore the appeal in respect of  Article  8  of
    the ECHR is allowed.

Notice of Decision
The Appeal is dismissed under the Immigration rules
The appeal is allowed under Human Rights.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 16 January 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

