
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/02661/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 10 March 2016                         |On 19 April 2016                    |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                               Mr H J E LATTER
                        (DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE)

                                   Between

                           taran chongbang (limbu)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr H Dieu, Counsel instructed by N.C. Brothers & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the appellant against a  decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Kainth) dismissing  an  appeal  by  the  appellant
    against the respondent's decision dated 20 January  2014  refusing  her
    entry clearance as an adult dependent child of her father and  sponsor,
    a former Ghurkha soldier.

Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Nepal born  on  25  November  1978.   She
    applied for entry clearance on 25 November 2013 but she was not able to
    meet all the requirements of the rules set  out  in  para  EC-DR1.1  of
    Appendix FM.  The respondent was satisfied that the appellant had close
    family in Nepal to turn to should the need arise and was not  satisfied
    that she required due to age, illness or disability long-term  personal
    care to  perform  everyday  tasks  or  that  she  would  be  adequately
    maintained, accommodated and cared for in the UK by her sponsor without
    recourse to public funds.  The  respondent  went  on  to  consider  the
    application under the policy for dependants set out in IDI, chapter 15,
    s.2(a), 13.2, but found that she was unable to bring herself within its
    terms.  He went on to consider article 8 but  found  that  it  was  not
    shown that there was family life within article 8(1) but, if there was,
    that refusal would be proportionate to a legitimate aim.  Following the
    filing of a notice of appeal the decision was reviewed  but  maintained
    and the appeal therefore proceeded to a hearing.

The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

3.   At the hearing the judge  heard  oral  evidence  from  the  appellant's
    father and mother, the appellant's brother and her  first  cousin.   It
    was accepted at the hearing that the  only  issue  for  the  judge  was
    article 8, the appellant accepting  that  she  could  not  satisfy  the
    requirements of the immigration rules.  The judge reminded  himself  of
    the relevant jurisprudence set out in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27  and  Huang
    [2007] UKHL 11 and  more  specifically  in  relation  to  adult  family
    dependants of former Ghurkha soldiers, Gurung v Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 8 and Ghising and Others (Ghurkhas:
    historic wrong; weight) [2013] UKUT 567.  It was argued  on  behalf  of
    the appellant that the historic injustice she had suffered should be  a
    formidable and weighty factor in the balancing exercise under article 8
    [22].  The judge referred to the guidance in AAO v ECO [2011] EWCA  Civ
    840 that family life would not normally exist between parents and adult
    children within the meaning of article 8  in  the  absence  of  further
    evidence of dependency which went beyond normal emotional ties and that
    financial dependency was not in itself sufficient to  create  a  strong
    bond under article 8.  The judge then referred to  Ghising  that  if  a
    Ghurkha could show that, but for the historic injustice, he would  have
    settled in the UK at a time when his  dependent  (now)  adult  children
    would have been able to accompany him as a dependent  child  under  the
    age  of  18,  that  was  a  strong  reason  for  holding  that  it  was
    proportionate to permit the adult child to join the family.

4.   The judge found that it was clear from the evidence of the sponsor  and
    the witnesses that they enjoyed a close family bond.  They remained  in
    regular contact and family members visited the appellant in Nepal.  The
    judge noted that the  appellant's  mother  had  returned  to  her  home
    country to visit the appellant on no  fewer  than  five  times  and  in
    December 2010 she remained with her for a period of about three months.
     The judge accepted that the appellant did not enjoy the best of health
    and there was  numerous  documentary  evidence  to  this  effect.   Her
    medication was paid for by family members in the UK.  She was unable to
    work and received  regular  financial  support  and  accommodation  was
    provided for her.

5.   The judge accepted that the appellant received emotional and  financial
    support.  Her parents and family members visited her regularly  but  it
    could not be said that there were greater emotional ties in this appeal
    than one would expect in a normal loving family relationship.   It  was
    understandable that her  family  in  the  UK  were  concerned  for  her
    wellbeing but that did not in itself equate to circumstances which were
    out of the  ordinary  or  not  expected.   The  judge  noted  that  the
    appellant's father had enlisted in the Ghurkha  Brigade  on  7  October
    1964 and was discharged on 26  October  1971.   His  conduct  had  been
    exemplary.  He was aged about 24 when discharged and although  he  made
    reference in his witness statement to the fact  that  had  he  had  the
    opportunity he would have made an application for settlement in the UK,
    there was no certainty that he would have  proceeded  with  this.   The
    judge also noted  that  in  the  decision  letter  the  respondent  had
    carefully considered the appellant's article 8 application taking  into
    account the historic injustice and provided comprehensive  reasons  why
    the appellant's application failed.  He concurred  with  those  reasons
    [29].

6.   The judge then went on to deal with  the  five  questions  set  out  in
    Razgar.  He concluded that there would be no interference with  respect
    to the appellant's right to respect for her family life as  the  status
    quo would continue as  it  had  done  for  the  last  five  years.   In
    connection with the second question, no facts had  been  identified  or
    accepted  which  would  give  rise  to  the  engagement  of  article  8
    concerning consequences of  sufficient  gravity  to  the  appellant  or
    others.  The interference was in accordance with the law and the  judge
    found that the decision was proportionate given the  need  to  maintain
    immigration control and the economic well-being  of  the  country.   He
    took into account s.117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
    2002 as amended.  He noted that the appellant was not in  the  best  of
    health and if allowed entry into the UK there was a  strong  likelihood
    that she would require the assistance of the  National  Health  Service
    and this would have a knock-on effect with regards to the economic well-
    being of the United Kingdom and the utilisation  of  scarce  resources.
    Taking everything into account the judge found that the respondent  had
    not reached a decision which could not be supported in law.

Submissions

7.   In the grounds it  is  argued  that  the  judge  erred  by  failing  to
    consider whether the appellant's  financial  dependency  could  or  did
    amount to real, effective and committed support and had failed to apply
    the guidance set out by the Court of Appeal in Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ
    31 when assessing whether there was family life within article 8.   The
    grounds further argued that, as the judge had made no  express  adverse
    credibility findings about the sponsor's evidence, in the light of  the
    fact that he had made an unequivocal and uncontested statement that  he
    would have settled in the UK when he left the army that it was not open
    to the judge to find otherwise than he would have  so  settled  had  he
    been permitted to do so.  It is further argued that the judge  did  not
    consider the interplay of s.117B of the 2002 Act and the  decisions  in
    Gurung and Ghising.  The possible future use by the  appellant  of  the
    NHS had to be balanced with the fact that even after  the  introduction
    of the immigration healthcare surcharge,  applications  for  settlement
    from adult dependent children were exempt.

8.   Mr Dieu adopted these grounds.  He submitted that the judge's  approach
    to article 8 was flawed in that there had been no explicit  finding  on
    whether family life within article 8  existed.   He  further  submitted
    that the judge had failed to consider the fact that, even where  family
    members have lived apart for a considerable period of time,  article  8
    may nevertheless oblige the state to facilitate family reunion and  not
    merely to refrain from interfering with the existing level of  contact.
    The judge had failed to give proper weight to the historic injustice to
    Ghurkha families which was a significant factor to be  weighed  in  the
    balance.  He had erred in his finding that there was no certainty  that
    the sponsor would have  settled  in  the  UK  had  he  had  an  earlier
    opportunity of doing so [27] as he had been unequivocal on  this  issue
    in his statement.  The judge had failed, so he  argued,  to  take  into
    consideration the fact that the appellant's health had deteriorated  in
    November 2010 or to give proper account to the healthcare surcharge and
    the exemption applying to Ghurkha settlement claims.

9.   Ms Isherwood submitted that the  grounds  amounted  to  a  disagreement
    with the judge's findings.  The appellant had not been able to meet the
    requirements of the rules.  The judge had gone  through  the  evidence.
    He had accepted that there was a close family bond between the  sponsor
    and the appellant's witnesses but had been entitled  to  conclude  that
    any interference caused by the refusal of  entry  clearance  would  not
    give rise to the engagement of  article  8  but  if  it  did  that  the
    decision would be proportionate to a legitimate aim.

Assessment of whether the judge erred in law

10.  I must consider whether the judge erred in law such that  the  decision
    should be set aside.  It is argued firstly on behalf of  the  appellant
    that the judge made no explicit  determination  of  whether  there  was
    family  life  within  article  8(1).   However,  the   first   question
    identified in Razgar is whether the decision would be  an  interference
    with the exercise of an applicant's right to  respect  for  private  or
    family life and the second that, if so, would  such  interference  have
    consequences of such gravity as potentially to engage the operation  of
    article 8.  The judge identifies at some length the facts  relating  to
    the appellant's family life in [20], her age, the  fact  that  she  had
    spent her entire life in Nepal and prior to 2010  had  lived  with  her
    parents  and  siblings,  she  was   unmarried   and   unemployed,   her
    accommodation was provided by her father by way of rental payments  and
    she received financial support from her parents and siblings.  She  had
    extended family members who lived in a remote village and she  kept  in
    regular contact with family members via telephone.  The judge then went
    on to consider the issue of historic injustice reminding himself of the
    relevant authorities.

11.  In [25] the judge said it was clear from the evidence that there was  a
    close family bond and in [27] that the appellant received emotional and
    financial support from her parents  but he found that it could  not  be
    said that there were greater emotional ties in the present appeal  than
    one would expect in a normal loving family relationship and that it was
    understandable that the appellant's family in the UK were concerned for
    her but that did not in itself equate to circumstances which  were  out
    of the ordinary or not expected.  When considering the Razgar questions
    in [30] the judge set out as his conclusion  that  there  would  be  no
    interference with the appellant's right to respect for her family  life
    as the status quo would continue as it had done for the  previous  five
    years.  Even if the judge did not  make  an  explicit  finding  on  the
    existence of family life, he was entitled to take into account that the
    status quo would continue as it had done so for the last five years and
    to find in respect of the second question in Razgar that no factors had
    been identified of sufficient gravity to engage article 8.

12.  This was an issue of fact for the judge  to  resolve  on  the  evidence
    before him.  There is no reason to believe that  he  was  unaware  that
    article 8 might oblige the state to facilitate family reunion  and  not
    merely to refrain from interfering with the existing level  of  contact
    or that the threshold for engaging article 8 was not an especially high
    one.  I am satisfied that the judge  took  all  relevant  factors  into
    account and properly directed himself on  the  law  when  reaching  the
    decision that in the particular circumstances of this appeal article  8
    was not engaged.

13.  In the skeleton argument produced by Mr Dieu it is argued that  it  was
    confusing for the judge to continue  to  consider  the  other  relevant
    questions in article 8 but,  generally,  it  is  an  entirely  sensible
    course for a judge to deal in the alternative with all the issues.   On
    the issue of proportionality I am satisfied that the  judge  reached  a
    decision properly open to him on the evidence.  The respondent  in  the
    original decision and in the decision on review took into  account  the
    issue of the  historical  injustice  when  considering  proportionality
    within article 8(2) and the judge was  entitled  to  agree  with  those
    reasons.  It was also a matter for the judge to decide what  inferences
    could properly be drawn from the evidence about whether  it  was  shown
    that the sponsor would have made an application for settlement  in  the
    UK at an earlier time if he had had the opportunity of doing  so.   The
    judge's comments and findings on this issue were properly open to him.

14.  Further, I am  not  satisfied  that  there  is  any  substance  in  the
    arguments relating to the deterioration in the appellant's health.  The
    judge left out  of  account  the  impact  of  the  exemption  from  the
    healthcare surcharge when considering the public interest but I am  not
    satisfied that this factor would have had any material bearing  on  the
    outcome of the proportionality assessment  but  in  any  event  he  was
    considering proportionality in the alternative.  When the  decision  is
    read as a whole the judge came to  findings  and  conclusions  properly
    open to him for the reasons he gave.  I am not satisfied that he  erred
    in law in any way capable of affecting the outcome  of  the  appeal  as
    argued in the grounds and submissions.

Decision

15.  The First-tier Tribunal did not  err  in  law.   It  follows  that  its
    decision stands.






Signed                                  Date: 13 April 2016

     H J E Latter

H J E Latter
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
