
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/02260/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House              |Determination Promulgated         |
|On 4 December 2014                |On 12 December 2014               |
|                                  |                                  |

                                   Before

                        THE HON. MRS JUSTICE CARR DBE
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN


                                   Between

                            MRS AICHA AL BADAOUY
                        (No anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - RABAT
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:
    For the Appellant:     Mr Daniel Sills of Counsel instructed by Garth
                        Coates Solicitors
    For the Respondent:    Mr Ian Jarvis a Senior Home Office Presenting
                        Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Morocco who was born on 7 April 1990. She
    has been given permission to appeal  the  determination  of  First-Tier
    Tribunal Judge R G  Walters  ("the  FTTJ")  who  dismissed  her  appeal
    against the respondent's decision of 15  January  2014  to  refuse  her
    entry clearance as the spouse of her  husband  and  sponsor  under  the
    provisions of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.


 2. The respondent  refused  the  application  for  one  reason  only,  the
    appellant had  not  established  that  she  met  the  English  language
    requirement  of  paragraph  EC-P.1.1  (d)  of  Section  E-ECP  of   the
    Immigration Rules. In her application form the appellant had said  that
    she was "illiterate and cannot read or write in Arabic...  or  learn  a
    new language such as English in  either  speaking  or  listening."  The
    respondent considered the exemption which could assist someone who  had
    a physical or mental impairment which would prevent them  from  meeting
    this requirement but concluded that the appellant had  not  shown  that
    she met this requirement.


 3. The appellant appealed. The FTTJ heard the appeal  on  6  August  2014.
    Both parties were represented, the appellant by Mr  Sills  who  appears
    before us. The FTTJ heard evidence from the husband.


 4. In her witness statement the appellant said that she believed  she  had
    an underlying learning difficulty which had  been  diagnosed  in  April
    2014 by a psychiatrist in Morocco. The husband's evidence was  that  so
    far as he was aware the appellant had not had  treatment  for  learning
    difficulties and in any event they could not afford treatment.


 5. The FTTJ concluded that the report from the psychiatrist in Morocco did
    not establish that the appellant had a medical condition  which  either
    prevented her from  taking  an  acceptable  English  language  test  or
    learning English. She had not shown that she was able to bring  herself
    within the exemption to the English language requirements in the Rules.
    The appeal failed under the Immigration Rules.


 6. The FTTJ went on to consider the Article 8 human rights  grounds  under
    the Rules and the best interests of the children under  section  55  of
    the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.  The  appellant  and
    her husband married on 31 May 2007 and she applied for entry  clearance
    on 29 May 2008. This was refused and there was no appeal.


 7. On 27 November 2008 the 21 year minimum age requirement was introduced.
    The appellant and her husband's daughter Iliyah was born on 7 May 2009.
    She  is  a  British  citizen.  The  English  language  requirement  was
    introduced on 1 October 2010. The husband has another daughter, Yasmin,
    born as a result of a former relationship. Yasmin is a British  citizen
    and the husband is her main carer.


 8.  The  FTTJ  applied  the  principles  set  out   in   Razgar,   R   (on
    the Application of) v. Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2004] UKHL 27. In relation to the first  test  he  found  that:   "the
    appellant has family life with the sponsor and their  daughter  Yasmin.
    The sponsor, I found, has family life with Iliyah,  the  appellant  and
    Yasmin. All parties have private lives."


 9. As to the second, third and  fourth  tests  the  FTTJ  found  that  the
    proposed exclusion of the appellant would be an interference  with  the
    exercise of her right to respect for private and family life and  would
    have  consequences  of  such  gravity  as  potentially  to  engage  the
    operation of Article 8. However, it would be in accordance with the law
    and necessary in the  interests  of  the  economic  well-being  of  the
    country through the maintenance of immigration control.


10. In relation to the  last  test,  whether  such  interference  would  be
    proportionate to the legitimate public end sought to be  achieved,  the
    FTTJ accepted that Yasmin's best interests would be to be brought up by
    the appellant and the  sponsor.  The  sponsor  could  not  relocate  to
    Morocco with Iliyah which would deprive her of the benefits granted  to
    British citizens and take her away from her mother. He  found  that  it
    would be in the best interests of both children to  be  brought  up  by
    both parents in the UK. Those best interest could not  be  met  if  the
    appellant was excluded.


11. The FTTJ  took  into  account  section  19  and  section  117B  of  the
    Immigration Act 2014 in relation to the  public  interest.  Whilst  the
    best interests of the children were a primary consideration, the public
    interest in the maintenance of immigration  control  and  the  economic
    necessity of a person's  ability  to  speak  English  outweighed  these
    interests. The FTTJ concluded that it would be proportionate to exclude
    the appellant. What she  needed  to  do  was  to  provide  satisfactory
    psychiatric evidence to establish her claimed mental condition.


12. The appeal was dismissed under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  on  human
    rights grounds. No anonymity direction was made.


13. The appellant applied for and was granted permission to appeal.  It  is
    unfortunate that in Mr Sills' grounds of appeal whilst  the  paragraphs
    are numbered, the grounds are not separately identified or numbered and
    issues are to some extent intermixed. We  have  sought  to  bring  some
    order to the issues by separating and numbering what appear to us to be
    the  individual  grounds.  These  tally  with  the  identification  and
    numbering of the grounds of appeal in Mr Jarvis' skeleton argument.


14. It is argued that there are a number of errors of law.


15. Ground 1 (paragraphs 2 and 3). The FTTJ failed to follow Alvi (Alvi,  R
    (on the application of) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2011] EWCA Civ 681) principles by treating  the  respondent's  policy
    guidance  as  a  mandatory  requirement  rather  than  considering  the
    provisions of the Rules.


16. Ground 2 (paragraph 4). He made a factual error in concluding that on a
    future application the appellant might be able to  provide  psychiatric
    evidence to show that she met the exception  to  the  English  language
    requirement. The grounds return to this point in paragraph 12 where  it
    is argued that in relation to proportionality the FTTJ erred in  taking
    into account hypothetical future evidence or findings.


17. Ground 3 (paragraphs 5-7). He failed to compare the in country and  out
    of country requirements and take into account the fact that the out  of
    country  requirements,  being  more  strict   than   the   in   country
    requirements, were less able to fully address private and  family  life
    issues under Article 8. For Article 8 purposes whether the case related
    to entry clearance rather than removal was irrelevant. The fact that in
    in country cases the English language requirement could  be  waived  in
    circumstances relating to  the  best  interests  of  the  child  was  a
    material factor in considering Article 8  in  entry  clearance  appeals
    where there was no similar waiver under the Rules.


18. Ground 4 (paragraph 8). The FTTJ's  reasoning  was  inadequate.  Whilst
    there was reference to the provisions of section 119 and  section  117B
    of the Immigration Act 2014 it was not clear how those  provisions  had
    been addressed and applied. In particular section 117B (6) had not been
    addressed.


19. Ground 5 (paragraph 9). In finding that  the  public  interest  in  the
    maintenance of immigration control and  the  economic  necessity  of  a
    person's ability to speak  English  outweighed  the  interests  of  the
    children  the  FTTJ  had  failed  to  take  into  account  Parliament's
    assessment of the public interest set out in section  117B.  There  had
    been a failure to take into account the fact that the appellant and her
    British citizen child were outside the UK.


20. Ground 6 (paragraphs 10-12). The proportionality assessment was  flawed
    because the only reason given for concluding that  exclusion  would  be
    proportionate  was  the  appellant's  inability  to  meet  the  English
    language requirements of the Rules.


21. Ground 7 (paragraph 13). There was a failure to consider  a  number  of
    relevant factors in assessing proportionality including the  length  of
    time the appellant and her husband had been separated, in part  by  the
    application of an "unlawful" immigration rule imposing a  21  year  age
    requirement and that the appellant had been able to  meet  the  onerous
    financial requirements of the Rules.


22. Ground 8 (paragraph 14). There was a failure to consider  the  case  of
    Bibi which upheld the lawfulness of the  English  language  requirement
    but pointed out that the  Secretary  of  State  had  accepted  that  an
    individual case with favourable facts could still succeed.


23. Ground 9 (paragraphs 15-16). There had been  a  failure  to  apply  the
    principles set out in ZH (Tanzania) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2011] UKSC 4 in reaching the conclusion  that  the  English
    language requirements were inherently more significant  that  the  best
    interests of the children.


24. We have the skeleton arguments submitted by Mr Sills for  the  hearings
    before the FTTJ and before us. The latter addresses points raised in Mr
    Jarvis' skeleton argument. We have a skeleton argument from  Mr  Jarvis
    addressing the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal.


25. We heard  submissions  from  both  representatives  building  on  their
    grounds  of  appeal   and   skeleton   arguments.   We   reserved   our
    determination.


26. Ground 1 (paragraphs 2 and 3). The Immigration Rules state:


        "English language requirement
        E-ECP.4.1. The applicant must provide specified evidence  that  they
        -?(a) are a national of a majority English speaking  country  listed
        in paragraph GEN.1.6.;
        (b) have passed an English language test in speaking  and  listening
        at a minimum of  level  A1  of  the  Common  European  Framework  of
        Reference for Languages with a provider approved by the Secretary of
        State;
        (c) have an academic qualification recognised  by  UK  NARIC  to  be
        equivalent to the standard of a Bachelor's or Master's degree or PhD
        in the UK, which was taught in English; or
        (d) are exempt from the English language requirement under paragraph
        EECP. 4.2.
        E-ECP.4.2.  The  applicant  is  exempt  from  the  English  language
        requirement if at the date of application-
        (a) the applicant is aged 65 or over;
        (b) the applicant has a disability (physical  or  mental  condition)
        which prevents the applicant from meeting the requirement; or
        (c) there are exceptional circumstances which prevent the  applicant
        from being able to meet the requirement prior to entry to the UK."


27. The respondent's policy is set out at Annex FM 1.21 of the  Immigration
    Directorate Instruction as follows:


        "The applicant is exempt from the requirement if:
        they are aged 65 or over (see Section 5), or
        they have a disability (physical or mental condition) which prevents
        them from meeting the requirement (see Section 6), or
        there are exceptional circumstances which prevent them from  meeting
        the requirement (see Section 7)....
        6. Disability exemption
        6.1 Criteria
        The applicant is exempt from the English language requirement if the
        decision maker considers that the applicant has a disability: that
        is a physical or mental condition that prevents them from meeting
        the requirement.
        6.2 Definition of disability
        This exemption will apply only where the applicant has a physical or
        mental condition which prevents them from learning English or taking
        an acceptable English language test. This is not a blanket
        exemption. Some disabled people will be capable of learning English
        and taking an English language test and some will not.
        6.3 Evidence required to demonstrate disability
        To qualify for this exemption, the applicant must apply for it in
        their application and submit satisfactory medical evidence from a
        medical practitioner who is qualified in the appropriate field which
        sets out the relevant physical or mental condition and from which it
        may be concluded that exemption on those grounds is justified. Each
        application for an exemption on this basis will be considered on its
        merits on a case-by-case basis.
        6.4 Authorisation of exemption
        Authorisation of  this  exemption  should  be  agreed  by  a  senior
        caseworker or equivalent or an entry clearance manager.
        7. Exceptional circumstances exemption
        The applicant is exempt from the English language requirement if the
        decision maker considers that there  are  exceptional  circumstances
        that prevent the applicant from meeting the requirement.
        This exemption  is  only  applicable  where  there  are  exceptional
        circumstances specifically relating to the ability of the  applicant
        to meet the English language requirement.
        An applicant granted  an  exemption  on  the  basis  of  exceptional
        circumstances at the entry clearance stage will be required to  meet
        the English language requirement when they apply for  further  leave
        to remain after 30 months, unless they  remain  exempt  on  this  or
        another basis.
        On 24 July 2014 the automatic exemption for an applicant  who  is  a
        long-term resident of a country with no approved A1  test  provision
        was withdrawn.


        7.1 Consideration of exceptional circumstances
        Each application for  an  exemption  on  the  basis  of  exceptional
        circumstances will be considered on its  merits  on  a  case-by-case
        basis.
        The applicant must demonstrate, in box 8.1 in part 8  of  the  VAF4A
        form for an entry clearance application as a partner or parent, that
        as a result of exceptional circumstances they are  unable  to  learn
        English before coming  to  the  UK  or  it  is  not  practicable  or
        reasonable for them to travel to another country to take an approved
        English language  test.  Partners  of  members  of  HM  Forces  must
        demonstrate this in box 9.1 of the VAFAF form.
        Evidence of the nature and impact of the  exceptional  circumstances
        must be  clearly  provided,  e.g.  of  previous  efforts  to  access
        learning materials or to travel overseas to take  an  approved  test
        and the obstacles to doing so. This must include  evidence  provided
        by an independent source (e.g. an  appropriately  qualified  medical
        practitioner) or capable of being verified by the decision maker.
        Examples of situations in which, subject to the necessary supporting
        evidence,  the  decision  maker  might  conclude  that  there   were
        exceptional circumstances, might include where the applicant:
        is a long-term resident of a country in  international  or  internal
        armed conflict, or  where  there  is  or  has  been  a  humanitarian
        disaster, including in light of the infrastructure affected.
        has been hospitalised for several months immediately  prior  to  the
        date of application.
        is the full-time carer of a disabled child also applying to come  to
        the UK.
        is a long-term resident of  a  country  with  no  approved  A1  test
        provision and it is not practicable or reasonable for the  applicant
        to travel to another country to take a test (see section 7.2 below).
        Lack of or limited literacy or education will  not  be  accepted  as
        exceptional circumstances.
        It will be extremely rare for  exceptional  circumstances  to  apply
        where the applicant is in the UK. However, in an  exceptional  case,
        the applicant must set out the relevant circumstances in box 8.6  in
        section 8 of the FLR(M) form for partners, in box 8.8 in  section  8
        of the FLR(FP) form for parents (5-year route)  or  in  box  8.6  in
        section 8 of the FLR(AF) form for partners of a member of HM Forces,
        and submit relevant supporting evidence."


28. We find that the FTTJ did not treat the policy guidance as a  mandatory
    requirement. He made reference to it because Mr Sills relied on it (see
    paragraph 18 of the determination). We can find no indication  that  it
    was  treated  as  a  mandatory  requirement  in   preference   to   the
    requirements of the Rules. We agree with Mr Jarvis that the possibility
    of showing exceptional circumstances appears in both the Rules and  the
    policy guidance. It is not clear what "exceptional  circumstances"  the
    appellant relies on to show why she was not able to  meet  the  English
    language requirements and the grounds of appeal do  not  challenge  the
    FTTJ's assessment of the appellant's disability. In paragraph 5  of  Mr
    Sills' skeleton argument which was before the FTTJ it is conceded  that
    the appellant could not show exceptional circumstances under the policy
    guidance and we can find nothing to suggest  that  it  was  argued  she
    could do so under the Rules.


29. Ground 2 (paragraph 4). This ground is misconceived. In paragraph 40 of
    the determination the FTTJ said; "On the question of proportionality, I
    find that the appellant's inability to pass the English  language  test
    may well be  accepted  by  an  ECO  if  satisfactory  evidence  from  a
    psychiatrist is presented to him in future  application.  Obviously,  a
    properly reasoned or comprehensive  psychiatric  report  is  required."
    This is not a factual error. In the light  of  the  undisputed  finding
    that the appellant could not bring herself within the exception to  the
    English language requirement  and  the  reasons  for  this  conclusion,
    largely relating to the inadequacies of the psychiatric report, it  was
    relevant to the assessment of proportionality to observe that a  future
    application might succeed if accompanied  by  satisfactory  psychiatric
    evidence. It indicated that there was an  avenue  which  the  appellant
    could still pursue  in  her  efforts  to  obtain  entry  clearance  for
    settlement and the unification of the family in the UK. She was not  in
    a situation where she had no prospect of  ever  being  able  to  do  so
    except through an Article 8 claim.


30. Ground 3 (paragraphs 5-7). Mr Sills relies on paragraph 30 of Nagre,  R
    (on the application of) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin). This states
        "I agree with the guidance given by the Upper Tribunal in Izuazu at
        paras. [40]-[43], as follows:
        "40. We accordingly further endorse the Upper Tribunal's observation
        in [MF (Article 8 - new rules) Nigeria [2012] UKUT 00393 (IAC)] that
        judges called on to make decisions about the application of Article
        8 in cases to which the new rules apply, should proceed by first
        considering whether a claimant is able to benefit under the
        applicable provisions of the Immigration Rules designed to address
        Article 8 claims. If he or she does, there will be no need to go on
        to consider Article 8 generally. The appeal can be allowed because
        the decision is not in accordance with the rules.
        41. Where the claimant does not meet the requirements of the rules
        it will be necessary for the judge to go on to make an assessment of
        Article 8 applying the criteria established by law.
        42. When considering whether the immigration decision is a justified
        interference with the right to family and/or private life, the
        provisions of the rules or other relevant statement of policy may
        again re-enter the debate but this time as part of the
        proportionality evaluation. Here the judge will be asking whether
        the interference was a proportionate means of achieving the
        legitimate aim in question and a fair balance as to the competing
        interests.
        43. The weight to be attached to any reason for rejection of the
        human rights claim indicated by particular provisions of the rules
        will depend both on the particular facts found by the judge in the
        case in hand and the extent that the rules themselves reflect
        criteria approved in the previous case law of the Human Rights Court
        at Strasbourg and the higher courts in the United Kingdom."
        The only slight modification I would make, for the purposes of
        clarity, is to say that if, after the process of applying the new
        rules and finding that the claim for leave to remain under them
        fails, the relevant official or tribunal judge considers it is clear
        that the consideration under the Rules has fully addressed any
        family life or private life issues arising under Article 8, it would
        be sufficient simply to say that; they would not have to go on, in
        addition, to consider the case separately from the Rules. If there
        is no arguable case that there may be good grounds for granting
        leave to remain outside the Rules by reference to Article 8, there
        would be no point in introducing full separate consideration of
        Article 8 again after having reached a decision on application of
        the Rules."
31. We find that  this  passage  addresses  the  question  of  when  it  is
    necessary to consider Article 8 grounds outside  the  Rules.  There  is
    nothing in this  passage  or  anywhere  else  in  the  judgement  which
    supports the proposition that there needs to be a comparison between in
    country and out of country requirements or that any differences between
    them should impinge on an Article 8 assessment. Mr Jarvis  argues  that
    the Secretary of  State  is  entitled  to  formulate  different  policy
    depending on the context of the  immigration  routes  in  question.  We
    agree. In his oral submissions Mr Sills accepted that the Secretary  of
    State was entitled to formulate and apply  different  policies,  adding
    that they should not be "so  different",  but  without  explaining  how
    different they could or could not be. We find that  the  FTTJ  followed
    what Nagre required of him and considered the Article  8  human  rights
    grounds outside the  Rules.  The  FTTJ  was  not  required  to  make  a
    comparison between the requirements for in country and out  of  country
    cases to see whether there were any differences and if so  to  consider
    how these might impinge on or nuance his assessment of  the  Article  8
    grounds.


32. Ground 4 (paragraph 8). The provisions of the Immigration Act 2014  set
    out where the public interest lies in paragraphs 117A, 117B, 117C  (not
    applicable here as it relates to foreign criminals) and 117D as follows


        "117A Application of this Part
        (1) This Part applies where a  court  or  tribunal  is  required  to
        determine
        whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-
        (a) breaches a person's right to respect for private and family life
        under Article 8, and
        (b) as a result would be unlawful  under  section  6  of  the  Human
        Rights Act 1998.
        (2) In considering  the  public  interest  question,  the  court  or
        tribunal must
        (in particular) have regard-
        (a) in all cases, to the considerations listed in section 117B, and
        (b) in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals, to the
        considerations listed in section 117C.
        (3) In subsection (2), "the  public  interest  question"  means  the
        question of whether an interference with a person's right to respect
        for private and family life is justified under Article 8(2).


        117B Article 8: public interest  considerations  applicable  in  all
        cases
        (1) The maintenance of effective  immigration  controls  is  in  the
        public interest.
        (2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests
        of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that  persons  who
        seek to enter or remain in the United  Kingdom  are  able  to  speak
        English, because persons who can speak English-
        (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
        (b) are better able to integrate into society.
        (3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests
        of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that  persons  who
        seek to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are  financially
        independent, because such persons-
        (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and
        (b) are better able to integrate into society.
        (4) Little weight should be given to-
        (a) a private life, or
        (b) a  relationship  formed  with  a  qualifying  partner,  that  is
        established by a person at a time when the person is in  the  United
        Kingdom unlawfully.
        (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established by a
        person at a time when the person's immigration status is precarious.
        (6) In the case of a person who is not liable  to  deportation,  the
        public interest does not require the person's removal where-
        (a) the person has a genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship
        with a qualifying child, and
        (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
        United Kingdom.


        117D Interpretation of this Part
        (1) In this Part-
        "Article 8" means Article 8 of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
        Rights;
        "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age of 18 and who-


        (a) is a British citizen, or
        (b) has lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of seven
        years or more;
        "qualifying partner" means a partner who-
        (a) is a British citizen, or
        (b) who is settled in the United Kingdom (within the meaning of  the
        Immigration Act 1971 - see section 33(2A) of that Act).
        (2) In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-
        (a) who is not a British citizen,
        (b) who has been convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and
        (c) who-
        (i) has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of  at  least  12
        months,
        (ii) has been convicted of an offence that has caused serious  harm,
        or
        (iii) is a persistent offender.
        (3) For the purposes of subsection (2)(b), a person  subject  to  an
        order under-
        (a)  section  5  of  the  Criminal  Procedure  (Insanity)  Act  1964
        (insanity etc),
        (b) section  57  of  the  Criminal  Procedure  (Scotland)  Act  1995
        (insanity etc), or
        (c) Article 50A of the Mental Health (Northern Ireland)  Order  1986
        (insanity etc),
        has not been convicted of an offence.
        (4) In this Part, references to a person who has been sentenced to a
        period of imprisonment of a certain length of time-
        (a) do not include a person who has received  a  suspended  sentence
        (unless a court subsequently orders that the sentence or any part of
        it (of whatever length) is to take effect);
        (b) do not include a person who has been sentenced to  a  period  of
        imprisonment of  that  length  of  time  only  by  virtue  of  being
        sentenced to consecutive sentences amounting in  aggregate  to  that
        length of time;
        (c) include a person who is sentenced to detention,  or  ordered  or
        directed to be detained, in  an  institution  other  than  a  prison
        (including, in particular, a hospital or an  institution  for  young
        offenders) for that length of time; and
        (d) include a person who is sentenced to imprisonment or  detention,
        or ordered or directed to be detained, for an indeterminate  period,
        provided that it may last for at least that length of time.
        (5) If any question arises for the  purposes  of  this  Part  as  to
        whether a person  is  a  British  citizen,  it  is  for  the  person
        asserting that fact to prove it."


33. The ground submits that FTTJ's reasoning was inadequate because, whilst
    there was reference to the provisions of section 19 and section 117B of
    the Immigration Act 2014, it was not clear  how  those  provisions  had
    been addressed and applied and in particular section 117B (6)  had  not
    been addressed. We find no merit in this ground. As the  wording  makes
    clear s 117B (6) relates to a situation where an individual  is  facing
    removal from the UK. It deals with in country not out of country cases.
    It was sufficient for the FTTJ to say  that  he  had  regard  to  these
    provisions particularly as the  only  example  the  appellant  provides
    relates to a provision which does not apply.


34. Ground 5 (paragraph 9). Section 117B (6) does not apply for the reasons
    we have already given. We find that the FTTJ did take into account  and
    make a proper assessment of the factors in section 117B which do apply,
    in particular; "(1) The maintenance of effective  immigration  controls
    is in the public interest. (2) It is in the  public  interest,  and  in
    particular in the interests of the economic well-being  of  the  United
    Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
    are able to speak English, because persons who  can  speak  English-(a)
    are less of a burden on taxpayers, and (b) are better able to integrate
    into society." The FTTJ gave proper weight to  the  assessment  of  the
    public interest set out  in  primary  legislation.  It  is  clear  that
    throughout his assessment the FTTJ was well  aware  of  and  took  into
    account the fact that this was an out of country application.


35. Ground 6 (paragraphs 10-12). The FTTJ did not say that the only  reason
    for  concluding  that  exclusion  would  be   proportionate   was   the
    appellant's inability to meet the English language requirements of  the
    Rules. What he said in paragraph 46 relied on the wider issue  of  "the
    public interest in the maintenance of immigration control" as  well  as
    "the economic necessity  of  a  person's  ability  to  speak  English".
    Mansoor R (on the application of) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2011] EWHC 832 (Admin) does not assist because it needs  to
    be viewed in the context of the Rules in force at the time and does not
    reflect the later provisions of the Immigration Act  2014  setting  out
    Parliament's assessment of where the public interest lies.


36. Ground 7 (paragraph 13). We find that there was no failure to  consider
    relevant  factors  in  assessing  proportionality.  As   appears   from
    paragraphs 30 to 34 of the determination the FTTJ was aware of and took
    into account when the marriage had taken place, how long the  appellant
    and  her  husband  had  been  apart  and  the  difficulties  they   had
    encountered in seeking entry clearance because of changes in the Rules.
    It is equally clear that the FTTJ was aware that the only  grounds  for
    refusal related to the English language requirement  which  meant  that
    all the other requirements including the  financial  requirements  were
    met. As Mr Jarvis points out in his skeleton  the  appellant  has  made
    more than one application for entry clearance and could  have  appealed
    an earlier decision or made a fresh application before the  21-year-old
    age requirement came into force.


37. Ground 8 (paragraph 14). We can find no merit in  the  submission  that
    there was a material failure to consider the case of Bibi or that  this
    could amount to a  material  error  of  law.  As  is  accepted  by  the
    appellant  Bibi  upheld  the  lawfulness  of   the   English   language
    requirement but pointed out that the Secretary of  State  had  accepted
    that an individual case with  favourable  facts  could  still  succeed.
    There is nothing in the determination to indicate that the FTTJ took  a
    different approach or failed to take into account the favourable facts.


38. Ground 9 (paragraphs 15-16). We do not accept  that  the  FTTJ  treated
    "the English language requirements as inherently more significant  than
    best (sic) interests of the child". This is not an accurate summary  of
    the reasoning or conclusion. ZH (Tanzania) v Secretary of State for the
    Home Department [2011] UKSC 4 was heard  before  the  English  language
    requirements and the Immigration Act 2014 came into force.  We  do  not
    consider that any relevant principles can usefully be drawn by  seeking
    to compare or distinguish the facts in this appeal with those in ZH  or
    EV Philippines and Ors v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2014] EWCA Civ 874. The authorities do not support the proposition put
    forward  by  Mr  Sills  in  his  latest  skeleton  argument  that  "the
    children's best interests rank higher than any other factor". The  FTTJ
    reached the conclusions that the best interests of the children were  a
    primary consideration. Yasmin's best interests would be to  be  brought
    up by the appellant and the sponsor. The sponsor could not relocate  to
    Morocco with Iliyah which would deprive her of the benefits granted  to
    British citizens and take her away from her mother. It would be in  the
    best interests of both children to be brought up by both parents in the
    UK. Those best interest could not be met if the appellant was excluded.


39. The FTTJ did not make an anonymity direction. We have not been asked to
    do so and in the absence of any explanation as  to  what  good  reasons
    there might be we do not make such a direction.


40. We find that the FTTJ reached  conclusions  open  to  him  on  all  the
    evidence. There  is  no  material  error  of  law  and  we  uphold  the
    determination.






    .............................................


    Signed        Date 10 December 2014
    Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden


