
[pic]

UPPER Tribunal
           (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/02658/2014
                                                               OA/02659/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 20 August 2015                    |On 21 September 2015                 |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer


                                   Between

                   entry clearance officer: Rio de Janeiro
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         Mr Moises Rolando Sandoval
                       Mr Franklin Aron Moron Sandoval
                         no anonymity direction made
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Mackenzie, counsel, instructed by Southwark Law
                    Centre


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as "the entry clearance officer" and  to
    the respondents as "the claimants."

 2. The claimants are nationals of Bolivia, who applied for entry clearance
    to enter the UK as the children of their mother, who held discretionary
    leave to remain in the UK until 16 May  2015[1].   The  claimants  were
    born on 9 January 1998 and 6 November 1999 respectively.

 3. They both appealed against the entry clearance officer's decision dated
    10 January 2014 refusing their claims for entry  clearance  to  the  UK
    with a view to settlement as the child of a parent having limited leave
    to remain in the UK under paragraph 301 of the  Immigration  Rules.  In
    each case the notice of refusal was identical.

 4. In a determination promulgated on 9  April  2015,  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Iqbal dismissed their appeals under  the  Immigration  Rules  but
    allowed them under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.

 5. On 3 June 2015 First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Brunnen  granted  the  entry
    clearance officer permission to appeal, finding that the  grounds  were
    arguable.

 6. In her decision Judge Iqbal set out  the  immigration  history  of  the
    claimants referred to in the notices of refusal. Their sponsor attended
    the hearing and gave evidence.

 7. Mr Mackenzie, who  represented  the  claimants  before  the  first-tier
    Tribunal, accepted that they were unable  to  satisfy  the  immigration
    rules. Judge Iqbal therefore went on to  consider  their  circumstances
    with reference to  Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights  Convention.  She
    directed herself in accordance with Razgar.

 8. She considered family life between the claimants and their mother.  She
    referred to Berrehab v Netherlands [1989] 11  EHRR  322  at  [21].  She
    found that the claimants and their mother do have a  family  life.  She
    answered the next three questions affirmatively.

 9. In considering the proportionality of the interference  she  took  into
    account  the  determination  of  First-tier   Tribunal   Judge   Mayall
    promulgated on 22 February 2012. That was an appeal by  the  claimant's
    mother and two children, who were Bolivian  nationals,  who  were  then
    aged 16 and 9 years respectively.

10. They appealed against the decision of the secretary of  state  refusing
    their applications for leave to  remain  in  the  UK  as  well  as  the
    decision to remove them from the UK.

11. Having taken into account the facts of the mother's case as well as the
    best interests of her two children and in particular her son, Luis, who
    was eight and a half years old at the date of application, Judge Mayall
    found that the removal  of  the  family  would  be  a  disproportionate
    interference with their Article 8 rights and allowed  the  appeal.  All
    three were subsequently granted discretionary leave.

12. Luis was born in the UK and was granted British citizenship  by  virtue
    of being registered and having reached the age of 10 - [30].

13. Judge Iqbal found that the mother and her two children have lives which
    are fully integrated in the UK and it would not be reasonable to expect
    them to relocate to Bolivia to establish family life with the sponsor's
    two children there [30].

14. The Judge accepted on balance that the claimants' grandmother's  health
    is deteriorating and more recently she required surgery  following  the
    loss of her eyesight. Her  medical  history  was  fully  documented  in
    various reports the basis of which she accepted  [31].  The  claimants'
    aunt, whom the entry clearance officer had asserted was the other carer
    of the claimants, had suffered a heart  attack  and  stroke  in  August
    2013. She was admitted to hospital for over a week and it took a  while
    for her to recover from this. She was unable  to  help  the  children's
    grandmother in caring for them. She found that it would be difficult to
    expect her to continue to care for the claimants as she had done in the
    past [32].

15. She found that the lack of proper carers for  the  claimants  was  even
    more important in the light of the fact that Moises appears  to  suffer
    from epilepsy, as supported by medical evidence which she  set  out  at
    [33].

16. There were also recent  developments  regarding  Franklin's  biological
    father who was not a good role model and  was  recently  released  from
    prison. That evidence came from the sponsor, whom the Judge found to be
    credible. Whilst he had not officially been  registered  as  Franklin's
    father, he was harassing the sponsor and attempting to become  involved
    in Franklin's life. She feared that he was going to take  Franklin.  He
    was known to be violent as well and was involved  in  drugs,  which  is
    another reason why she wished to remove  her  children  away  from  the
    influences in Bolivia [34].

17. The Judge also  considered  a  report  dated  7  February  2015  of  an
    independent social worker,  who  analysed  the  effects  of  a  lengthy
    separation from their mother. The current arrangements for  their  care
    in Bolivia were stated to be precarious, linked to the health  problems
    of their grandmother and aunt; the  threat  of  Franklin's  father  and
    concerns about the true nature of Moises's health condition [35].

18. The children were desperate  to  be  reunited  with  their  mother  and
    siblings. It was his professional  opinion  that  it  is  in  the  best
    interests of all the children of  the  family  that  the  claimants  be
    reunited with their family. The Judge  found  that  these  amounted  to
    important considerations to be weighed in the balancing act [35].

19. The Judge also accepted that the sponsor's  private  life  had  further
    developed and that she was in a relationship with a British citizen who
    has two British children. They have been living together for a year and
    a half  and  were  considering  marriage.  This  would  create  further
    obstacles in family life continuing outside the UK [36].

20. Whilst noting that the sponsor is on benefits, and there  may  well  be
    additional recourse to public funds with the addition of the claimants,
    she considered the best interests of the  children,  referring  to  the
    guidance in T (Entry Clearance - s.55 BCIA 2009)  Jamaica  [2011]  UKUT
    483 (IAC).

21. She considered  that  the  starting  point  must  relate  to  the  best
    interests of the children to be with one or more of their  parents.  On
    the facts of this case, the claimants were left  in  the  care  of  the
    sponsor's mother and sister who were not in a position to continue that
    care 'for quite serious reasons' that had been set out. She found  that
    on balance, these boys who still have family  life  with  their  mother
    ought to be cared for by her [38].

22. The Judge had regard to the provisions of s.117B of the Immigration Act
    2014 which she set out in full. Having considered the totality  of  the
    factors, she found that they weighed in favour  of  the  claimants  and
    that  the  refusal  of  entry  clearance  accordingly   constituted   a
    disproportionate  interference.  She  set  out  the  basis   for   that
    conclusion at [41-42].

23. In seeking permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  the  entry
    clearance officer raised two grounds. The first challenged the  Judge's
    finding that family life existed between the claimants and their mother
    in the UK. It was contended that Berrehab also  found  that  subsequent
    events may break the tie between the mother and her  children.  It  was
    noted that the appellant in that appeal saw his daughter four  times  a
    week for several hours at a time, showing that  he  "valued  them  very
    greatly". With regard to the first ground, it was contended that unlike
    Berrehab, the instant appeal disclosed no such frequency of contact.

24. The Judge had referred to there being evidence of  ongoing  interaction
    but does not state  what  forms  these  interactions  take,  nor  their
    frequency. Accordingly it had not been demonstrated  that  family  life
    exists between the parties as claimed.

25. It was also  contended  that  the  Judge  failed  to  explain  how  the
    claimants' mother is integrated into the UK or why she could not return
    to Bolivia to be with her children, the claimants. It is contended that
    the Judge's assessment of reasonableness  "....is  absent  of  any  due
    regard for the public interest (i.e.  proportionality),  and  fails  to
    establish how the sponsor and  her  children  are  integrated  into  UK
    society, nor reasons against comparable private life being  established
    in Bolivia."

26. Ms Isherwood relied on  the  entry  clearance  officer's  grounds.  She
    emphasised that the facts in Berrehab were different. There the  father
    had status in the Netherlands. He lost status and was deported.

27. She submitted with regard to the  findings  relating  to  the  Bolivian
    carers that the aunt when interviewed stated that she was working.  The
    Judge did not pay sufficient regard to the reasons for refusal letters.



28. Ms Isherwood relied on the decision of the Court of Appeal in SSHD v SS
    (Congo) and others [2015] EWCA Civ 387.  In  the  current  appeal,  the
    sponsor had left the  children  in  Bolivia  some  12  years  ago.  The
    claimants were 14 and 15 at the date of the application.

29. She also submitted that weight is to be given  to  the  fact  that  the
    claimants cannot meet the requirements under the rules. The  Judge  had
    failed to consider the nature of the  family  life,  having  regard  in
    particular to the gap of the separation between them and their mother.

30. She referred to [39 iii] in SS (Congo), where the Court stated that  in
    deciding whether to grant leave to enter to a family member outside the
    UK, the state authorities may  have  regard  to  a  range  of  factors,
    including the pressure which admission of an applicant may  place  upon
    public resources, the desirability of promoting social integration  and
    harmony and so forth. Refusal of LTE in cases where these interests may
    be undermined may be fair and proportionate to the legitimate interests
    identified in Article 8(2) of "the economic well being of the  country"
    and "the protection of the rights and freedoms  of  others"  (taxpayers
    and members of society generally).

31. A court will be slow to find an implied positive obligation which would
    involve imposing on the state significant additional expenditure  which
    will necessarily involve a diversion of resources from other activities
    of the state in the public interest, a matter which usually  calls  for
    consideration under democratic procedures.

32. The court went on to state at [39 iv] that on the other hand, the  fact
    that the interests of the child are in issue will be  a  countervailing
    factor which tends to reduce to some degree the width of the margin  of
    appreciation which the State authorities would otherwise enjoy. Article
    8 has to be applied in the light of the UN Convention and the rights of
    the child.

33. Ms Isherwood noted that SS (Congo) was only published on 23 April 2015,
    several weeks after the promulgation of the decision under appeal.

34. She asked with regard to ground 1 "where can it be seen that the  Judge
    has addressed the element of family life in these circumstances?"

35. With regard to ground 2,  she  emphasised  that  the  sponsor  and  her
    children in the UK only have discretionary leave and are thus here in a
    temporary capacity. In reaching a conclusion on matters  including  the
    weight to be given to the public interest, there  was  not  a  balanced
    consideration of both sides and in particular the weight that needs  to
    be given to the public interest.

36. She referred to the entry clearance manager's report where it was noted
    that in the interests of fairness, the ECO took into consideration  the
    claimants'  allegations  and  circumstances  at   the   time   of   the
    applications and referred the cases to RCU to be assessed whether there
    might be sufficient evidence to warrant issuing outside the rules.  The
    decision was thus put on hold pending a decision by RCU and the outcome
    was to maintain the refusal.

37. She accordingly submitted that the claimants' appeals should have  been
    dismissed.

38. Mr Mackenzie in reply submitted that there has been an attempt to raise
    new grounds relating to the failure to give a proper balance so  as  to
    provide sufficient weight to the public  interest.  No  permission  had
    been sought and no permission had been granted. Although he objected to
    their permission, he nevertheless contended that the grounds were  "not
    meritorious."

39. Mr Mackenzie submitted in conformity with the Rule 24 response that the
    claimants' mother was granted discretionary leave to remain on  16  May
    2012 following a successful appeal against removal. Her other children,
    born in 1996 and 2003, were also granted discretionary  leave  in  line
    with their mother. Luis has subsequently been registered as  a  British
    citizen.

40. He contended that ground 1 amounts to no more than a disagreement  with
    the  decision  properly  reached.  There  was  voluminous  evidence  of
    contacts between them. Over 300 pages were produced in  the  claimants'
    bundle. There was in addition the report.

41. The Judge did explain the basis upon which family life  was  continuing
    at [42]. There was  a  proper  evidential  basis  for  justifying  that
    finding. She had additional regard to regular contact,  including  some
    visits by the sponsor, demonstrating the  nature  of  the  relationship
    between them.  Accordingly, it is not correct  to  assert  that  family
    life had been severed since their mother came to the UK.

42. With regard to ground 2, he again submitted that this amounted  to  re-
    arguing submissions that had been rejected by the First-tier  Tribunal.
    He relied on the earlier decision of Judge  Mayall  that  it  would  be
    unlawful to require the sponsor to return to Bolivia as referred to  at
    [29] of Judge  Iqbal's  judgment.  In  the  earlier  decision,  it  was
    accepted that the best interests  of  the  UK  based  children  and  in
    particular, Luis, outweighed the interests of immigration control.  The
    Judge was accordingly bound to follow and apply that conclusion.

43. He also referred to the fact that Judge Brunnen did  not  even  mention
    this ground in the grant of permission. However,  the  entry  clearance
    officer is not precluded from pursuing it.

44. The contention for the first time that the Judge was  not  entitled  to
    take into account the fact that Luis was  granted  British  citizenship
    which post dated the date of decision was not a material error  in  the
    circumstances. The Judge  has  given  a  full  decision  regarding  the
    interests of the claimants to join their mother in the UK.

45. With regard to the entry clearance officer's public  interest  grounds,
    he submitted that the Judge dealt with these considerations  adequately
    at [41]. She is obliged to take into account the factors set out in the
    legislation. The entry clearance officer however simply disagrees  with
    the conclusion reached. It cannot be said  that  the  Judge  failed  to
    address the public  interest  considerations  or  that  she  failed  to
    realise that this was an entry clearance case.

Assessment

46. The entry clearance officer has advanced two grounds of appeal which  I
    have set out. The first issue raised is whether the First-tier Tribunal
    wrongly held that family life existed between the claimants  and  their
    mother in the UK. The contention is that it had not  been  demonstrated
    that family life exists between the parties as claimed,  having  regard
    to the absence of evidence relating to frequency of  contact.  Although
    the Judge referred to evidence of ongoing interaction, the  form  those
    interactions took, by way of letters,  texts,  Skype,  etc.  nor  their
    frequency was addressed.

47. I have considered the evidence available to the Judge as set out in the
    bundle of evidence before her, which  contained  over  300  pages.  The
    Judge stated at [42] that  she  has  considered  the  totality  of  the
    documentary evidence and has found that it does demonstrate the  nature
    of the relationship between the claimants and their mother.

48. Although she has not set out in detail what that evidence  constituted,
    she has referred to an examination  of  the  bundle  before  her.   The
    evidence considered from  the  bundle  included  a  report  from  Peter
    Horrocks, an independent social worker,  dated  7  February  2015.  The
    report is almost 40 pages in length (bundle tab 2, pages 340-379).  The
    social worker noted that in about May 2013, one of the carers  suffered
    from a heart attack and a stroke, leaving her partially  paralysed.  In
    September 2013, the mother went to Bolivia with her child, Andrea,  for
    a month in order to apply for their visas  to  come  here.  The  social
    worker had also  undertaken  detailed  telephone  interviews  with  the
    claimants on 24 January 2015. Both confirmed that they wished  to  come
    to the UK to join their mother, brother and sister. The sponsor  stated
    that in Bolivia she pays for Moises to have private medical  treatment.
    She currently pays $150 a month for his medication.

49. The social worker has set out his final conclusions and recommendations
    at 5.3 and 5.4. The claimants' situation is  one  of  insecurity;  they
    have suffered  from  the  lengthy  separation  from  their  mother  and
    although they have different needs in terms  of  their  functioning,  a
    uniting factor is the need for them to live together with their  mother
    for at least a period of their childhood.

50. Current arrangements for their care in Bolivia are  precarious,  partly
    related to health problems of their  grandmother  and  aunt,  but  also
    linked to the threat of Franklin's father and concerns about  the  true
    nature of Moises' health condition. The claimants are willing to accept
    the challenges to learn English and to adapt to life in the UK.

51. There are also records of money transfer  receipts  to  the  claimants.
    There are Facebook messages between the sponsor and the first  claimant
    for the period 28 August 2011 to  January  2015  as  well  as  Facebook
    messages between her and the second claimant from 4 August  2011  to  2
    August 2014. There are "What's App" messages between her and the  first
    claimant between August 2011 and January 2015. There  are  also  mobile
    records produced for the period January 2014 to January  2015  relating
    to calls to the claimants which have been marked with an asterisk.  The
    electronic communications are from pages 27 to 339.

52. In addition, the social worker report  referred  to  ongoing  emotional
    ties between their mother and the claimants. The  Judge  has  confirmed
    that she had taken account of all the documentation before her.

53. I have also had regard to  the  ECM  report  which  asserted  that  the
    claimants have provided no evidence to suggest that  their  mother  had
    supported either of them in any substantial way, either financially  or
    emotionally.  Nevertheless,  the  ECM  took  into   consideration   the
    claimants' allegations and  circumstances  appearing  at  the  date  of
    application and referred the cases to RCU to assess whether there might
    be sufficient evidence warranting the grant of permission  outside  the
    rules.

54. The conclusion was that whilst there may be a perceived interference of
    their  Article  8  rights,  this  is  justified  for  the  purposes  of
    maintaining an effective immigration control and is proportionate.

55. There appears at least to be an implied acceptance that family life did
    exist, otherwise the  need  to  justify  "the  perceived  interference"
    would not be relevant.

56. I accept the submission of Ms Isherwood that the Judge has  only  given
    brief reasons for her conclusions regarding the family life.  There was
    nevertheless considerable evidence  which  she  took  into  account  in
    making that finding;  the  evidence  demonstrated  regular  contact  by
    telephone, social media, as well as financial support  and  a  trip  to
    Bolivia shortly before the entry clearance applications were made.

57. I conclude therefore that the entry clearance officer's first ground of
    appeal is not made out.

58. Insofar as  the  second  ground  is  concerned,  the  position  is,  as
    submitted by Mr Mackenzie, that Judge Mayall had already decided in  or
    about February 2012 that it would be unlawful to  require  the  sponsor
    and her children to return  to  Bolivia.  He  accepted  that  the  best
    interests of the UK based children and in  particular  Luis  outweighed
    the interests of immigration control.

59. In those circumstances, it is not surprising that Judge Iqbal  followed
    and applied that conclusion.

60. The ground asserts that the Judge's assessment of reasonableness  fails
    to establish how the sponsor and her children are  integrated  into  UK
    society.

61. However, their Article 8 claims had been upheld in 2012. There has been
    no change in their circumstances.  The  sponsor  attended  the  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal and gave evidence. She had set  out  her
    position with regard to her integration into the UK in her evidence.

62. I accordingly find that the Judge was entitled on the  evidence  before
    her to conclude as she did that their mother could  not  reasonably  be
    expected to return to Bolivia to be with the claimants.

63. Insofar as the ground raised during the course of the hearing regarding
    the public interest, I find that the Judge has  had  proper  regard  to
    s.117B and has concluded that they weigh in favour of the claimants.

64. She noted that whilst individuals who are unable to  speak  English  or
    may not be financially independent and  may  constitute  an  additional
    burden on the taxpayer is to be considered, she  nonetheless  found  on
    balance that these matters in themselves do not weigh in favour of  the
    public interest. As  to  their  ability  to  speak  English,  they  are
    children, and the progression of their sibling Andrea after her arrival
    in the UK, through college and school, constitutes a testament to  what
    they may be able to achieve in the future.

65. The findings of the Judge Iqbal are sustainable and were open to her on
    the  evidence  presented.   The  decision  is  neither  irrational   or
    perverse.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    any material error of law. The decision shall accordingly stand.

    No anonymity direction is made.




    Signed   Date 18 September 2015


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer
-----------------------
[1]  At the hearing I was informed that the mother's leave to remain has
now been extended to 22 July 2018

