




Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number: OA/02244/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Determination Promulgated |
|On 5 September 2014                    |On 11 September 2014      |
|                                       |                          |


                                   Before


                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA

                                   Between

                              MISS SALLY KAYED
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY Of STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Not Represented
For the respondent:    Mr Kandola, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



1. The appellant is the Secretary of State for the home Department  and  the
   appellant is a national of Syria born on 1 January 1995. I shall  however
   for the sake of Convenience, refer to  the  Secretary  of  State  as  the
   appellant and Miss Kayed as the appellant which other  designations  they
   had before the First-tier Tribunal.


2. The appellant appealed against the decision of the  respondent  dated  16
   January 2014 to refuse the  appellant's  application  to  remain  in  the
   United Kingdom pursuant to paragraph 352D of the  Immigration  Rules  and
   Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights. First-tier Tribunal
   Judge Rys-Davies allowed the appellant's appeal pursuant to Article 8  of
   the European Convention on Human Rights.


3. Permission to appeal was granted by first-tier Tribunal  Judge  Lever  on
   14 July 2014 stating that it is arguable that the Judge who accepted that
   the appellant could not succeed under the Immigration Rules but  granting
   her appeal under Article 8. The Judge overly focusing on the  appellant's
   younger brother and other  individuals  as  opposed  to  the  appellant's
   circumstances as to whether there were compelling circumstances that  she
   could properly invoke Article 8.


4. The Judge in his determination in summary found the following.


   i. It was accepted that the appellant does not satisfy paragraph  350  2D
      of the Immigration Rules because she was over 18 years old at the date
      of application and she does not seek to appeal that decision so  there
      is no need to further address the issue.


  ii. Applying the guidance of the upper Tribunal in Gulshan (article  8-new
      rules-new  rules)  [2013]  UKUT  640  (IAC)  and  the  fact  that  the
      respondent has conceded that  there  are  arguably  good  reasons  for
      granting leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules in this case.


 iii. Applying the five stage test set out in the case of Razgar  [2004]  UK
      HL 27, there is family life between the appellant and her  father  and
      younger brother in the United Kingdom. The appellant is  aged  19  and
      remains dependent upon her parents and has never lived separately from
      her family.


  iv.  The  decision  to  refuse  the  appellant  entry  clearance   is   an
      interference with the appellant's right to respect for her family life
      and also the rights of her parents and her younger brother in  respect
      of their family life pursuant to the case of Bekou Betts.


   v.  The  decision  is  in  accordance  with  the  law  and  the  proposed
      interferences necessary in  the  interests  of  maintaining  effective
      immigration control. The only question remaining is proportionality.


  vi. In assessing proportionality the best interests of any child  affected
      by the decision must be  the  primary  consideration  as  required  by
      section 55 of the Boarders Act 2009.  In  this  case  the  appellant's
      younger brother is affected by the decision to  refuse  to  grant  the
      appellant entry clearance because it is keeping  him  apart  from  his
      mother, who cannot leave  Egypt  to  travel  to  the  United  Kingdom,
      because this would leave the appellant alone in Egypt.


 vii. Given the prevailing cultural and social norms in Egypt a young  woman
      such as the appellant cannot be left living alone without  any  family
      to support and watch out for her.  The  interest  of  the  appellant's
      brother is to live with both his  parents.  It  is  therefore  in  the
      appellant's brother's best interest to have his mother join him in the
      United Kingdom.


viii. The respondent's decision to refuse the appellant entry clearance  has
      the direct effect of keeping the appellant's mother and father  apart.
      The appellant's father is a refugee and reunion of a refugee with  the
      spouse is provided for within  the  Immigration  Rules  and  has  been
      accepted by the respondent as applicable in the present case  as  they
      granted the appellant's mother entry clearance.


  ix. It  is  not  been  suggested  by  the  respondent  that  it  would  be
      appropriate for the appellant's younger  brother  and  his  father  to
      return to Egypt or anywhere else in order to  achieve  family  reunion
      with the appellant and his wife.


   x. The background evidence provided by the appellant about the  situation
      in Egypt for Syrian refugees generally.  Her  situation  is  therefore
      somewhat precarious in Egypt.


  xi. Against these factors, it is borne in mind that the weight that is  to
      be attached to the fact that the Immigration Rules are intended to set
      out where the public interest lies. The appellant cannot  satisfy  the
      Immigration Rules.


 xii. In all the circumstances of this case, the  appellant's  situation  is
      compelling and  not  sufficiently  recognised  under  the  Immigration
      Rules. This is a case where the appellant's younger  brother  and  the
      appellant's mother are entitled to join the appellant  father  in  the
      United Kingdom and the appellant is excluded because she is just  over
      18 years of age.


xiii. Regardless of the  standard  of  accommodation  or  support  that  the
      appellant presently received in Egypt from a benefactor,  the  refusal
      of entry clearance will have her disproportionate and unduly harsh and
      unjustifiable consequences for the appellant and for the rest  of  her
      family, particularly her younger brother  was  best  interests  are  a
      paramount consideration and whose best interests are not outweighed by
      any single or combination of other factors in this  appeal,  including
      giving due deference to the requirements of the Immigration Rules.


 xiv. The appellant's appeal must be allowed under article 8 of the European
      Convention on Human Rights.








   The grounds of appeal


5. The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal state the  following  which  I
   summarise.


   i. It was accepted that the appellant could not meet the requirements  of
      the Immigration Rules.  To  grant  her  leave  to  enter  outside  the
      Immigration Rules, it  is  necessary  for  the  Judge  to  proceed  to
      consider whether there are compelling circumstances  not  sufficiently
      recognised under the Rules, as per the case of R (on  the  application
      of) Ngare v Secretary of State for the home Department [2013] EWHC 720
      (admin)


  ii. Whilst there may be arguable good reasons for granting  leave  outside
      Immigration Rules, there are  not  compelling  circumstances  in  this
      case. The appellant does not meet the requirements of the  Immigration
      Rules as she is now an adult.  Therefore,  she  is  able  to  live  an
      independent life without her family and would need to  show  something
      more than the normal emotional ties with her parents as per  the  case
      of Kugathas v SS HD [2003]  EWCA   civ  31.  The  appellant  is  being
      supported by Mr Mohamed Rabie Barakat in Egypt and  is  also  able  to
      receive support from the Syrian Refugee Association in Egypt  and  the
      UN High Commissioner for Refugees in Cairo.


 iii. Allowing the appellant to enter the United  Kingdom  would  cause  the
      family to resort to additional public funds, as the appellant's father
      has not yet secured employment.


  iv. The Judge has materially misdirected himself in law, in  allowing  the
      appeal and finding that there  are  compelling  circumstances  in  the
      appellant's case.




   The Rule 24 response


6. The respondent's reply to the grounds  of  appeal  states  the  following
   which I summarise. In the  grounds  of  appeal  it  is  stated  that  the
   appellant has not demonstrated more than normal emotional ties  with  her
   parents and can  continue  to  receive  support  in  Egypt  from  various
   organisations. The respondent's grounds of appeal merely take issue  with
   the findings of the First-tier Tribunal.


7. The Judge took into account the appellant's circumstances  in  Egypt  and
   found that there was family life between the appellant and her family  in
   the United Kingdom. The judge found that the appellant  has  never  lived
   separately from her family. The appellant is only  aged  19  and  remains
   dependent on her parents. Given the prevailing cultural and social  norms
   in Egypt, a young woman such as the appellant cannot be left living alone
   without any family to support and watch out for  her.  The  appellant  is
   relying on a benefactor in Egypt and given the  deteriorating  atmosphere
   in Egypt with Syrian refugees generally her situation is precarious.


8. The permission Judge who granted permission to appeal stated that it  was
   arguable that Judge relied heavily on the effect of the  refusal  on  the
   appellant's mother and younger brother rather than the appellant herself.
   However in the case of Beoku Betts, [2008] UK HL 39 it is stated that the
   effect on the entire family  should  be  assessed  when  considering  the
   proportionality of an action  that  interferes  with  family  life  under
   Article 8, not  merely  the  effect  on  the  appellant.  The  Judge  was
   therefore under a duty to  assess  the  effect  of  the  refusal  on  the
   appellant's mother, father  and  younger  brother  and  did  so  entirely
   correctly.


9. The Judge also referred to his duty under section  55  of  the  Boarder's
   Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 to treat the best interests  of  any
   child affected by the decision as  a  primary  consideration.  The  Judge
   correctly applied the same in respect of the appellant's younger  brother
   who is resident in the United Kingdom.


10. The Judge made reference to case law and statutory provisions which  are
   directly relevant to the appellant and applied  these  correctly  to  the
   facts at hand. No other conclusion  to  the  case  was  possible  on  the
   evidence and arguments presented at the hearing.


   The Hearing


11. The Tribunal received a letter by fax dated 3 September  2014  from  the
   appellant's representatives, stating "I write  to  inform  you  that  the
   respondent's representative will not be attending the appeal  hearing  in
   the case on Friday, 3 September 2014". She has since entered  the  United
   Kingdom by a non-lawful means and has called the Asylum Screening Unit in
   Croydon on 1 September 2014 to lodge a claim for asylum. (ASU  call  ref:
   4947). We would invite the appellant to take what action she sees fit  in
   light of this development.


12. In the submissions made by Mr Kandola, he  relied  on  the  respondent's
   grounds of appeal and said that the Judge  materially  erred  in  law  in
   allowing the appellant's appeal pursuant to Article 8.


   Decision on the error of law


13. The Judge was legally bound to consider the effect  of  the  respondents
   denial of entry clearance to the appellant and the impact it had  on  the
   family life of all those who share family  life  with  the  appellant  as
   required by the case of Bekou-Betts.   Baroness  Hale  observed  in  that
   case, that 'the right to respect for the family life of  one  necessarily
   encompasses the right to respect for the family life of others,  normally
   a spouse or minor children, with whom that family life is  enjoyed'.  The
   Judge therefore had a positive duty to take into account  the  impact  of
   the respondent's decision on all those who share  family  life  with  the
   appellant.


14. It was common ground that the appellant cannot succeed pursuant  to  the
   Immigration Rules. It is, clear that the Judge was alive to the fact that
   there must be compelling circumstances present in the appellant's  appeal
   for her to succeed under Article 8 when she cannot meet the  requirements
   of the Immigration Rules.


15. The Judge found ample compelling circumstances in this  case  which  are
   set out at length in his careful and detailed  determination.  The  Judge
   was entitled to find that the appellant has family life with  her  father
   and younger brother  and  her  relationship  is  over  and  above  normal
   emotional ties expected between adults as the appellant has  never  lived
   without her family as she still dependent on her  parents  and  has  just
   recently passed her 18th birthday.


16. The Judge was entitled to conclude that by not  granting  the  appellant
   entry clearance to United Kingdom has had the impact of breaking  up  the
   family unit as two members of the family are in the  United  Kingdom  and
   two members of the family are in Egypt. He was entitled to conclude  that
   the respondent's decision has the consequence of keeping the  appellant's
   mother away from her son and husband who are in the United Kingdom as she
   cannot leave the appellant alone in Egypt with a benefactor  who  is  not
   related to the appellant.


17. The Judge was entitled to take into account that the appellant was  only
   19 years of age, living in Egypt with a benefactor and her situation  was
   precarious. He was entitled to take into account the culture  from  which
   the appellant comes and background  evidence  which  sets  out  that  the
   deteriorating atmosphere in Egypt for Syrian refugees generally.  He  was
   also entitled to find on the evidence that  the  appellant  was  a  young
   vulnerable woman living alone in Egypt.


18. It is implicit in the determination that the Judge considered  that  the
   appellant is not able to live on her own,  without  one  of  her  parents
   which is why the appellant's mother stayed with the appellant even though
   she has been granted entry clearance the United Kingdom in line with  her
   husband and son.


19. The respondent's grounds of appeal are no more than a quarrel  with  the
   Judge's findings on the facts and the conclusions  reached  thereon.  The
   Judge correctly applied the law and came to a sustainable conclusion that
   the appellant's  circumstances  were  sufficiently  compelling  that  she
   should succeed pursuant to Article  8  even  though  she  cannot  succeed
   pursuant  to  the  Immigration  Rules.  There  is  nothing  perverse   or
   irrational in the conclusions that the Judge reached on the evidence.


20. The Judge was also entitled to find the appellant's father who has  been
   recognised as a refugee in the United Kingdom that family reunion  cannot
   take place in any other country but in the United Kingdom.


21. I find there the Judge's reasoning was not  perverse  or  irrational  in
   his analysis of and his conclusion on the evidence. I therefore find that
   the respondent's grounds of appeal has no merit and the decision  of  the
   first-tier Tribunal stands.


21. It follows that the appeal is dismissed.

    DECISION

I dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.


Signed by


Mrs                                 S                                  Chana


A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal     Dated this  5th  day  of  September
    2014





