







Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/02345/2014

                                                            OA/02347/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                 |     Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On: 20 April 2015                     |                                     |
|                                      |On 30 April 2015                     |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                         Mr Laljibhi Fulabhai Rabari
                        Mrs SakarBen Laljibhai Rabari
                        (no anonymity direction made)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                           entry clearance officer
                                                                  Respondent
Representation
For the Appellants:    Mr P Bonavero, counsel (instructed by Turbervilles
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellants are husband and wife. They are nationals of India. They
      appealed against the respondent's decision dated 25  January  2014  to
      refuse to grant them entry clearance to join their son, "the sponsor",
      who is a British citizen.


   2. In the determination promulgated on 5 December  2014,  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge dismissed their appeals under the Immigration Rules and
      pursuant to Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.


   3. On 9 February 2015,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Colyer  granted  the
      appellants permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal stating that  it
      is arguable  that  the  Judge  misdirected  himself  in  various  ways
      including the finding that the appellants had failed to show that they
      required long term personal care to perform every day  tasks.  It  was
      also arguable that the Judge failed to give  proper  reasons  for  not
      following the doctor's assessment of the physical capabilities of each
      appellant.


   4. Mr Rabari is 75 years old and his wife is 72. They live together in  a
      rural village in Gujarat. Their sponsor is their only son.


   5. It was contended before the first-tier Tribunal  that  the  appellants
      are both in poor health.


   6. Mr Bonavero, who also represented the appellants before the First-tier
      Tribunal, contended that in the light of the evidence  disclosed,  the
      Judge  could  not  properly  have  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
      appellants do not require long term personal care to perform every day
      tasks. The Judge noted that the appellants  provided  medical  reports
      from a single doctor, Dr Thakar. He had been their family doctor since
      2005. The Judge stated that "......it would be assumed therefore  that
      he did have some knowledge about the appellants."  The  letters  dated
      October 2014 set out in more detail the  medical  conditions  of  each
      appellant. The Judge stated that he has taken those into account [10].


   7. The Judge went on to find at paragraph 13 that it  was  impossible  to
      accept that a qualified medical doctor would describe his practice  as
      "a Poola Nursing Home" unless it actually was  a  nursing  home.  That
      evidence cast doubt over the whole of  the  claim  that  there  is  no
      private  care  available  to  the  appellants  in  the  locality.   He
      considered that  the  claims  that  appear  in  their  statements  are
      embellishments and are not accurate.


   8. The Judge went on to state [14] that this casts doubt over  the  whole
      of the claim as regards the availability of carers and why they  could
      not go into a residential home.


   9. Mr Bonavero submitted that in fact the sponsor had  been  asked  about
      this during the hearing and he explained that it  was  not  a  nursing
      home in the sense understood in the UK. It did not provide residential
      care. This was consistent with the fact that Dr Thakar had been caring
      for the  appellants  despite  the  fact  that  they  are  plainly  not
      residents of a nursing home. Accordingly, the Judge  appears  to  have
      discounted the sponsor's explanation without giving good  reasons  for
      doing so.


  10. Mr Bonavero referred to  the  letters  produced  in  respect  of  each
      appellant from Dr Thakar, Appellants' bundle  p.  43.  The  letter  is
      headed "Medicare". The  words  "Poola  Nursing  Home"  appear  in  the
      heading. Underneath that, the names of the two doctors,  Dr  Vijay  C.
      Thaker and Dr Smita V. Thaker, are  set  out.  They  are  respectively
      described  as  physician  and  cardiologist,  and   obstetrician   and
      gynaecological specialist.


  11. Accordingly, the fact that the letter refers to Poola Nursing Home  is
      not in any way determinative that it is in fact a nursing home in  the
      conventional  sense.  The  fact  that  the  doctors  referred  to  are
      specialists  in  areas  not  apparently  related  to  a  nursing  home
      militates against the finding that  it  was  not  a  residential  home
      providing full time care to patients.


  12. Apart from this having been explained to the  Judge  during  evidence,
      each letter relied on and produced refers in detail to the  individual
      problems of each appellant,  noting  that  the  appellants  have  been
      patients under his treatment as outdoor patients  from  December  2005
      and December 2013 respectively.


  13. The Judge has, as a result of 'this dubious finding',  found  that  it
      casts doubt over the whole of  the  claim.  Accordingly,  Mr  Bonavero
      submitted  that  this  has  affected  the  Judge's  approach  to   the
      credibility of the claim as a whole.


  14. He pointed out that the Judge also  referred  to  the  fact  that  the
      appellants have hired a number of carers in the  past,  although  they
      have been unreliable. This therefore is an indication that carers  are
      available in the local area. He also found that it was  understandable
      that they may well be suspicious of different carers because of  their
      past experiences. One carer was caught  stealing  from  them  and  was
      dismissed on the spot.


  15. Mr Bonavero  submitted  that  the  Judge  failed  to  have  regard  to
      paragraph E-ECDR.2.5(a) of the rules which requires that the applicant
      must be unable, even with the practical  and  financial  help  of  the
      sponsor, to obtain the required level of care  in  the  country  where
      they are living because it is not available and there is no person  in
      that country who can reasonably provide it.


  16. Mr Bonavero also  submitted  that  the  Judge  found  that  the  Entry
      Clearance Manager had made a fair observation concerning the  opinions
      of Dr Thaker and how his conclusions were reached. That seemed  to  be
      based at least in part on what he  was  told  by  the  appellants.  He
      submitted that it is unclear how or why such a conclusion was reached.
      Every doctor relies at least initially on what the patient tells  him.
      In any event, that appeared to contradict what the Judge  had  already
      found at paragraph 10, namely that it would be assumed that Dr  Thaker
      did have some knowledge of the appellants. That is because he had been
      a family doctor since 2005.


  17. Mr Bonavero referred to the detailed letters  dated  31  October  2014
      relating to each appellant from Dr Thaker at pages 43-44 respectively.
      He also referred to the letters relating to each  appellant  dated  10
      November 2014 at page 43. There were also  numerous  reports  produced
      relating to the history and findings in  respect  of  each  appellant.
      There are letters dated December 2013 noting  the  second  appellant's
      suffering from osteoarthritis in  her  knee,  hypertension  and  chest
      pains, requiring attention by a close relative  for  her  well  being.
      There are other reports pre-dating the dates of application  in  which
      the individual treatment and findings by the doctor in respect of each
      appellant are given.


  18. Accordingly Mr Bonavero submitted that the undisputed evidence  before
      the First-tier Tribunal was that Dr Thaker had been their  doctor  for
      many years.


  19. The evidence also disclosed that there were severe mobility  problems,
      including ordinary day to day tasks such as cooking and the like. This
      is clearly set out by the doctor at page 43. Even  'light  activities'
      such as walking by the first appellant  could  not  be  performed.  He
      cannot perform normal day to day  tasks.  Mr  Rabari  has  high  blood
      pressure. He also suffers from difficulties in breathing as  a  result
      of long term damage to his lungs. He is increasingly breathless,  even
      when not doing anything particularly active. He frequently  has  chest
      infections and needs an inhaler.


  20.  These  conditions  affect  his  mobility.  He  is  often  unwell  and
      bedridden. His health has deteriorated a great deal  according  to  Dr
      Thaker's report.


  21. With regard to the second appellant, she suffers osteoarthritis in her
      knees. This results in discomfort and the loss of movement. Her  chest
      pains should be taken seriously. She needs someone to look  after  her
      24 hours a day. There is no care home facility around the  area  where
      they are living. There is great difficulty in finding a good, reliable
      personal carer.


  22. Her condition has also affected her mobility in that she is often very
      ill and can barely walk. She can no longer perform normal day  to  day
      tasks. Her health has also deteriorated a great deal.


  23. Mr Bonavero also complained about the finding [19] that the appellants
      "..... have been able to survive adequately in their own country  with
      the financial health (sic) of the sponsor".


  24. That reasoning placed an impossibly high threshold for success in such
      appeals. The appellants have survived despite the  lack  of  necessary
      care. It is not the case however that they should be required to  wait
      until they were on the threshold of death before  an  appeal  of  this
      nature could succeed. By definition, in appeals  such  as  these,  the
      dependent relative has managed to survive despite  the  lack  of  care
      required for their needs.


  25. Moreover, although the Judge found that the appellants have been  able
      to pay for their care in the past, that ignored the  evidence  of  the
      'Sarpanch' (Head) of their village, who confirmed in a statement  that
      they have had great difficulties finding a responsible carer and  that
      one had been caught stealing from them. That  has  resulted  in  their
      fear of letting a stranger into the home.


  26. The Rule merely requires the applicant to demonstrate  that  the  care
      which they require is not available and there is  no  person  in  that
      country who can reasonably provide it.


  27. In the circumstances, having regard to their experiences, it would not
      be reasonable, he contended,  to  require  the  appellants  to  employ
      another carer in similar circumstances. Nor had the  Judge  considered
      whether, even if home care is available, it would  be  reasonable  for
      the appellants to make use of it.


  28. He submitted that in the circumstances, there are  no  findings  which
      can be preserved as the Judge has made findings which  have  not  been
      supported by the  evidence.  There  have  been  misdirections  in  law
      rendering his decision unsustainable.


  29. On behalf  of  the  respondent,  Ms  Holmes  relied  on  the  Rule  24
      submission. The  grounds  are  essentially  a  disagreement  with  the
      findings of the Judge. He took all the evidence into consideration and
      did not accept that the true position of the appellants was accurately
      represented.


  30. Moreover, his comments at  paragraph  10  about  Dr  Thaker  are  only
      initial observations. He has given a full analysis of that evidence at
      paragraph 18.


  31. She submitted  that  E-ECDR.2.5  is  stringent.  With  regard  to  the
      findings of the Judge at paragraph 13 relating to  the  Poola  Nursing
      Home, she submitted that the Judge had been entitled to find  that  it
      was a nursing home. Moreover, he found that that evidence  cast  doubt
      over the claim  that  there  is  no  private  care  available  to  the
      appellants in the locality.


  32. The findings at paragraph 19 as to whether  the  evidence  shows  that
      they require long term personal care to perform every day  tasks  were
      appropriate and open to him. They are able to travel independently  to
      visit their doctors and to make trips to obtain food and  other  items
      as found.


  33. There is an apparent conflict  between  those  findings  and  what  is
      contained in Dr Thaker's letters at pages 43 and 44. Although they may
      be helpful on the face of it, they do not identify what the day to day
      tasks are.


  34. It is not clear from the letters how bad the conditions  are  for  the
      appellants as they still survive. There was a lack of detail to assess
      that issue.  The  Judge  was  entitled  to  have  doubts  about  their
      situation.


  35. There was also conflicting  evidence  between  that  provided  by  the
      Teacher of a primary school,  Ms  Jarjibhai  Horabhai  Rabari  in  the
      statement in support of their appeals, bundle p. 46. It is asserted by
      her that the appellants have hired carers who have stolen from them in
      the past and have been unreliable and  untrustworthy.  The  appellants
      only referred to the theft by a carer and did not state  that  all  of
      them were dishonest and untrustworthy - the first appellant's  witness
      statement at paragraph 9.


  36. In reply, Mr Bonavero submitted that it was not only a small  part  of
      the claim that the Judge found to be affected  by  the  Poola  Nursing
      Home issue [13] but the Judge went on to find  that  this  cast  doubt
      over the whole of the claim as regards the availability of  carers  as
      to why they could not go into a residential home.


  37. There was no conflicting evidence before the Judge.






Assessment


  38. The appellants were at the date of the appeal  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal, 75 and 72 years old respectively.  They  lived  in  a  rural
      village.


  39. The evidence produced showed that both are in poor health.  Mr  Rabari
      suffers from hypertension, chronic obstructive pulmonary  disease  and
      gastrooseophagal   reflux   disease.   Mrs   Rabari    suffers    from
      osteoarthritis, hypertension and chest pain. There was also  reference
      to  their  loneliness  and  isolation  leading  them   to   developing
      depression and anxiety.


  40. Both appellants have restrictions relating to their  mobility  and  in
      particular the first appellant  has  difficulties  moving  about.  The
      result is that they are not able to perform ordinary tasks relating to
      their personal hygiene apart from being unable to cook for  themselves
      or to clean the house.


  41. The  respondent  has  accepted  that  the  suitability  and  financial
      arrangements were made out.


  42. With regard to the eligibility requirements at E-ECDR.2.4 and 2.5, the
      appellants must as a result of age,  illness  or  disability,  require
      long term personal care to perform every  day  tasks.  Moreover,  they
      must be unable, even with the practical  and  financial  help  of  the
      sponsor, to obtain the required level of care where  they  are  living
      because it is not available and there is no person in that country who
      can reasonably provide it.


  43. The Judge found that it was significant that the appellants'  doctor's
      address is "Poola Nursing Home." That had been referred to during  the
      sponsor's oral evidence. He explained that it was not a  nursing  home
      in the sense understood in the UK as it did  not  provide  residential
      care.


  44. Further, as already referred  to  above,  the  identification  of  the
      specialities of the two doctors in the letterhead is inconsistent with
      the assertion that this is a residential nursing home  as  opposed  to
      the address of the hospital where the doctors practice.


  45. The Judge's findings with regard to the Nursing home at paragraphs  13
      and 14, which I have set out  above,  did  result  in  the  subsequent
      finding that the claims that appear in the appellants' statements  are
      embellishments and not accurate. It cast doubt over the whole  of  the
      claim regarding the availability of carers. The actual finding by  the
      Judge was that the documents produced  by  the  appellants  themselves
      demonstrated that there is a nursing home in the local area [13]. That
      constituted a material misdirection in the circumstances.


  46. The Judge's findings that the appellants  do  not  require  long  term
      personal care to perform every day tasks  are  also  problematic.  The
      question is not whether, as stated by the Judge, the  appellants  have
      been able  to  survive  adequately  in  their  own  country  with  the
      financial help of the sponsor [19], but whether they  had  shown  that
      the care which they require is not available and there is no person in
      the country who can reasonably provide it.


  47. I accept the submission in this respect that the Judge's approach  and
      reasoning required too high a threshold for success.


  48. Given the fact that the appellants  have  had  carers  who  have  been
      dishonest and stolen from them in the past, causing them distress, the
      question is whether it would be reasonable to require them  to  employ
      another carer in similar circumstances. Nor  has  it  been  considered
      whether, even if such home care was available, it would be  reasonable
      in the circumstances for the appellants to be required to make use  of
      it.


  49. The Judge  concluded  without  an  appropriate  consideration  of  the
      evidence produced that they had not shown that they required long term
      personal care to perform every day tasks. The evidence in that respect
      was set out in their respective witness statements  and  confirmed  by
      their sponsor, as well as  Dr  Thaker  who  identified  their  medical
      problems, stating that they are unable to take care of  themselves  or
      one another. Finally, there were  members  of  the  village  who  also
      described  their  predicament,  which  was  not  properly  taken  into
      account.


  50. I accordingly find  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      involved  the  making  of   an  error  on  a  point  of  law.  In  the
      circumstances, I set aside the determination.


  51. Both parties accepted that if I reached that conclusion, the  decision
      would have to be remade, without preserving any facts.


  52. I have considered Mr Bonavero's submission that this is an appropriate
      case to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for such a decision.  I
      have had regard to the Senior President's Practice Statement  relating
      to the issue of remitting to the First-tier Tribunal.


  53. I am satisfied that the extent of judicial finding which is  necessary
      in order for the decision to be made will be extensive. The appellants
      are entitled to have their case considered on the  basis  of  all  the
      evidence presented. It will have to therefore be a complete re-hearing
      with no findings preserved. I have also had regard to  the  overriding
      objective and conclude that it would be just and  fair  to  remit  the
      case.


  54. In the circumstances, I direct that the  appeal  be  remitted  to  the
      First-tier Tribunal (Taylor House) for a fresh decision to be made.


  55. The necessary administrative arrangements will need to take place.









Notice of Decision


         Having found that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved
the making of          material errors of law, it is set aside.  The  appeal
is remitted to Taylor House for a       fresh decision to be made.


         No anonymity direction is made.


         Signed                              Dated 28/4/2015


         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer




