
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/02981/2013
     OA/02982/2013
     OA/02983/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination  Promulgated    |
|On 22 January 2015                            |On 5 February 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                     Entry Clearance Officer - islamabad
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                 Zaheer Khan
                                 Nadir Khan
                                 Sardar Khan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr Khan, instructed by Jusmount & Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondents, Zaheer Khan, Nadir Khan and Sardar Khan, are  citizens
    of Afghanistan.  They are brothers.  The first respondent was  born  on
    20 March 2003, the  second  respondent  28  February  1995,  the  third
    respondent 14 October 1999.  I shall hereafter refer to the respondents
    as the appellants and the Entry Clearance Officer as the respondent (as
    they  appeared  respectively  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal).    By
    decisions of the respondent dated 22 October 2013, the appellants  were
    refused entry clearance to the United Kingdom as dependant relatives of
    a refugee, their older sponsor brother, Omar Khan (paragraph 352 of  HC
    395).  The appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Juss)
    which, in a determination promulgated on  10  July  2014,  allowed  the
    appeals.  The respondent now appeals, with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2.  The  application  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Saffer)   for
    permission was out of time.  Judge Saffer refused to extend time.   The
    application was renewed to the Upper Tribunal (Judge Gleeson)  and,  by
    an order dated 17 September 2014, she admitted the  application  having
    received an explanation for the delay and having found that it  was  in
    the interests of justice  to  do  so  (paragraph  21(7)  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).  Mr Khan, who appeared
    for the appellants before  the  Upper  Tribunal  at  Birmingham  on  22
    January 2015, did not  satisfy  me  that  I  had  any  jurisdiction  to
    interfere or reverse Judge Gleeson's grant of permission.  Accordingly,
    the initial hearing proceeded.

 3. This is a case of a de facto adoption by the brother of the  appellants
    and his wife.  I understand that the sponsor brother's  wife  has  been
    granted entry clearance to join her  husband  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    Judge Juss found that the appellants were also entitled,  as  de  facto
    adopted children of the couple, to  entry  clearance.   The  respondent
    disputes that.  The respondent relies on Mohamoud (Paragraphs 352D  and
    309A  -  de  facto  adoption)  Ethiopia  [2011]  UKUT  00378  (IAC)  in
    particular at [21] and [27]:

    Unfortunately, neither Mr. Alim nor Ms. Saunders  referred  me  to  the
     judgment of the Court of Appeal in MK (Somalia) & Ors v Entry Clearance
     Officer [2008] EWCA Civ 1453, paragraph 17 of which reads:

      "17. In the present case (and, I accept, many others), this test of de
      facto adoption is not satisfied because it requires that both adoptive
      parents  have  spent  at  least  18  months  living  with  the   child
      immediately prior to the  child's  application  for  entry  clearance,
      whereas in an asylum case at least one of the  parental  figures  will
      usually be in the United Kingdom, having successfully sought asylum."




    It is clear in the present case that paragraph 309A of HC 395 cannot be
    satisfied since the sponsor brother has not resided with the appellants
    for a period of 18 months, including at  least  12  months  immediately
    prior to the making of the application for entry clearance.  As I  told
    the representatives and  the  sponsor  at  the  hearing,  Judge  Juss's
    determination has to be set aside because it is wrong in  law.   It  is
    true that Judge Juss also allowed the appeal under Article  8  but,  as
    the grounds of appeal point out, he did  so  solely  because  he  found
    (incorrectly) that  the  appellants  succeeded  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.  His analysis  on  Article  8  began  and  ended  there.   I  am
    satisfied that the entire determination should  be  set  aside  as  the
    Article 8 analysis is inevitably tainted by the error of law concerning
    the application of the Immigration Rules.

 4. Mr Khan  acknowledged  the  appellants  could  not  succeed  under  the
    Immigration Rules and both he and Mr Smart made representations  to  me
    (on the basis of the evidence before the Tribunal - I did not hear  any
    new oral evidence) as regards Article 8 ECHR.   Having  set  aside  the
    determination, I reserved the remaking of the decision.

 5. Mohamoud makes it clear that, whilst an appellant may not  fall  within
    the provisions  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  Article  8  ECHR  may  be
    "available in appropriate cases".  I  acknowledge  that  an  appeal  on
    Article 8 grounds may succeed  in  an  out-of-country  entry  clearance
    case.   It  is  important,   however,   to   ensure   that   a   proper
    proportionality assessment is carried out,  weighing  the  interference
    which the  immigration  decision  may  cause  to  family  relationships
    against the public interest concerned with regulating immigration by  a
    transparent and consistent system.  In the present case, the appellants
    have established by reference to DNA evidence that they are related  to
    the sponsor brother.  Mr Khan told me that the children had been in the
    care of the sponsor brother before he came to  the  United  Kingdom  in
    July 2006.  He said that, notwithstanding the separation,  the  sponsor
    brother and the appellants have maintained a  strong  bond  by  way  of
    regular communication.  However, as Mr Smart pointed out, the  youngest
    appellant was only 3 years old when the sponsor  brother  came  to  the
    United Kingdom; he is now nearly 12 years old.  I am prepared to accept
    that the sponsor brother and the children have maintained  contact  but
    the strength of their family life while physically separated for nearly
    nine years is,  in  my  opinion,  outweighed  by  the  public  interest
    concerned with refusing entry to  those  who  cannot  comply  with  the
    Immigration Rules.  I am not satisfied on the evidence  that the family
    bond between the sponsor and the  children,  after  so  many  years  of
    living apart, is such that it  should  trump  or  outweigh  the  public
    interest in this instance.  For that reason, I dismiss the  appeals  on
    Article 8 grounds.  I am aware that the sponsor brother's wife may seek
    to make an application which will enable her to  bring  the  appellants
    (or at least the first and third appellants) with  her  to  the  United
    Kingdom.  However, that is a matter for the family and their  advisers.



Notice of Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated  10  July  2014  is
set aside.  I have remade the  decision.   The  appeals  against  the  ECO's
decisions dated 22 October 2012 are dismissed.


No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date 2 February 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
