
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/02033/2012
     OA/02035/2012
     OA/02029/2012
     OA/02031/2012



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On  21 May 2013                               |On 10 June 2013              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                                HALEEMA AHMED
                                MISS WAWREENA
                                 MISS REHAB
                                 MISS ANAIZA

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER-ABU DHABI

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants: Ms A. Radford, Counsel instructed by Maliks and Khan
Solicitors
For the Respondent: Ms Z. Kiss, Home Office Presenting Officer




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction and history

    1. The appellants are citizens of Pakistan. The first appellant is  the
       mother of the remaining appellants. They were born on 10 March 1984,
       1 July 2005, 6 January 2007 and 20 October 2009, respectively.

    2. On 5 October 2011 they applied for entry clearance as the spouse and
       children of a person present  and  settled  in  the  UK.  The  first
       appellant's application was refused under paragraphs  281(i)(a)  and
       320(7A) of HC 395 (as amended). The applications  of  the  remaining
       appellants were correspondingly refused under paragraph 301(i).

    3. Their appeals came before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Narayan  who
       dismissed them.  Permission  to  appeal  having  been  granted,  the
       appeals came before me.

    4. The basis of the refusal of these applications for  entry  clearance
       was  that  the  first  appellant  had  submitted  a  false  marriage
       registration  certificate,  evidenced  in  a  document  verification
       report ("DVR"). This led to the refusal under paragraph 320(7A)  and
       the conclusion that she is not validly married to the sponsor.

    5. The appellants had previously applied for  entry  clearance  on  the
       same basis in February 2010. Those applications were  also  refused,
       it having been said that a false marriage certificate  was  produced
       in support of the  application.  However,  the  appellants'  appeals
       against those decisions were allowed by Immigration Judge Keane in a
       determination promulgated on  7  September  2011.  He  also  gave  a
       direction that entry clearance be granted to the appellants.

    6. In refusing these present applications the Entry  Clearance  Officer
       ("ECO") stated in relation to the first appellant that "the document
       submitted (marriage registration certificate) at the appeal  [before
       Immigration  Judge  Keane]  was  not  submitted  at  the   time   of
       application or appeal." The reference to "appeal" I take to mean the
       notice of appeal, rather than the appeal hearing itself before Judge
       Keane, otherwise the comment makes no sense.

    7. In granting permission to appeal, Upper Tribunal Judge  Jordan  gave
       comprehensive directions which reflected the factual  complexity  of
       the appeals. The matter initially came before me on 26 February 2012
       for mention only. On that date, as  my  subsequent  directions  make
       clear, the respondent's representative did not have any case  papers
       and was not therefore in a position to confirm compliance with Judge
       Jordan's directions. Those  directions  were  reiterated  by  me  in
       writing on that date.

    8. The appeals next came on for hearing on 10 April 2013 when  I  heard
       submissions from the parties. At that hearing I decided  that  there
       was an error of law in the  decision  of  First-tier  judge  Narayan
       which required the decision to be set aside. The appeal was not able
       to proceed to a conclusion on that  date  because  the  respondent's
       representative sought time to consider the authorities  referred  to
       in the appellants' skeleton argument. On that date I issued  further
       directions which required the respondent to file and serve a written
       response to [6] of the appellant's skeleton argument.

    9. At the hearing on 21 May 2013, I was informed by  Ms  Kiss  for  the
       respondent that although she had recently had sight of  a  file  for
       the respondent, that file had not found its way to the hearing.  She
       was therefore without any respondent's papers and relied on  a  copy
       bundle provided to her by the Tribunal. She also  acknowledged  that
       the direction requiring  a  response  to  the  appellants'  skeleton
       argument had not been complied with.

   10. I shall refer to the parties' submissions as necessary in the course
       of my analysis.

Error of law

   11. The error of law that I identified at the hearing on 10  April  2013
       and which resulted in the decision being set aside was in  terms  of
       First-tier judge Narayan failing to have regard to the determination
       of Immigration Judge Keane who allowed the appeals  in  relation  to
       the earlier applications for entry clearance.

   12. The appeals before the First-tier Tribunal were considered without a
       hearing, the appellants indicating that course  on  the  notices  of
       appeal. It appears that Judge Narayan did not have  before  him  the
       determination of Immigration Judge Keane. However, it is plain  that
       he was aware that there was a previous determination of  appeals  by
       these appellants because it is referred to in the notice of decision
       of the first appellant in this appeal. Judge Narayan  also  referred
       to the fact of  the  previous  appeals  in  the  determination  when
       reciting the respondent's reasons for refusal.

   13. At the hearing on 10 April 2013, Ms Kenny initially  submitted  that
       the issue of the previous  determination  of  Judge  Keane  was  not
       raised in the grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal. However,
       as was established, that  is  not  the  case.  The  first  appellant
       specifically referred to that appeal, mentioning  the  judge's  name
       and the appeal reference number. She also referred to  the  marriage
       document that was in issue in that appeal.

   14. I am satisfied that Judge Narayan fell  into  error  in  determining
       these appeals without considering the determination of Judge  Keane.
       That determination should have been  the  starting  point  in  Judge
       Narayan's deliberations given the reference to it in the  notice  of
       decision refusing the first appellant's application,  and  the  fact
       that it was referred to in the  Entry  Clearance  Managers'  review.
       Although Judge  Narayan  was  not  provided  with  a  copy  of  that
       determination, it would have been possible for him to obtain it.  In
       the alternative, the respondent could have been directed to  provide
       a copy.

   15. Ms Radford made the additional point that the respondent should have
       provided the previous determination in accordance with rule 13(1)(c)
       of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure)  Rules  2005,  it
       being an unpublished document referred to in the notice of decision.

Re-making the decision

   16.  The  notices  of  decision  do  not  raise  any  issues  under  the
       Immigration Rules other  than  those  I  have  referred  to.  On  no
       occasion in the course of this appeal has any representative for the
       respondent suggested that, for example, issues  of  maintenance  and
       accommodation were at large and I note that evidence in  respect  of
       those aspects of the Rules was put before the ECO.

   17. Ms Radford submitted  that  given  that  Judge  Keane  had  given  a
       direction that entry clearance be granted, the ECO was not  entitled
       to refuse to grant entry clearance. She referred me to section 87(2)
       of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act")
       which states that "A person responsible for  making  an  immigration
       decision shall act in accordance with any relevant  direction  under
       subsection (1)." Judge Keane made such a direction.

   18. As I understood Ms Kiss' submission on that point it was that  if  I
       did not agree with her primary submission that the ECO was  entitled
       to refuse the applications, then I should find that entry  clearance
       should have been granted. However, she also suggested that  the  ECO
       would have been entitled to cancel the entry clearances immediately.

   19. In a sense, the application of s.87(2) and  whether  in  consequence
       the decisions of the ECO were not in  accordance  with  the  law  is
       dependant on the success of the appellants' main argument  which  is
       that the issues in this appeal had already been determined by  Judge
       Keane and there is nothing new to displace his conclusions. That  is
       in any event the outcome sought  on  behalf  of  the  appellants.  A
       conclusion that the decisions are not in accordance with the law  in
       consequence of s.87(2) is  the  appellants'  'fall  back'  position.
       However, as is apparent from my analysis below, the outcome of these
       appeals goes further than that.

   20. It is as well to start with a statement of the obvious, namely  that
       it  is  for  the  appellants  to  establish  that  they   meet   the
       requirements of the Rules, and that the standard they must meet is a
       balance of probabilities. The obvious also includes the  requirement
       that it  is  for  the  respondent  to  establish  on  a  balance  of
       probabilities that paragraph 320(7A) applies and, for  reasons  that
       are elaborated on below, it is evident that the respondent  has  not
       discharged that burden to the required standard.

   21. In accordance with established principle, I  take  as  the  starting
       point the determination of Judge  Keane.  The  applications  he  was
       dealing with were made in February 2010. The decisions to refuse the
       applications were made on 17 September 2010. There was a DVR  before
       him. Amongst the documents before me there is a  DVR  dated  1  July
       2010. That related to a document described as a marriage certificate
       and one Zahir Muhammad was apparently spoken to. Next  to  his  name
       are the words "secretary union council".

   22. It is apparent from [21] of Judge Keane's  determination  that  this
       was the same DVR that was before him, he having referred to the name
       of Zahir Muhammad and the four bullet points on the DVR. In  finding
       that the DVR did not  establish  that  a  false  document  had  been
       submitted he referred to evidence that he  had  before  him  to  the
       effect that a new system in relation  to  the  issuing  of  marriage
       certificates  had  been  instituted.  That  evidence  was  that  the
       marriage certificate is not issued by the Union Councils but by  the
       National Database and Registration Authority. He concluded that "The
       marriage registration certificate was not a document which the Union
       Council would have retained because it had never issued the document
       in the first place."

   23. At [20] he found that the original marriage certificate was in  fact
       in the possession of the ECO, and indeed the presenting  officer  at
       the hearing confirmed that this was the case. It  appears  from  the
       DVR that no original document was submitted which was  part  of  the
       basis for the conclusion that what was submitted was not  a  genuine
       document. Judge Keane remarked in [21] on the significance  of  this
       to the document verification process.

   24. Judge Keane concluded that there was  a  valid  marriage;  that  the
       document submitted to the ECO in  support  of  the  application  for
       entry clearance had not been  established  as  being  false.  Having
       heard other evidence in  relation  to  the  marriage  of  the  first
       appellant and the sponsor he concluded at [17] that he was "entirely
       satisfied that Mrs Ahmed and the sponsor were married to each  other
       at a village ceremony which took place in September 2004."  He  also
       noted that it was not disputed that the minor  appellants  were  the
       children of the  first  appellant  and  the  sponsor,  a  matter  of
       significance when considering whether they were validly married.

   25. In the notice of decision in the appeal before me it  is  said  that
       "the document submitted (marriage registration certificate)  at  the
       appeal [before Immigration Judge Keane] was  not  submitted  at  the
       time of application or appeal. Therefore, we did not have access  to
       the document until after the Immigration Judge's decision was made."

   26. However, as is apparent from the references at [23] above  to  Judge
       Keane's determination, it is clear that the judge was satisfied that
       the  original  document  was  in  fact  in  the  possession  of  the
       respondent prior to the appeal hearing before him.  It  is  not  the
       case therefore, as appears to be suggested in the notice of decision
       relating to the appeals before me, that Judge  Keane  was  assessing
       the DVR, or the validity of the marriage, on some new document  that
       had not been before the ECO. The reference at [11] of Judge  Keane's
       determination  to  a  further  copy  of  the  marriage  registration
       certificate having been produced does not detract from  the  judge's
       findings in relation to what document was in fact the subject of the
       DVR. On that analysis, there was no basis for  the  refusal  of  the
       applications which are the subject of this appeal. The  question  of
       the  genuineness  of  the  marriage  certificate  had  already  been
       adjudicated on by Judge Keane.

   27. At the hearing on 21 May, I asked Ms Kiss whether she  was  able  to
       say what marriage document was before the ECO prior  to  the  appeal
       before Judge Keane, and what  marriage  document  was  before  Judge
       Keane. She was unable to do so. This brings the issue  back  to  the
       basic proposition that it is for the respondent  to  establish  that
       paragraph 320(7A) applies.

   28. In the circumstances, it is not necessary to  consider  the  further
       DVR relied on by the respondent in terms of the refusals  which  are
       the subject of these appeals. The question of the  validity  of  the
       marriage is already the subject of an unappealed decision  of  Judge
       Keane and it has not been  established  that  there  was  any  'new'
       document before him which informed his decision.

   29. Even if it were necessary to evaluate the evidence in the latest DVR
       dated 15 December 2011 I would still not have  been  satisfied  that
       the respondent had established that the appellants had  submitted  a
       false document. The DVR describes the type of document submitted  as
       "Nikah Nama (Marriage  Certificate)",  although  the  two  types  of
       document are different, as established in the evidence before  Judge
       Keane. That is of no significance however, because the Form  No.  is
       given. This corresponds to the "Marriage  Registration  Certificate"
       in the respondent's bundle. It appears  that  the  "secretary  union
       council Jhanda" stated that there is  no  record  for  the  marriage
       certificate in their office. That of course presupposes  that  there
       would be such a record. I have  already  referred  to  the  evidence
       accepted by Judge Keane to the effect that the  Union  Council  does
       not issue those certificates.

   30. That aside, as Ms Radford submitted, there is no complete record  of
       the conversation between the ECO's  representative  and  the  person
       he/she spoke to. As she submitted,  it  is  not  known  whether  the
       individual spoken to confirmed that there would  have  been  such  a
       record if the marriage had taken place. To that  I  would  add  that
       there is no information from the respondent as to the process, basis
       or reliability of the record keeping.

   31. All those observations must be considered  in  the  context  of  the
       evidence accepted by Judge Keane which gave  support  to  the  claim
       that the first appellant and the sponsor are validly  married.  That
       evidence was reinforced by  the  evidence  before  me  in  terms  of
       continued  contact  between  the  appellants  and  the  sponsor  and
       financial support from the sponsor. There is  no  dispute  that  the
       minor appellants are the children of the  first  appellant  and  the
       sponsor. As previously indicated, this was a matter that  was  taken
       into account by Judge Keane.

   32. Accordingly, I am not satisfied that the respondent  has  discharged
       the burden of proof in establishing that a false document  has  been
       submitted in support of the applications. I am  satisfied  that  the
       first appellant has established that she is (validly) married to the
       sponsor. None of the other requirements of the Rules are said to  be
       in issue in relation to any of the appellants.

   33. Section 87(1) of  the  2002  Act  allows  the  Tribunal  to  give  a
       direction for the purpose of giving effect to its decision.  Section
       81 states that 'Tribunal' means the  First-tier  Tribunal.  However,
       section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007
       allows the Upper Tribunal, in re-making  a  decision,  to  make  any
       decision that the First-tier Tribunal could  make  if  it  were  re-
       making the decision. This therefore permits the  Upper  Tribunal  to
       direct the grant of entry clearance, which I do.

Decision

   34. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  an
       error on a point of law. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is
       set aside and the decision re-made  allowing  the  appeals  of  each
       appellant under the Immigration Rules.

   35. I direct that each of the  appellants  be  granted  entry  clearance
       forthwith.



Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

    In the light of my decision to re-make the decision in the  appeals  by
    allowing them, I have considered whether to make a fee award (rule  23A
    (costs) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure)  Rules  2005
    and section 12(4)(a) of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
    2007).


    I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance Note:  Fee  Awards
    in Immigration Appeals (December 2011).


    I make a whole fee award.


    Reasons: The appellants' appeals have been allowed on the merits.






Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek
                                                 22/05/13
