
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/02657/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                          |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2nd December 2014                       |                                |
|                                           |On 14th January 2015            |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER Tribunal JUDGE KELLY


                                   Between

                   THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ISLAMABAD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MISS CHAMMAN BATOOL
                          (ANONYMITY NOT DIRECTED)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
                    Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Q Iqbal, Solicitor.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The respondent is a citizen of  Pakistan  who  was  born  on  the  21st
    February 1992. The Entry Clearance Officer (ECO)  appeals  against  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Dearden, promulgated on  the  1st
    September 2014, to allow the respondent's appeal against the refusal to
    issue her with a European Economic Area (EEA) Residence Permit in order
    that she may reside with her father, Mr Shafqat  Ali  (hereafter,  "the
    sponsor") in the United Kingdom.

 2. The sponsor is a Belgian  national  who,  the  appellant  accepts,  was
    exercising his EEA treaty rights in the United Kingdom at the  material
    time.

Background to the appeal

 3. The respondent had applied for a Residence Permit alongside her younger
    siblings, Ali Raza and Alifa Batool, both of whom were under the age of
    21 years at the date of the decision.

 4. The material part of the ECO's decision reads as follows -

         You state that you wish to join your father who is residing in  the
         UK as a Belgian national. As you are over 21, in order  to  qualify
         as a family member you are required to  be  dependent  on  the  EEA
         national. You state  that  you  are  financially  reliant  on  your
         sponsor, and spend around 4000PKR per month on  living  costs.  You
         nave not  submitted  any  documents  to  demonstrate  any  kind  of
         financial dependence on your father, or where you receive  4000PKER
         per  month  from.  You  have  also  not  provided   any   financial
         circumstances. Furthermore, you mother states  in  her  application
         that she only has one dependent child, your  younger  sister.  This
         suggests that you are not dependent on your mother. Given that  you
         have failed to demonstrate a financial dependency on your  sponsor,
         I am not  satisfied  that  you  are  dependent  as  claimed.  I  am
         therefore not satisfied that you are a family member in  accordance
         with Regulation  7  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area
         Regulations 2006.

 5.  In  allowing  the  appeal,  Judge  Dearden  accepted   the   sponsor's
    explanation that the respondent's mother had made "a simple  error"  in
    stating that she had only one dependent daughter, and that she  had  in
    fact two dependent daughters and one dependent son [paragraphs  16  and
    17].

 6. The core of Judge Dearden's  reasoning  concerning  the  issue  of  the
    respondent's financial dependency, and that which  the  ECO  argues  is
    fundamentally  flawed,  is  to  be  found  at  paragraph  19   of   his
    determination:

         I conclude that since 1995 or 1996 Mr Shafqat Ali has been  working
         out of Pakistan. It must follow [that] because Ali Raza  and  Afifa
         Batool have been granted entry clearance that the  Entry  Clearance
         Officer was satisfied that he had been exercising treaty rights and
         been sending remittances to Pakistan to maintain his family. Whilst
         the refusal letter complains that there is little documentation  to
         support the contention  that  Mr  Shaafqat  Ali  has  been  sending
         remittances to his family, the very fact that entry  clearance  has
         been granted to Ali Raza and Afifa Batool persuades  me  that  they
         have been maintained by remittances from  their  father.  [Emphasis
         added]

 7. Having accepted that  for  the  above  reasons  the  sponsor  had  been
    financially maintaining his wife and two younger children in  Pakistan,
    Judge Dearden when on to find that it was "inconceivable" that  he  had
    not also been financially maintaining the respondent.

Error of law

 8. Mr  Iqbal  accepted  that  Judge  Dearden's  reasoning  was  illogical.
    Although the definition  of  a  'family  member'  of  an  EEA  national
    encompasses all 'direct descendents', it is only necessary for  such  a
    person to prove that he is either under the age of 21 years or the  EEA
    national's  dependent  [Regulation  7(1)(b)].  It  did  not   therefore
    "follow" from the granting of a Residence Permit  to  the  respondent's
    younger siblings that the ECO had necessarily accepted that  they  were
    financially dependent upon their father. On the contrary, this is a non
    sequiteur. All that the granting of entry clearance to the respondent's
    younger siblings in fact demonstrated was that  the  ECO  had  accepted
    that they were the sponsor's direct  descendants  and  that  they  were
    under the age of 21.  The  ECO's  decision  in  their  cases  was  thus
    entirely immaterial to the issue that confronted the judge in  relation
    to the instant appeal; namely, whether the respondent had proved - as a
    direct descendant who was over the age of  21  years  -  that  she  was
    financially dependent upon the sponsor at the date of  the  Immigration
    Decision. As this flawed reasoning formed the bedrock  of  the  judge's
    decision to allow the appeal, it follows that that it cannot stand  and
    must be set aside.

Re-making of the decision

 9. Whilst the sponsor has submitted documentary proof of  his  remittances
    to Pakistan since the date of the decision, which might  reasonably  be
    construed as being for the  benefit  of  the  respondent,  he  has  not
    submitted any such proof in support of his  claim  that  he  made  such
    remittances prior to the  date  of  the  decision.  There  is  thus  no
    documentary proof that the sponsor was supporting  any  member  of  his
    family (not just the respondent) prior to the  date  of  the  decision.
    Although the documentary proof of remittances made since  the  date  of
    the decision may be used to  support  a  fresh  application  for  entry
    clearance, I am not satisfied that it casts any light at all  upon  the
    circumstances that were appertaining either at or prior to the date  of
    the Immigration Decision. I am therefore satisfied that the decision to
    refuse entry clearance is in accordance  with  immigration  rules,  and
    that the appeal against it must accordingly be dismissed.

Notice of Decision

10. The Entry Clearance Officer's appeal is allowed.

11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the appeal against the
    Entry Clearance Officer's decision is set aside and  substituted  by  a
    decision to dismiss that appeal.

Anonymity is not ordered


Signed        Date 13/01/2015

Judge
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
