
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/02176/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24th June, 2016                            |On 11th August, 2016          |
|Given extempore                               |                              |
|Signed 27th June, 2016                        |                              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                  Entry Clearance Officer - ukvs SHEFFIELD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             John Chinedu Nnadi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr E Eluwa, Solicitor, Finsbury Law Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The respondent is a national of Nigeria who was born on 9th  November,
    1996.  He is now aged 19 years.  At the date of his application to  the
    respondent he was 17 years.  The respondent appealed  the  decision  of
    the  appellant  dated  15th  October,  2014  refusing  to  grant  entry
    clearance to the respondent to join his sister in  the  United  Kingdom
    under paragraph 297 of Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules HC 395
    (as amended).

2.    The appeal was heard by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Norton-Taylor  at
    Richmond on 1st December, 2015.  He makes it clear in the determination
    that the appellant refused the respondent's application on  two  bases.
    The first was that the sponsor did not have sole responsibility for the
    appellant's upbringing and secondly  that  there  were  no  serious  or
    compelling family or other considerations.

3.    The judge quite properly directed himself on the law  at  paragraph  6
    of the determination, where he set out paragraph 297 of the Immigration
    Rules and at paragraph 7. He  referred  to  the  Tribunal  decision  in
    Mundeba (s.55 and  para  297(i)(f))  [2013]  UKUT  0088.   He  directed
    himself on the burden and standard of proof at  paragraph  8  and  then
    considered the evidence and submissions before him and  made  findings.
    The findings which I  believe  are  the  most  relevant  are  those  at
    paragraphs 20 to 28.  I am going to set them out below because I  think
    that they are relevant.

         "20.     Thus, I find that the appellant was orphaned in 2012.


         21.      I find that he has lived with three sets of cousins  since
             the death of his mother in 2012.   The  evidence  on  this  is
             consistent and plausible.  There has been no  suggestion  that
             he has been abused or physically neglected,  or  that  he  has
             been in danger of being thrown out into the street.   In  that
             sense, there has been no embellishment of the claim.   I  find
             that he has been able to complete his education.


         22.      In the light of the above,  I  find  that  there  were  no
             serious and  compelling  'other  considerations'  such  as  to
             render exclusion from the UK undesirable.


         23.       Having  said  that,  I  accept  the   evidence   of   the
             [respondent] and his sister that the living arrangements  have
             resulted in him  being  forced  to  endure  a  transitory  and
             unstable situation, a situation which  followed  on  from  the
             death of his mother  when  he  was  just  15.   I  accept  the
             evidence of  the  [respondent]  himself  that  this  state  of
             affairs led to an inability on his part to be able to properly
             come to terms with his loss (a  loss  that  would  undoubtedly
             have been compounded by  the  additional  fact  that  he  then
             became an orphan).  I accept the evidence that  his  emotional
             needs were not being met by the various households to which he
             was  moved.   Importantly,   these   needs   were,   I   find,
             significantly beyond those of an 'average'  teenage  boy:  the
             [respondent] had become an orphan in the midst  of  a  crucial
             stage of his development.  That is  the  relevant  context  in
             which to assess the claim.


         24.      I find that the [respondent] was unable to live  with  his
             sisters in the North of Nigeria.  I accept that the  sponsor's
             evidence on this point, namely that the husband of  the  older
             sister simply would not allow an additional relative  to  join
             him.


         25.      In respect of  the  sponsor,  there  has  never  been  any
             suggestion from the [appellant] that she was and is unable  to
             provide a loving and secure home for the [respondent].   There
             is ample evidence of  accommodation  and  maintenance  in  the
             papers before me, and none of this has been challenged  by  Ms
             Ahmad.


         26.      There has been no suggestion from the [appellant] that the
             sponsor could or should go and live  in  Nigeria.   She  is  a
             British citizen, with three British  children  and  a  husband
             here.  I find that she could not have emigrated.


         27.       Bringing   the   foregoing   together,   I   assess   the
             [respondent's] best  interests  as  having  lain  in  being  a
             stable, emotional secure and supportive  home  environment  in
             which he could not only move forward in his life, but also  to
             properly come to terms with the death of his parents.  He  was
             not, at the relevant time, in such an environment.  I do  take
             into account the fact that any  move  to  the  United  Kingdom
             would be  disruptive  to  an  extent.   The  [respondent]  has
             obviously lived his life in Nigeria.  However, the very  sound
             decision of the sponsor not to seek entry clearance while  the
             [respondent] was  undertaking  studies  will  result  in  less
             disruption than otherwise might have been the case.   Overall,
             his best interests were best served by joining the sponsor  in
             this country.


         28.       Having  regard  to  Mundeba,  in  my  view   the   family
             considerations in this case are 'serious',  in  that  they  go
             well beyond a mere desire for the [respondent]  to  live  with
             his sister in  the  United  Kingdom,  based  upon  normal  and
             understandable familial ties.   The  relevant  considerations,
             which  include   the   [respondent's]   losses,   his   living
             circumstances, the lack of  emotional  support  and  his  best
             interests, are 'compelling' in that they  are  persuasive  and
             powerful, even from an  objective  viewpoint.   When  the  two
             facets of the test are combined, the facts of  this  case  are
             sufficient to render the exclusion of  the  [respondent]  from
             the United Kingdom undesirable."


4.     The  judge  allowed  the  respondent's  appeal.   The  appellant  has
    obtained permission to challenge the decision on the basis that it  was
    not open to the judge to allow the appeal  under  paragraph  297(i)(f),
    which he does at paragraph 29, when he finds at paragraph 22 that there
    are no serious and compelling 'other considerations' such as to  render
    exclusion from the UK undesirable.

5.    Before  me  today  Mr  Duffy  suggested  that  the  judge  has  simply
    contradicted himself.  He thought that  possibly  what  the  judge  was
    thinking of at paragraph 22 was the question of sole responsibility but
    that is  conjecture  on  his  part.   The  respondent's  representative
    accepted  that  there  was  a  contradiction  and  told  me  that   the
    determination could not stand.  I retired briefly and on  resuming  the
    hearing gave this extempore determination.

6.    It is necessary  in  cases  involving  paragraph  297(i)(f)  that  the
    appeal be considered on the basis of what is the best interest for  the
    child.  In Mundeba the Tribunal considered in detail  the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules and  adopted  an  inclusive  approach  to  the
    "exclusion undesirable" test. At paragraph 34 it said:

         "In our view, 'serious' means that there needs to be more than  the
         parties simply desiring a state of affairs to obtain.  'Compelling'
         in the context of paragraph 297(i)(f) indicates that considerations
         that are persuasive and powerful.  'Serious' read with 'compelling'
         together indicate that the family or  other  considerations  render
         the exclusion of the child from  the  United  Kingdom  undesirable.
         The analysis is one of degree and  kind.   Such  an  interpretation
         sets a high threshold that excludes cases where, without  more,  it
         is simply the wish of parties to be together however  natural  that
         ambition that may be."


7.    At paragraph 36 it said this:

         "The exercise of the duty by the Entry Clearance Officer to  assess
         the application under the Immigration Rules as to whether there are
         family  or  other  considerations  making  the  child's   exclusion
         undesirable inevitably involves an assessment of what  the  child's
         welfare and best interests require."

    As a starting point of course the  best  interests  of  any  child  are
    usually best served by the child being with both or  at  least  one  of
    their parents and of course continuity of residence is another  factor.
    A change in the place of a residence where a child has grown up  for  a
    number of years, when socially aware is also important.


8.    I believe that looking at  paragraphs  21  and  22  and,  importantly,
    reading them in context, it is quite clear that what the judge intended
    was to say was that in the light of what he had said  at  paragraph  21
    there were no serious and compelling other considerations, but he  then
    went on to apply Mundeba and examined what were the best  interests  of
    the child.  He did precisely what was required of any  judge  in  those
    circumstances; he look at the issue from the child's  perspective.   In
    my view, what he has said at paragraphs 22 to 28 cannot be faulted.   I
    believe he was entitled to conclude as he did.  There  was  nothing  at
    all inconsistent in what he said at paragraph 22 and what  he  said  at
    paragraph 27.  The appellant's challenge only quoted part of  paragraph
    22, but it is necessary not simply to look  at  individual  paragraphs,
    but to read the  determination  as  a  whole  and  to  read  individual
    paragraphs in context.

Notice of Decision

For all these reasons I find that the judge has  not  erred  in  law  and  I
uphold his decision.

No anonymity direction is made.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  fee  award
of any fee which has been paid or may be payable (adjusted where full  award
not justified) for the following reason.  The  respondent  was  entitled  to
have his entry clearance application allowed.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

