
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH--V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/02952/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 November 2016                   |On 8 November 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                   MISS GO
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms M Malhotra, counsel instructed by Kulendran
                    Immigration Law Chambers


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  K
    Lester, promulgated on 19 May 2016. Permission to appeal was granted by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Martin on 27 September 2016.

Anonymity

 2. No direction has been made previously, and there is no reason  for  one
    now

Background

 3. On 6 November 2014, an application was made for  the  respondent,  then
    aged 9, to settle in the United Kingdom  as  the  child  of  a  British
    citizen. The sponsor is Mr SKO, described on the visa application  form
    as the respondent's father.

 4. In refusing that application, on 14 January 2015,  an  Entry  Clearance
    Officer (ECO) noted that the respondent's birth certificate  was  dated
    21 May 2013 and that her birth was registered on 24  April  2012,  more
    than 7 years after her birth. The ECO remarked that no explanation  had
    been put forward as to why the respondent's birth was not registered at
    the time she was born  or  what  documents  were  used  to  obtain  the
    certificate. The ECO was unable  to  determine  the  answers  to  these
    questions from other  evidence  provided.  Reference  was  made  to  an
    official statement by Ghana Immigration Service regarding  the  use  of
    false representations to  obtain  documents  including  Ghanaian  birth
    certificates.  The  birth  certificate  was  said  to  be  of   limited
    evidential value as  corroboration  of  the  relationship  between  the
    respondent and her sponsor.

 5. The application was refused was specifically refused  under  paragraphs
    297(1)(e) and (f) of the Immigration Rules. The ECO gave no weight to a
    document signed by the sponsor and his wife which described him as  the
    respondent's lawful custodial parent because the document contained  no
    details of its origin or that it was a legal document giving the bearer
    full custody rights. It was not accepted that the  sponsor  was  solely
    responsible for exercising parental care over a substantial period. The
    ECO noted the money transfer receipts showing funds remitted  to  Ghana
    but did not accept that this showed that the funds were  used  for  the
    respondent's  support.  The  ECO  was  not  prepared  to  consider  the
    telephone calling cards provided with the application  as  evidence  of
    contact, in isolation.  The  photographs  provided  were  of  only  two
    different occasions in  different  years  and  the  ECO  considered  it
    reasonable to expect a parent with sole responsibility to make  contact
    on special occasions on a regular basis regarding schooling,  financial
    support and  welfare.  Finally,  it  was  noted  that  no  serious  and
    compelling, family or other considerations were raised.

 6. Notice of appeal was lodged on 10 February 2015. The grounds of  appeal
    stated that the respondent was the sponsor's  biological  daughter  and
    that he was taking responsibility  for  her  welfare  including  school
    fees, food and clothing  since  birth.  No  additional  documents  were
    enclosed with the notice of appeal, however  an  indication  was  given
    that further documents  would  be  sent,  including  a  paternity  test
    result.

 7. An Entry Clearance Manager's review, dated 27 March 2015 and noted that
    no new evidence had been submitted and that there was  no  evidence  of
    the respondent's guardian having health problems or her other  guardian
    having moved away.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 8. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal,  the  judge  heard  oral
    evidence from the sponsor. DNA evidence was  also  provided  which  the
    judge considered put the paternity of the  respondent  "beyond  doubt."
    Despite finding that the respondent's mother had  some  involvement  in
    her life; contrary to the evidence of the sponsor; the  judge  accepted
    that the sponsor was solely responsible for the respondent's upbringing
    and allowed the appeal under the Rules.

The grounds of appeal

 9. The grounds of appeal in support of the  application  argued  that  the
    judge's reasons were inadequate  in  view  of  the  evidence  that  the
    respondent's mother still had an input in her life. Furthermore, it was
    argued that the respondent's circumstances  did  not  suggest  she  was
    living in squalor or not progressing at school and  her  uncle's  lower
    back pain did not render him incapable of looking  after  her.  Neither
    297(1)(e) or (f) had been established. It was submitted that  financial
    support from the sponsor and contact could continue as before.

10. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it was arguable that
    the judge, having made several adverse findings, erred in allowing  the
    appeal and applying the incorrect standard of proof to the question  of
    sole responsibility.

11. The respondent's Rule 24 response, received on 4 November 2016, argued,
    in essence, that the judge correctly  directed  herself  and  that  her
    reference to the wrong standard of proof was a typographical error  and
    if it were not it was an immaterial error.

The hearing

12. Ms Isherwood drew my attention to a number of adverse findings made  by
    the judge regarding the respondent's mother.  The  judge  rejected  the
    submission made on  the  respondent's  behalf  to  the  effect  that  a
    reference to both of the appellant's  parents  in  a  letter  from  her
    school, was no more than a typographical error. The judge rightly noted
    that  the  respondent's  birth  certificate  was   issued,   with   the
    involvement of her mother, years after her mother was supposed to  have
    disappeared.  At [37], the judge reached the  view  that  the  mother's
    whereabouts were not unknown and that she was not inaccessible. At [40]
    the judge found that the respondent's  mother  tacitly  agreed  to  the
    respondent  going  to  live  in  the  United  Kingdom.  Ultimately,  Ms
    Isherwood argued, the judge made no clear findings regarding  the  role
    of the mother in the appellant's life, which she was  required  to  do.
    The judge's findings ought to have led to a conclusion that the sponsor
    did not have  sole  responsibility  for  the  respondent's  upbringing.
    Furthermore, in deciding the issue of sole  responsibility,  the  judge
    referred only to financial responsibility taken by the  sponsor,  which
    was not enough; TD (Paragraph 297(i)(e): "sole  responsibility")  Yemen
    [2006] UKAIT 00049, considered.

13. Expanding on TD, Ms Isherwood argued that the judge failed to  approach
    the questions identified in that case, with specific reference to  [52]
    (i),(ii), (iv),  (v)  and  (vi).  Given  her  findings  that  both  the
    respondent's parents were involved in her upbringing, the issues raised
    in (iv)-(vi) had not been resolved.

14. In response, Ms Malhotra asserted that it was "clear"  that  the  judge
    used the civil standard of proof because she considered the evidence on
    both sides. She reiterated that it was clear from the  judge's  wording
    that she considered the balance of probabilities. I was referred to  no
    part of the judge's decision in this respect.

15. Ms Malhotra argued that even if the  respondent's  mother  was  in  the
    picture, there was no evidence before the judge to show  that  she  had
    any involvement in the child's  upbringing.  At  [40],  the  judge  had
    referred to the correct test, that of  whether  the  sponsor  had  sole
    responsibility for making the major decisions in the respondent's life.

16. Ms Isherwood closed her submissions by arguing that  it  could  not  be
    said that the judge's reference to the lower standard was a typographic
    error.

Decision on error of law

17. At the end of the hearing, I announced that the judge made  a  material
    error of law. My reasons are as follows.

18. The application for entry clearance indicated that the  respondent  had
    been effectively abandoned by her  mother  since  June  2010  when  the
    latter left and did not return.  The  judge  noted  at  [35]  that  the
    respondent's mother had been the informant when the respondent's  birth
    was registered in 2012; that the school letter dated  3  November  2014
    referred to the  wish  of  both  parents  to  secure  a  visa  for  the
    respondent and at [36] that the respondent's statement makes no mention
    of being abandoned by her mother and never  seeing  her.  At  [37]  the
    judge finds that the respondent's uncle is responsible for her  day  to
    day care and that she did not accept that her mother  was  inaccessible
    and her whereabouts unknown. The judge further found, at [38] that both
    parents agreed that the respondent should go to the United Kingdom.

19. While the judge accepts that the sponsor sends money regularly and  has
    been in touch with the school, on occasion, she does not  truly  engage
    with the questions set out in TD. In particular at [52  iv],  "if  both
    parents are involved in  the  upbringing  of  the  child,  it  will  be
    exceptional that one of them will have sole responsibility."  From  the
    judge's findings, it is apparent that the respondent's mother  had  not
    disappeared and furthermore she was in  contact  with  the  school  and
    agreed with plans to send  her  to  the  United  Kingdom.  The  judge's
    decision fails to give any  reasons  as  to  why  she  considered  that
    responsibility for the respondent's upbringing was not in  fact  shared
    by both parents. Nor is there any engagement with (iii), given that the
    respondent was said to have been cared for a number of other  relatives
    in the absence of the sponsor.

20. The errors in relation to the judge's approach to  sole  responsibility
    were compounded by her reference to "the lower standard  of  proof"  in
    [41] of the decision, in relation to the key issue as  to  whether  the
    sponsor had the required level of responsibility.  The  judge  did  not
    give any indication in the rest of her decision that she had  correctly
    directed herself. Indeed, Ms Malhotra did not  refer  me  to  a  single
    passage in support of her submissions.

21. Ms Malhotra urged me to remit this matter, de novo, to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. I agreed to do so, with no findings preserved given that  the
    judge's findings did not rationally follow  from  the  evidence  before
    her. I was also  concerned  regarding  the  poor-quality  DNA  evidence
    relied upon by the respondent which made no reference to any identities
    having been checked before the blood samples were taken.  I  understand
    that the clinic in question is no longer in  operation.  Regardless  of
    what was said by Judge Lester, the DNA evidence provided does  not  put
    the question of the relationship between the respondent and the sponsor
    beyond doubt and the sponsor may wish to  consider  obtaining  reliable
    DNA evidence for the re-hearing of this appeal.



Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  reheard
at Taylor House, with a time estimate of 2 hours by any judge except  First-
tier Tribunal Judge Lester.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed

Date: 21 July 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

