
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
OA/02461/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre |       Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 12th April 2017                    |       On 9th  May 2017               |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                               Mr Amir Sohail
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer, islamabad

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No legal representation
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Raikes promulgated on 25th January 2016, following a  hearing  at
    Stoke-on-Trent on 12th January 2015.  In the determination, the  judge
    had dismissed the  appeal  of  Amir  Sohail,  whereupon  the  Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.





The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who was  born  on  8th  November
    1976.  He applied for entry clearance as a partner  under  EC-P.1.1  of
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules, as the spouse of a person present
    and settled in the UK, namely, of Ms Shahina Pathan, a British  citizen
    of Indian origin.

The Judge's Findings

 3. The relevant  facts  and  documentary  material  are  set  out  in  the
    determination under appeal.  The legal framework is also set out in the
    determination by Judge Raikes.   He  notes  that  the  essence  of  the
    Appellant's claim is that he has a genuine and subsisting  family  life
    relationship with Ms Shahina Pathan, that he has funds  available  that
    meet the financial threshold requirement, and that  there  are  medical
    problems on the part both of the Appellant  and  his  sponsoring  wife,
    such that he succeeds in his application to be with his wife in the UK.



 4. The judge took into account, as relevant matters,  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant had originally come to the UK  as  a  visitor  and  had  then
    overstayed and worked illegally before voluntarily  returning  back  to
    Pakistan.  He held that, "I am satisfied that notwithstanding that  the
    Sponsor is the Appellant's wife, and the relationship  is  genuine  and
    subsisting, she is not the only family the Appellant has  and  he  does
    have family in Pakistan" (paragraph 31).

 5. At another place, the judge observes  that,  "I  do  not  consider  the
    Appellant enjoys family life such as to engage  Article  8"  (paragraph
    32).  He goes on to explain that,

         "Aside from  a  limited  period  in  the  UK  when  they  formed  a
         relationship knowing the position of the Appellant, they appear  to
         have always lived in separate countries for the duration  of  their
         marriage.  I am not satisfied that he does  not  continue  to  have
         relatives there with whom he is able to live and have support from"
         (paragraph 32).

    The judge then went on also to consider the  issue  of  proportionality
    and held that the legitimate public  end  is  to  maintain  immigration
    control  and  that  the  decision  against  the   Appellant   was   not
    disproportionate (paragraph 35).  Finally, regard was  had  to  Section
    117B and the judge held that "I am  satisfied  that  those  seeking  to
    enter or stay in the UK should meet the requirements of the immigration
    laws and Rules", and that "any family life established  or  anticipated
    in the UK was whilst his immigration status was precarious"  (paragraph
    36).

 6. The Grounds of Appeal assert three essential grounds.  First, that  the
    decision was disproportionate and in breach of Article  8  because  the
    Appellant's wife was of Indian origin and could not live permanently in
    Pakistan.  Second, that the wife had a  daughter,  Miss  Lubna  Sheikh,
    from her ex-husband who died on 13th November 2007, and she  was  fully
    dependent upon her mother, and currently studying at university in  any
    event.  Third, that the Appellant's wife, Shahina Pathan,  had  an  old
    age mother with poor  health,  who  was  a  widow,  and  was  currently
    dependent upon her daughter, requiring close assistance as he is unable
    to live alone, even though she has other children.

 7. On 10th November 2016, permission to appeal was granted  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that, in view of the fact that the Appellant  was
    unrepresented at the hearing, the judge arguably  fell  into  error  in
    three respects.  First, that there was a  finding  that  there  was  no
    family life between the Appellant and his wife (see  paragraphs  31  to
    32), even though they  had  lived  together  in  the  UK  after  having
    undergone an  Islamic  marriage,  and  then  returned  to  Pakistan  to
    undertake another marriage there.  Second, that the judge had held that
    there was no evidence that the Appellant's wife could not join  him  in
    Pakistan (see paragraph 35), but this overlooked the fact that she  was
    a person of Muslim  religion  but  of  Indian  origin  who  would  have
    difficulties living there.  Thirdly,  that  the  judge  approached  the
    question of Section 117B of the 2002 Act in an erroneous fashion.

 8. A Rule 24 response was entered on 22nd  November  2016,  where  it  was
    asserted that no evidence was shown as to why  the  Sponsor  could  not
    obtain a visa to Pakistan for longer  than  three  months  as  she  was
    alleging, and the Sponsor's daughter was in any event an adult now  who
    was at university, such that the judge's findings were properly open to
    him.

Submissions

 9. At the hearing before me on 12th April 2017, the  Appellant  was  again
    legally unrepresented.  His stepdaughter, Miss Lubna Sheikh,  spoke  on
    his behalf.  In the court present also was the sponsoring wife, Shahina
    Pathan, and at the back of the courtroom was the Appellant's mother-in-
    law.  Miss Lubna Sheikh submitted that the decision failed to take into
    account the Appellant's family  life  and  the  fact  that  there  were
    medical problems here.  The mother could not go to Pakistan because she
    was looking after her own mother who was entirely dependent  upon  her,
    and she in any event, stated Miss Lubna Sheikh, was a Muslim  woman  of
    Indian origin, and as such could not settle there.

10. For her part, Ms Aboni relied upon the Rule 24  response.   She  stated
    that there was a potential conflict in finding of  fact  by  the  judge
    when it is stated (at paragraph 31) that the  Appellant  and  his  wife
    have a relationship which "is genuine and subsisting".  This  conflicts
    with the subsequent  statement  (at  paragraph  32)  that,  "I do  not
    consider that the Appellant  enjoys  family  life  such  as  to  engage
    Article 8".  Nevertheless, if the determination is  read  as  a  whole,
    submitted Ms Aboni, there was no error of law here at  all.   What  the
    judge had done was to  maintain  the  status  quo,  which  was  of  the
    Appellant and his wife living in different countries.  Furthermore, the
    plain fact here was that the  parties  could  not  meet  the  financial
    requirement threshold because, although there was a house in  Pakistan,
    this had not been sold, despite repeated assertions to the effect  that
    it would be, such that it was not  possible  still  to  show  that  the
    Appellant could satisfy the precise financial threshold  applicable  to
    him.

11. In reply, Miss Lubna Sheikh  submitted  that  her  mother,  Ms  Shahina
    Pathan, and the Appellant had lived together in the UK for seven years,
    whilst he was working here illegally, and  they  had  been  enjoying  a
    family life, so that it was simply not accurate to suggest  that  there
    was no family life between them.  Secondly,  her  grandmother  (namely,
    the Appellant's mother-in-law) was very ill and needed  looking  after,
    so that the wife of the Appellant, Ms Shahina Pathan, could not go  for
    a prolonged period of time to Pakistan, even if she were able to do so.
     She stated that the Appellant was sending  monies  from  Pakistan  and
    still maintaining their upkeep in this country and they were  a  viable
    family unit.

Error of Law

12. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.

13. First, there is a contradiction in the judge's fundamental  finding  as
    to the existence, or otherwise of a genuine and subsisting family  life
    between the Appellant and his wife.  This goes  to  the  crux  of  this
    appeal.  At  paragraph  31  he  finds  that  there  is  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship.  However, at paragraph 32 he  concludes  there
    is not.

14. Second, less it be thought that this is simply a slip of language,  the
    manner in which the subsequent conclusion is drawn (at paragraph 32) is
    in the context of the judge concluding that the Appellant  also  has  a
    family life with wider family members  in  Pakistan.   However,  whilst
    this may be true, it is not a finding that can be used to detract  from
    the quality of the relationship that the Appellant  may,  or  may  not,
    have enjoyed with his sponsoring wife,  Ms  Shahina  Pathan.   This  is
    clear from the assertion that,

         "Aside from  a  limited  period  in  the  UK  when  they  formed  a
         relationship knowing the position of the Appellant, they appear  to
         have always lived in separate countries for the duration  of  their
         marriage.  I am not satisfied that he does  not  continue  to  have
         relatives there with whom he is  able  to  live  and  have  support
         from".

15. Whether or not the Appellant can have support from other relatives,  or
    whether he can live with them, is beside the point, when  consideration
    is given as to whether he actually has a relationship of a husband  and
    wife with Shahina Pathan.  The resultant confusion has led to a finding
    that the Appellant does not enjoy family life so as to  engage  Article
    8.  On the evidence, such a conclusion is unsustainable.

16. Third, this is not least because the Home Office Presenting Officer  at
    the hearing accepted that, "there  was  a  finding  that  there  was  a
    genuine and subsisting marriage [although] the  financial  requirements
    could not be met" (see paragraph 16).

17. Finally, the issue of Section 117B needs  to  be  more  comprehensively
    addressed.  Although the  judge  states  (at  paragraph  36)  that  the
    Appellant's immigration status was always precarious, which is entirely
    correct, as is the fact that the Appellant's wife  had  undergone  this
    Islamic marriage with the Appellant in the UK knowing  full  well  what
    his immigration status was, the fact that the Appellant's  wife  was  a
    person of Indian origin, and (as stated in  the  earlier  determination
    that her child, Miss Lubna Sheikh, is born of  a  Somali  father,  thus
    resulting in difficulties of her residence in  Pakistan)  needs  to  be
    weighed in the balance, as does the ill-health both of  the  sponsoring
    wife and the sponsoring wife's mother, because that  too  goes  to  the
    issue of whether she can leave  the  UK  to  go  to  Pakistan  for  any
    appreciable period of time.

Decision

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    allowed to the extent that  it  is  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal under practice statement 7.2(a) to be determined  by  a  judge
    other than Judge Raikes.  As I have made it clear  to  the  Appellant's
    relatives in court today they would  be  well  advised  to  seek  legal
    assistance in this complex appeal.

19. No anonymity direction is made.

20. The appeal is allowed to this limited extent.



Signed                              Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 8th May 2017


