
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/02883/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 31 March 2016                         |On 19 April 2016                    |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                               Mr H J E LATTER
                         DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE

                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                 FOR THE BRITISH CONSULATE GENERAL IN PARIS
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             LOUIZA KRIBEL-HAFSI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Paraskos, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the Entry Clearance Officer against a decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Oakley) allowing  an  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules against the respondent's decision made on 21  January
    2014 refusing the applicant entry clearance as a spouse under  Appendix
    FM.  In this decision I will refer to the parties as they  were  before
    the First-tier Tribunal, the applicant as the appellant and  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer as the respondent.

Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Algeria born on 27  December  1986.   Her
    husband, the sponsor, is a UK citizen who was previously married in the
    UK but that marriage failed and he was divorced on 18  June  2012.   In
    his  witness  statement  dated  13  August  2015  he  said  that  after
    recovering from his divorce he thought about his future and shared  his
    feelings and wishes with his family in Algeria.  His  sister  knew  the
    appellant and arrangements were made for them to be introduced in March
    2013 in Algeria. They entered into a marriage under Algerian law  on  2
    April 2013.  He then returned to the  UK  but  in  line  with  Algerian
    customs there were separate  wedding  celebrations  to  announce  their
    marriage to friends and families, for the appellant on 12 June 2013 and
    for him on 8 October 2013. They lived together until 26  November  2013
    when the sponsor had to return to the UK

3.   The appellant applied for entry clearance as a  spouse  on  7  November
    2013.  The application was refused on 21 January 2014 as the respondent
    was not satisfied that the relationship with the  sponsor  was  genuine
    and subsisting or that they intended to live together permanently.   It
    was his finding that the appellant had entered into  this  marriage  in
    order to facilitate her entry clearance to the UK.  The decision is set
    out on a standard form, GV51(FRA).  It is divided into  four  sections:
    suitability -  entry  clearance  requirements,  eligibility  for  entry
    clearance as a partner, financial requirements,  and  English  language
    requirement.  The respondent's reasons for refusal are  set  out  under
    eligibility for entry clearance as a partner and  in  relation  to  the
    other  three  requirements  the  reasons  are  simply  given  as   "not
    applicable".

4.   The appellant filed a notice of appeal.  The application  was  reviewed
    by an Entry Clearance Manager who maintained the decision.  The  appeal
    therefore proceeded to a hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

5.   At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal the judge said  that  the
    basis of the decision was in  relation  to  whether  the  marriage  was
    genuine and subsisting [3].  He heard oral evidence  from  the  sponsor
    and a friend of the sponsor and he also had  documentary  evidence  set
    out in bundles submitted by both the appellant and the respondent  [5].
    The judge found the sponsor to be an  entirely  credible  witness.   He
    accepted that this was an arranged marriage and that the  relationship,
    albeit of a short duration, was one where both the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor "clicked" and he  found  that  the  marriage  was  genuine  and
    subsisting.

6.   So far as the issues relating to finance and English  language  ability
    are concerned, the judge said at [20]:

         "20. The appellant had submitted with the  application  details  of
             her English language qualification as well as full details  of
             the financial requirements.  It was noted  from  the  decision
             that had been made by the respondent  that  neither  of  these
             issues were in contention as the relevant part of the decision
             concerning financial  requirements  of  the  English  language
             requirement had been  marked  as  'not  applicable'.   Clearly
             therefore they had been considered by the respondent otherwise
             there would have been a relevant completion of  that  part  of
             the decision and the fact that it is stated that  it  was  not
             applicable.  It therefore has to be assumed that the  question
             of English language and financial requirements have been met."


     and at [26]:

         "26. Clearly from the decision given that all details of  financial
             requirements  and  English  language  requirements  have  been
             submitted the  Respondent  has  not  considered  these  to  be
             applicable in terms of the  decision  and  from  that  I  must
             assume that the Respondent is  therefore  satisfied  on  these
             matters."


    On this basis the judge said at [27] that the respondent's decision was
    not in accordance with the law and the applicable immigration rules and
    the appeal was allowed.


The Grounds and Submissions

7.   In the respondent's grounds it is argued that the judge  erred  in  law
    in that he  wrongly  assumed  that  the  decision  indicated  that  the
    respondent was satisfied on the financial requirements and the  English
    language requirements of the rules.  The respondent's  clear  statement
    that no decision had been taken  on  aspects  of  the  application  was
    incapable of amounting to a  concession  that  those  aspects  met  the
    requirement of the  Immigration  Rules.   It  followed  that  a  lawful
    decision was awaited on material aspects of  the  application  and  the
    only option properly open to the judge would have  been  to  remit  the
    matter back to the respondent for reconsideration.

8.   Permission to appeal was granted by the Upper  Tribunal  on  the  basis
    that it was arguable the judge  erred  in  law  in  assuming  that  the
    financial and English language requirements were met and  that  he  had
    erred by failing to consider whether they were in fact met.

9.   At the hearing before me Mr Clarke adopted  his  grounds  arguing  that
    the evidence indicated that the respondent had not made any decision on
    the financial or English language requirements of  the  rule  and  that
    could not be inferred from the use of the phraseology "not applicable".



10.  Mr Paraskos submitted that the judge did not err in law  or,  if  there
    was any error, it  was  of  no  practical  significance  based  on  the
    evidence before him.  He argued that the respondent had made a decision
    on issues relating to the financial and English  language  requirements
    and  on  suitability  for  entry  clearance.   He  had   entered   "not
    applicable" under the box headed "ECO's reasons for refusal".  If there
    were no reasons for refusal, it must follow, so he argued, that it  was
    accepted that those requirements had been met.  The judge had commented
    at [20] that the appellant had submitted with the  application  details
    of her English language qualifications and there were full  details  of
    the financial requirements. In Mr Paraskos' skeleton argument  at  [14]
    it is argued that the judge proceeded on the basis of  the  information
    before him and was entitled to do so.

11.  At [15] of the skeleton argument it is  accepted  that  it  might  have
    been unfortunate for the judge to have used the word "assumed" at  [20]
    and [26] of his  decision  but  as  he  had  the  bundle  of  documents
    submitted to the respondent, he was entitled to and did make a decision
    on those matters where on the face of it the core contested  issue  was
    the relationship requirement.

12.  It was further argued that the appellant  had  paid  her  fee  in  good
    faith and could reasonably expect that a decision would be made on  all
    aspects of her application.  Mr Paraskos submitted that as a matter  of
    policy the Upper Tribunal should be slow to endorse  a  position  where
    there was a part decision by the respondent compelling the Tribunal  to
    undertake and complete the respondent's task through the appeal process
    or otherwise proliferate  litigation  "through  pigeon  step  decision-
    making", as he described it.

Consideration of whether there is an Error of Law

13.  The issue at the  heart  of  this  appeal  is  whether  the  judge  was
    entitled to assume that the respondent had accepted that the  financial
    and English language requirements of the rules had been met.  I am  not
    satisfied that he was entitled to infer this from the way the notice of
    decision (GV51(FRA)) was competed.   The  reasons  why  the  respondent
    found that the appellant could not meet the eligibility requirements as
    a partner are set out in the appropriate part of the  form.   The  fact
    that "not applicable" has been entered in relation to the  three  other
    requirements  identified  does  not  without  more  indicate  that  the
    respondent accepted that those requirements  were  met.   In  order  to
    obtain entry clearance as a partner the appellant  must  meet  all  the
    requirements of s.E-ECP, eligibility for entry clearance as a  partner.
    The respondent found that the appellant could not meet the relationship
    requirements and I am satisfied that the  respondent  was  entitled  to
    refuse the application on that basis alone.  There may  well  be  cases
    where it is appropriate to deal in the alternative with all  the  other
    requirements of the rules but a decision based on a failure to meet one
    requirement of the rules does not in itself give rise to  an  inference
    that the respondent was satisfied on the other aspects of the rules.

14.  I am not satisfied that such an inference can be drawn from the use  of
    the phrase "not applicable" as used on the notice  of  decision.   Both
    the initial decision and the Entry Clearance  Manger's  review  focused
    solely on whether the relationship requirements of the rules were  met.
    Having decided that they were not, the other requirements of the  rules
    were not on the face of the decisions dealt with.  I am  not  satisfied
    that it can be assumed or inferred in the absence of a clear concession
    that the other requirements were met.  There  is  nothing  to  indicate
    from the judge's decision that any concession was made at  the  hearing
    and I am not satisfied there  is  any  adequate  basis  either  in  the
    respondent's decision or from what happened at  the  hearing  that  the
    respondent had accepted that the requirements relating to  finances  or
    English language were met.

15.  Both parties referred to the Tribunal determination in Sabir  (Appendix
    FM - EX.1 not freestanding) [2014] UKUT  0063  and  in  particular  [9]
    where UTJ Coker said:


         "9.  In order to establish whether the claimant meets the
             requirements of Appendix FM it is necessary to proceed through
             the Rules in a consecutive manner.  If the claimant fails to
             meet a particular requirement of the Rules in that process,
             then she fails to meet the criteria in Appendix FM and thus
             her application under the Rules fails. "

     This decision was primarily concerned with  whether  para  EX.1  was  a
    freestanding provision of the rules or whether it was only available to
    those who had successfully navigated  their  way  through  one  of  the
    alternative routes through R-LTRP.  Mr Paraskos also relied on  Pankina
    [2010] EWCA Civ 719 and the fact that the rules were to be  treated  as
    law by the Tribunal.  However, I am not satisfied that either authority
    casts any light on the issue in the present appeal.

16.  I am satisfied that the  judge  erred  in  law  by  assuming  that  the
    respondent accepted that the other requirements of the rules were  met.
    Mr Clarke submitted that the proper course was for  the  appeal  to  be
    remitted to the respondent to decide those issues whereas  Mr  Paraskos
    submitted that if there was an error of law, the matter should go  back
    to the First-tier Tribunal to resolve those  issues.   I  am  satisfied
    that remittal to the First-tier Tribunal is the proper course and meets
    at least in part the argument that a failure by the respondent to  deal
    with all the matters and issues might  proliferate  litigation  through
    sequential decision-making.  The documents the appellant sought to rely
    on were in the bundle before the  First-tier  Tribunal.   It  was  also
    clear that Mr  Clarke  and  Mr  Paraskos  disagreed  on  whether  these
    indicated that the appellant could in fact meet the other  requirements
    of the rules.  It was open to the judge to resolve these issues  and  I
    am satisfied that the proper course is for the appeal to be remitted to
    Judge Oakley for him to re-open the hearing and make  findings  on  the
    outstanding issues.





Decision

17.  For the reasons I have given I am satisfied that  the  judge  erred  in
    law.  His decision is set aside in so far as it relates to the  finance
    and language requirements of the rules.  I remit the appeal to  him  to
    make a decision on those issues.




Signed                                  Date: 13 April 2016
                     H J E Latter
H J E Latter
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



