
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/02064/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 20 September 2016                     |On 4 October 2016                   |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK



                                   Between

                               KHALIDA PARVEEN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Richardson, Counsel, instructed by Lawmen
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   I shall refer to the parties as "the Secretary of  State"  who  is  the
    appellant in these proceedings, and to  Mrs  Khalida  Parveen  as  "the
    Claimant".  This is an appeal by the Secretary of State in respect of a
    Decision and Reasons by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Kainth) heard at
    Richmond on 18 March 2016 and promulgated on 24th March 2016, in  which
    the Claimant's appeal against a refusal of entry clearance was  allowed
    outright under Regulations 7 and 12 Immigration (EEA Regulations) 2006.



2.    In grounds of  application  for  permission  the  Secretary  of  State
    argued that the FTT proceeded to determine the appeal by  applying  the
    wrong  Regulation,  namely  Regulation  7  for  family  members.    The
    applicable regulation was Regulation 8  for  extended  family  members.
    (This error was in fact drawn  to  the  attention  of  the  FTT  by  Mr
    Richardson representing the appellant as is recorded  in  the  decision
    and reasons [5].)  Permission was granted on the grounds as argued.

3.   At the proceedings before me it is agreed by both representatives  that
    the FTT erred and that the Claimant should  have  been  treated  as  an
    extended family member and would fall to be considered under Regulation
    8(2).  I find that there was  a  material  error  of  law  by  the  FTT
    accordingly.  I find that the FTT further erred by allowing the  appeal
    outright with reference to Regulation 12, for  which  the  FTT  has  no
    jurisdiction. I set aside  the  decision  and  reasons  save  that  the
    findings [12-17] as to dependency  and  family  relationship  [11]  are
    preserved.

    Re making the decision


4.   There is no dispute as to the relationship  between  the  Claimant  and
    the sponsor. The FTT made clear findings  as  to  past  dependency  and
    current dependency  as  between  the  Claimant  and  the  EEA  sponsor.
    Therefore on the facts  as  found  by  the  FTT  I  am  satisfied  that
    Regulation 8(2) applies and the requirements are met.

5.   The only difference in terms of the outcome is  that  the  matter  will
    have to be re considered by the Secretary of State under Regulation 12.



    Notice of Decision

6.   There is a material error of law and I set aside the  FTT  decision.  I
    remake the decision and allow the Claimant's  appeal  under  Regulation
    8(2).  The matter is to be reconsidered by the Secretary of State under
    Regulation 12.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 3.10.2016

GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no  fee  award
consistent with the decision made by the FTT.


Signed                                  Date 3.10.2016

GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black


