
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA027312015
                                                                 OA027322015
                                                                 OA027332015
                                                                 OA027352015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 May 2017                                |On 22 May 2017                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL
Between

                  Hassan Aweys Abdullahi (First Appellant)
                   Halima Hassan Aweys (Second Appellant)
                    Fartun Hassan aweys (Third Appellant)
                   Mohamed Hassan Aweys (Fourth Appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants


                                     and



                  ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, KAMPALA/PRETORIA

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Miss Pinder of Counsel instructed by Polpitiya & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants appeal with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Roots promulgated  on  11  August  2016  dismissing
    their appeals against decisions  of  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  in
    Kampala to refuse them entry clearance as in  the  case  of  the  first
    appellant, the spouse of a refugee present in the United  Kingdom,  and
    in the case of the second to fourth appellants as the children  of  Mrs
    Nasra Abdullahi Mohamed whom I refer to as "the sponsor", and the first
    appellant.

 2. The decisions in this case were made on 9 January 2015  in  respect  of
    the first appellant and on 16 January 2015 in  respect  of  the  third,
    second and fourth appellants.

 3. Their case is, in brief, that the first appellant  and  sponsor  are  a
    married couple and that the  second  to  fourth  appellants  are  there
    children; that the marriage took place in Somalia  in  1995;  that  the
    children were born in Somalia; and, it was only later  that  they  were
    forced to flee in different directions, the  sponsor  arriving  in  the
    United Kingdom relatively recently having  left  Somalia  in  2009  and
    becoming separated from her family.  Prior to her arrival in the United
    Kingdom the youngest child of the family (who is not an appellant)  had
    arrived here in it appears 2008 and she was able to get back in contact
    with him.

 4. It is said that the couple became separated in 2008  and  it  was  only
    after her arrival in the United Kingdom that by chance the sponsor  was
    able to get back in contact with her husband and children, finding that
    they were by this point in Uganda.

 5. Judge Roots heard oral evidence from the first appellant.  He also  had
    before him a bundle containing witness statements and a certain  number
    of other documents.  It is also important to note that  by  this  point
    DNA evidence had been provided indicating that  the  second  to  fourth
    appellants were the children of the first appellant and the sponsor.

 6. Judge Roots directed himself as to the relevant  Immigration  Rules  at
    paragraph 27 and then went on to make findings which  are  set  out  at
    paragraphs 29 to 43 of the decision.

 7. Judge Roots was not satisfied that the sponsor and first appellant were
    married, was not  satisfied  that  the  relationship  was  genuine  and
    subsisting, and was not satisfied that the appellants had shown, in the
    case of the second to fourth appellants, that they were not leading  an
    independent life, were unmarried and  had  not  formed  an  independent
    family unit.

 8. The challenge to the judge's findings made in the grounds of appeal  is
    primarily characterised as one  of  perversity,  although  it  is  also
    argued that Judge Roots failed to reach proper findings in  respect  to
    material facts and  failed  to  take  into  account  properly  material
    evidence.

 9. There are, as Miss Pinder characterised in the grounds, three  specific
    issues:-

      a) findings in respect of whether the marriage had taken place or not;



      b) whether the relationship was genuine and subsisting; and

      c) whether the family unit had pre-existed the decision to flee.

10. One thread of the challenges is that Judge Roots  had  improperly  made
    adverse findings in respect of a failure it is said on the part of  the
    sponsor to give sufficient detail in respect to certain matters.   This
    can be seen primarily in paragraphs [34] to [38].

11. Although this appears at first glance to be a perversity challenge,  it
    has to be informed by the fact  that  what  Judge  Roots  has  done  in
    rejecting evidence given orally which would appear to have answered the
    questions that he had, consideration has been made  only  what  was  in
    witness statements, and whilst that might have justified a decision  to
    reject the evidence, in this case what Judge Roots failed to do  is  to
    take into account what the sponsor had clearly said some  years  before
    in her asylum interview and  in  her  screening  interview  about,  for
    example, the circumstances in which she had tried to  relocate  family,
    which is dealt with at paragraph 33, and the difficulties in  how  they
    were separated at paragraph 35.   It  cannot  thus  be  said  that  the
    sponsor was only now disclosing material facts; she  had  already  done
    so.

12. In addition, whilst it is correct  that  as  Judge  Roots  recorded  at
    paragraph 34 there  is  limited  evidence  about  how  she  had  become
    separated out from her youngest son, I consider that this matter is not
    material.  This is not part of the Secretary of State's  case,  nor  is
    there any explanation from the  judge  as  to  why  it  was  thought  a
    relevant and material matter, or why the failure to give evidence about
    an immaterial matter is something that could  probably  be  taken  into
    account in reaching an adverse credibility finding.

13. Further, it is to draw inferences adverse to the appellants evidence of
    funds being transferred simply because,  as  Judge  Roots  recorded  at
    [36], the total transfers had not been provided is irrational as is the
    conclusion that the transfers in  themselves  did  not  show  that  the
    appellants were financially dependent on the sponsor is unreasoned.

14. Further, at [37] Judge Roots wrongly said that matters  have  not  been
    dealt with in a witness statement when in fact  they  have,  and  again
    this was a matter which formed a  reason  why  he  concluded  that  the
    relationship  between  the  first  appellant  and   sponsor   was   not
    subsisting.

15. At paragraph [39] I am satisfied that  Judge  Root's  approach  to  the
    evidence in stating that the difficulties that there  may  well  be  in
    keeping in contact, and indeed that it may be very difficult to obtain,
    is arguably an indication of irrationality when considering the way  in
    which the judge had viewed earlier the inability  to  provide  evidence
    and finding not that it was simply  neutral,  but  that  it  undermined
    credibility.  Further, the Judge Roots wrongly said at  [40],  contrary
    to what is said in her witness statement at paragraph  [12],  that  the
    sponsor had not explained why she had not made any  attempts  to  visit
    Uganda, the issue clearly being cost.

16. Taking these factors into account and given that Mr Duffy did not  seek
    to persuade me that this was a decision which could  be  upheld,  I  am
    satisfied that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve  the
    making of an error of law in that the judge's findings  of  fact  were,
    and this is not a conclusion I reach easily, perverse.  I am  satisfied
    that the high threshold for that is met, together with  the  fact  that
    there has been a failure to take into account material evidence and the
    taking into account of immaterial matters.  It is also of some  concern
    that Judge Roots appears in two passages to have  considered  the  role
    simply as one of review and that is specifically at paragraphs [32] and
    [42].

    Remaking the decision

17. I am satisfied that it would now be appropriate to remake the  decision
    and with the agreement of the parties I have proceeded to do so in  the
    Upper Tribunal in the absence of it being necessary  on  the  facts  of
    this case, given the additional evidence which has  been  provided  and
    which I consider can properly be taken into account as it goes to  show
    the situation between the parties as at the date of decision, should be
    admitted.

18. The first issue is in relation to paragraph  352A  in  respect  of  the
    sponsor and the first appellant.  There is no doubt  that  the  sponsor
    and the first appellant are the parents of three children.  That is not
    now disputed by  the  respondent.   I  consider  that  given  what  the
    background material shows about the attitude in Somalia towards  having
    children or sex outside wedlock, that it is more likely than  not  that
    the  first  appellant  and  sponsor  were  married,  given  that   they
    subsequently had four children together.

19. I accept that there are difficulties with the marriage certificate, but
    given the upheaval that has occurred in Somalia and which is  a  matter
    of record, is not a matter which concerns me greatly. Further,  and  in
    any event, I am satisfied that they  had  been  living  together  in  a
    relationship akin to marriage, even if not  lawfully  married  for  the
    purposes of English law, given the number  of  children  born  in  that
    relationship over a period of several years, greatly in excess  of  two
    years.

20. Second, I am satisfied,  given  the  timescale  of  the  birth  of  the
    children, this relationship must have existed before the  sponsor,  and
    for that matter the appellants, left Somalia.  That is because  of  the
    account given by the sponsor in her asylum interviews, which I  see  no
    reason to doubt, nor has it been suggested by the respondent that  this
    account should be doubted, and indeed it is on that  account  that  the
    sponsor was granted asylum.

21. I then arrive at a starting point where this must have been a  marriage
    which was genuine and subsisting in the past, and one out of which four
    children were born.  I accept that it may well be the  case  that  this
    has ceased to be genuine and subsisting, but  the  fact  that  it  pre-
    existed in the past for a number of years is a factor which I take into
    account in assessing whether it continues to subsist.   I  accept  from
    the documents provided which now includes copies  of  messages  through
    electronic messaging systems produced  show  a  significant  degree  of
    contact between the appellants and the sponsor.  I  am  satisfied  also
    that the sponsor has now been able to go to visit the family in Uganda,
    albeit that as that it something which postdates  the  previous  appeal
    decision, it is difficult to attach a great deal of weight.

22. I am satisfied that the sponsor has transferred to her husband what is,
    in Ugandan terms, and indeed in terms of the  sponsor's  own  income  a
    significant transfer of money from the sponsor  to  the  appellants  to
    help to support them in Uganda.

23. I have considered carefully all the accounts provided by the sponsor in
    her interviews and in her witness statements, and indeed the record  of
    what she said to Judge Roots.  It has not been  submitted  to  me  that
    there is any basis on which I  should  disbelieve  her  account  and  I
    accept it.  I consider that  on  the  balance  of  probabilities  I  am
    satisfied that what was a genuine and subsisting marriage in the  past,
    continues to  be  one,  albeit  that  it  has  through  the  well-known
    difficulties which have occurred in Somalia in the last  twenty  years,
    been one in which the family have had to flee in different  directions.
    They have, as I accept, lived apart,  but  I  find,  despite  that  and
    despite the length of time that has elapsed, that I am  satisfied  that
    both as to the truth of the marriage subsisting, and I note that it was
    of course mentioned in the asylum interview which was accepted as being
    the sponsor's true account,  and  I  am  satisfied  that  the  marriage
    continues to be genuine and subsisting.  I am satisfied also that it is
    from this the intent to live permanently  with  each  other,  and  that
    accordingly in respect of the first appellant all the  requirements  of
    paragraph 352A of the Immigration Rules are met.

24.  Further,  and  in  the  alternative,  I  am  satisfied  that  all  the
    requirements of paragraph 352AA of the Immigration Rules are met.

25. I now turn to the case of  the  second  to  fourth  appellants.   I  am
    satisfied:-

      a) It is not disputed that the mother has refugee status in the United
         Kingdom.

      b) It is not disputed either that as at the date of decision they were
         under the age of 18.

      c) The question then arises in respect of 352D(iii) and (iv) which are
         best viewed together.  I am satisfied by  the  accounts  that  have
         been given to me of the situation that  the  children  continue  to
         live with their father and that this forms a family unit.

26. Having found that the relationship between the father and  the  mother,
    who is the sponsor, continues  to  be  genuine  and  subsisting,  I  am
    satisfied that there continues to be a family unit, albeit one that has
    through the difficulties arising from the conflict in Somalia, one that
    has had to take place in different countries.    I  am  satisfied  that
    they all formed part of the same family unit when the sponsor left  her
    country of her habitual residence in order to seek asylum; it  has  not
    been submitted to me that this was not so.

27. Finally, I note that it has not been submitted that  sub-paragraph  (v)
    applies in this case, nor is there any indication that it should.

Conclusion

28. For these reasons  I  am  satisfied  that  the  appellants  fulfil  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules and on that basis I  allow  their
    appeals.  In the circumstances it is unnecessary  for  me  to  consider
    also whether their refusal of entry clearance  was  in  breach  of  the
    United Kingdom's obligations pursuant to Article 8 of the Human  Rights
    Convention.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside

29. I remake the decision by allowing all the appeals under the Immigration
    Rules.

Signed                                  Date 18 May 2017
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
