
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/03892/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 21 January 2014                            |On 29 January 2014           |
|                                              |                             |

                                           (Given orally on 21 January 2014)

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SOUTHERN

                                   Between

                            OSAZEE PALMER AKENUWA

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, MADRID



                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No representative
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Kiss, Home Office Presenting Officer










                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The respondent, the Entry Clearance Officer at Madrid, has been granted
    permission to appeal against the decision of a Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal, Dr Majid, who by a determination promulgated  on  25  October
    2013 allowed the appellant's appeal against the decision of  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer to refuse entry clearance as the spouse of  a  person
    present and settled in the United Kingdom.  The sponsor,  Miss  Cecilia
    Akpan is a British citizen as indeed is her daughter and  although  the
    appellant is not represented before me today, Miss Akpan  has  attended
    with her daughter and I have heard what she has to say in  response  to
    the challenge brought today by the Secretary of State on behalf of  the
    Entry Clearance Officer.

 2. The grounds for seeking permission to appeal are that the judge  simply
    failed to grapple with what was in issue between the parties and failed
    to  provide  any  reasoning  to  support  his  conclusion   that   this
    application, which failed to meet the requirements  of  the  applicable
    immigration rules, was one  that  should  succeed  on  the  basis  that
    refusal  to  grant  entry  clearance  would  bring  about  an  unlawful
    infringement of rights protected by Article 8 of the ECHR.

 3. Regrettably, I have no doubt at all that the grounds are made out.   It
    may be that it is necessary  to  say  no  more  than  that  this  is  a
    hopelessly    inadequately    determination    which    discloses     a
    misunderstanding  of  the  applicable  legal   principles   and   fails
    altogether to resolve the matters in issue between the parties.

 4. The respondent  did  not  accept  that  the  relationship  between  the
    appellant and the person said to  be  his  sixteen  year  old  daughter
    living here in the United Kingdom, as is claimed.   The marriage to the
    sponsor took place as recently as August 2012 and the respondent points
    out that the sponsor was previously married to someone else.  There was
    no birth certificate produced to the Entry Clearance Officer  with  the
    application, and there was no evidence of contact between the appellant
    and this child.  Indeed, it is said that there was no evidence that the
    appellant had ever visited the United Kingdom at all.   The  judge  has
    simply not engaged with any of this.

 5. We have, today, evidence of a  DNA  test  which  may  represent  cogent
    evidence speaking in favour of that which the  appellant  asserts;  but
    that does not assist with the real hurdles  that  face  Miss  Akpan  in
    seeking  to  persuade  me  to  salvage  anything  at  all   from   this
    determination.

 6. Other reasons given by the Entry Clearance  Officer  for  refusing  the
    application include that the appellant had failed to  provide  required
    documentary evidence of the sponsor's financial position.   Again, that
    is an issue which the judge  has  simply  not  addressed  and,  in  the
    context of this  particular  application  and  in  the  context  of  an
    assessment of public interest issues, this was an important issue  that
    the judge had to deal with.  The consequence of all  this  is  that  in
    reality there has been no  proper  assessment  at  all  of  the  issues
    arising in this appeal.  The failure of the  judge  to  deal  with  the
    issues in the appeal, or to provide any proper reasoning to explain why
    this was an appeal that should succeed on human rights grounds, amounts
    to an error of law such as to require his decision to be set  aside  in
    its entirety.

 7. For those reasons, this appeal to the Upper Tribunal will be allowed to
    the extent that it will be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal  to
    be listed before a different judge of that Tribunal  to  be  determined
    afresh.









                                               Upper Tribunal Judge Southern

                                              Immigration and Asylum Chamber
                                                       Date: 21 January 2014
