
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/03604/2014
                                                               OA/03780/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th August 2015                  |On 20th August 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                            MISS OSASU OGIERIAKHI
                             Mr AMOS ORIERIAKHI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr S Canter, Counsel, instructed by Farani Javid
                    Taylor Solicitors LPP
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
                    Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are citizens of Nigeria who appealed against the refusal
    of entry clearance to grant them entry  to  the  UK  as  the  dependent
    children of their father and British citizen, Mr Peter Ayo  Ogieriakhi.
    Their applications were refused under paragraph 297 of  the  Rules  and
    under Article 8 ECHR the date of refusal being 3rd February 2014. Their
    subsequent appeal to Judges Daldry and Denson was dismissed.

 2. In short, the judges gave two substantial reasons  for  dismissing  the
    appeal.  Firstly, the Sponsor had not  shown  he  had  exercised  "sole
    responsibility" for the children and secondly,  the  accommodation  was
    not adequate.

 3. The Grounds of Appeal point to the fact that the judges failed to apply
    paragraph 297(d) of the Rules which significantly did not  require  the
    element of "sole responsibility" to be satisfied.  This was because the
    Appellants' mother  was  deceased  and  the  judges  appeared  to  have
    overlooked that.  No more need be said about that  aspect  because  the
    parties agreed that this was a material error.

 4. The judges also found that the accommodation was "inadequate" as stated
    by the Sponsor but it was said in the grounds that the judges were also
    wrong in their conclusion on this aspect given that the property was  a
    two bedroom flat with a "three bed  space".   Given  that  the  Sponsor
    lived alone  at  the  date  of  decision  the  property  would  not  be
    overcrowded. It was also said that the  Sponsor  did  not  say  in  his
    evidence that the property was "inadequate" for the three  persons  but
    merely said he wanted to improve the size  of  the  accommodation  once
    entry clearance was granted.

 5. Permission to appeal was duly granted. The Secretary of State lodged  a
    Rule 24 notice indicating that it was for the Appellants to  show  that
    their accommodation was adequate and the  panel  had  given  sufficient
    reasoning for their findings, pointing  out  the  lack  of  documentary
    evidence to support the claims i.e. a property inspection report.

 6. Before me Mr Canter for the  Appellants  said  that  the  accommodation
    available at the date of decision, namely 42 [ - ] House, was  adequate
    because it contained two bedrooms  and  a  living  room.   There  would
    therefore be a separate bedroom for each of the three  persons  in  the
    property and there could not be said to be overcrowding in terms of the
    Housing Acts.   The  tenancy  agreement  at  page  117  of  the  bundle
    confirmed the Sponsor's evidence in this regard. Whatever  the  Sponsor
    may have said about the apparent inadequacy of  the  accommodation  the
    issue required to be looked at on an objective basis and on that  basis
    the Appellants should succeed.  If it was necessary to look at the  new
    property at 82 [ - ] Lanes then the Sponsor's evidence was that he  now
    had a "spare room".  There was not a hint in the findings of the  panel
    that they regarded the tenancy agreement as in any  way  inadequate  or
    that they were rejecting any parts of the Sponsor's evidence.   On  the
    contrary, they were relying on what he said about the inadequacy of the
    accommodation to dismiss the appeal.  They had been wrong to do so  and
    for the reasons stated I was asked to set the decision aside and  allow
    the appeal.

 7. For the Home Office Ms Isherwood relied on her Rule  24  notice.  There
    was no material error in law.   The  Sponsor's  witness  statement  was
    silent on the issue of accommodation. The panel were entitled  to  take
    the view they did take given that the Sponsor  had  accepted  that  the
    accommodation was inadequate.   I  was  asked  to  uphold  the  panel's
    decision.

 8. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

 9. It is agreed that the panel fell into material error in concluding that
    the Sponsor was bound to prove he had  "sole  responsibility"  for  the
    children and that error is acknowledged by the Home Office.

10. The panel found that the accommodation of 42 [ - ] House was inadequate
    (as was the new accommodation at 82 [ - ] Lanes).

11. Being an entry clearance case I am bound to look  at  matters  as  they
    stood at the date of decision - see DR  (ECO:  post-decision  evidence)
    Morocco* [2005] UKIAT 00038.  It seems to have been put to the  Sponsor
    in evidence that this accommodation was inadequate and he may well have
    agreed with that.  After all, on  his  evidence  there  were  only  two
    bedrooms and assuming each child would wish to have their  own  bedroom
    that meant that the living room would have to be  used  as  a  bedroom,
    which many persons would think was  essentially  unsatisfactory.   From
    Counsel's note produced before me it seems that the Sponsor was asked a
    leading question on  the  issue  of  accommodation,  namely  "When  the
    application was submitted they would  live  at  42  [  -  ]  Road,  not
    adequate for you and two children. Is that why you moved?"

12. To that question the Sponsor agreed that this was why he had moved.  To
    move to a larger property with two children of a different sex would be
    entirely understandable.  However whatever the  Sponsor  thought  about
    the adequacy of the accommodation is not determinative  of  whether  or
    not the accommodation was adequate in terms of the  Immigration  rules.
    The test must be an objective one  and  depends  on  the  size  of  the
    accommodation - it does not depend on the description given  of  it  by
    the Sponsor.

13. Before me Ms Isherwood was good enough to agree  (correctly)  that  the
    fact that there was a living room  in  addition  to  the  two  bedrooms
    indicated that the accommodation was adequate under the  Housing  Acts.
    Apart from relying on the admission of the Sponsor  that  the  property
    was inadequate, the panel gave no further reasons why the accommodation
    requirements of the Rule were not satisfied.  The reason they did  give
    was unsound and constitutes a material error in law.   It is  therefore
    necessary to set aside the decision and remake it.

14. The panel were not disputing the evidence of the Sponsor  in  any  way.
    They accepted that the property at 42 [ - ] House  had  three  rooms  -
    indeed  the  tenancy  agreement  confirms  that.   On  that  basis  the
    requirements of Rule 297  (iv)  namely  that  the  Appellants  will  be
    "accommodated adequately" are satisfied.

15. It is not necessary to go on and consider the new accommodation at 82 [
    - ] Lanes. In passing  it might be said that the panel fell into  error
    by doing so and also erred in their conclusions about the  adequacy  of
    the accommodation there given that the Sponsor explained that there was
    a "spare room" (see paragraph 20 of the decision). However I  emphasize
    that the obligation of the panel was to consider the  adequacy  of  the
    available accommodation at the date of decision.

16. For the reasons stated it is necessary to set this decision  aside  and
    allow the appeal. There is no need for an anonymity order.

Notice of Decision

17. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

18. I set aside the decision.

19. I remake the decision in the appeal by allowing it.

20. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald
