
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/03768/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 February 2016                  |On 24 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                 MISS W E A
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                      v

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Bandagani, counsel instructed by Lambeth Law
Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The Appellant is a national of Ethiopia, born on 8 November  1996.  On
24 April 2014, she made an application for entry clearance in order to  join
her father and Sponsor, who had been granted ILR as a refugee in the  United
Kingdom. This application was refused on the basis  that  the  ECO  was  not
satisfied that the Appellant was part of the Sponsor's family  unit  at  the
time he left Ethiopia. The ECO further doubted the relationship claimed.

2.    The Appellant appealed against  this  decision  and  the  appeal  came
before First-tier Tribunal Judge Moore for hearing on 22  July  2015.  In  a
decision and reasons promulgated on 5 August 2015, the Judge  dismissed  the
appeal. He accepted at [23] in light  of  the  Cellmark  DNA  report  of  21
February 2014 that it is more likely  than  not  that  the  Sponsor  is  the
father of the Appellant but found at [24] that the Appellant  was  not  part
of the Sponsor's family unit at the time he left Ethiopia,  as  he  was  not
aware that she had been born until 2002.

3.    An application for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was
made in time on 10 August 2015. The grounds in support  of  the  application
dated  16  August  2015  asserted  inter  alia  that  the  Judge  had  erred
materially in law in that the familial relationship began at birth  and  the
Respondent's policy instructions at 4.3. provide  that  "children  conceived
before the refugee fled to seek asylum in the UK but born  post  flight  are
considered part of the sponsor's pre-existing family."

4.     Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
Grimmett on 15 January 2016 on the basis  that  it  was  arguable  that  the
Judge erred in not considering the  Respondent's  policy  instructions  with
regard to the children of refugees.

Hearing

5.    At the hearing before  me,  Mr  Jarvis  produced  a  letter  dated  16
February 2016 in  which  he  states:  "the  ECO  takes  the  view  that  the
Appellant has made out her  case  that  the  FtT  materially  erred  in  its
approach to the question of whether or not the A  was  part  of  the  family
unit of the person granted asylum  at  the  time  that  the  person  granted
asylum left the country of his habitual residence in order  to  seek  asylum
...the ECO accepts the A's  contention  that  a  child  conceived  prior  to
flight from the relevant country is included in  the  definition  of  family
unit." The letter also  expressly  accepts  that  the  Appellant  meets  the
definition  and  requirements  of  paragraph  352D(iv)  and  there  was   no
suggestion by the ECO that the Appellant had formed an independent life  and
in any event the argument was not being pursued in light of NM ("leading  an
independent life") Zimbabwe [2007] UKAIT 00051. It was  suggested  that  the
Appellant be allowed substantively.

6.    Mr Jarvis confirmed at the hearing that  this  represented  the  ECO's
position and with the agreement of Mr Bandagani I indicated that,  in  light
of the ECO's concession and stated position, I  found  that  the  First-tier
Tribunal Judge had  erred  materially  in  law  and  the  appeal  should  be
allowed.

Decision

7.    The decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Moore  is  vitiated  by
material error of law and cannot stand.  I substitute  a  decision  allowing
the appeal on the  basis  that  the  Appellant  meets  the  requirements  of
paragraph 352D of the Immigration Rules, as has been accepted  by  the  ECO.
In light of the fact that  the  Appellant's  father  and  Sponsor  has  been
diagnosed with cancer and is seriously ill, I would request that  the  Entry
Clearance  post  give  consideration  to  expediting  the  grant  of   entry
clearance to the Appellant so she might  join  her  father  as  soon  as  is
reasonably possible.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

18 February 2016
