
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/03123/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at  Field House                |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 9 October 2015                    |On 19 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                                LAXMAN GUPUNG
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Puar (counsel) instructed by N C Brothers & Co,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms E Savage, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.    This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Phull promulgated  on  5th  May  2015,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal.

Background

3.    The Appellant was born on 5 May 1987 and is a national of Nepal.

4.    On 12 February 2014 the Secretary of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
application for entry clearance as an adult dependent relative of  a  person
present & settled in the UK.

The Judge's Decision

5.     The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   First-tier
Tribunal  Judge  Phull  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the
Respondent's decision.

6.    Grounds of appeal were lodged and on  31st  July  2015  Judge  Simpson
gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

    "... having found in [35] and [36] that A  ".....  Is  emotionally  and
    financially dependent on his mother for his needs....  I  am  satisfied
    that they enjoy a relationship which goes beyond normal emotional  ties
    and therefore Article 8 is engaged" it is arguable that  she  ought  to
    have followed the guidelines in Ghising & Ors, particularly as the  ECO
    refused entry clearance solely on public interest grounds."

The Hearing

7.    Mr Puar, for the  appellant  adopted  the  terms  of  the  grounds  of
appeal. He told me that there is no great dispute about the  facts  in  this
case, but that the Judge had carried out an  inadequate  balancing  exercise
when assessing the question of proportionality. He told me  that  the  Judge
finds that family life exists and at [15] correctly  identifies  the  burden
of proof, but incorrectly  sites  Ghising  (family  life  -  adults-  Ghurka
policy) [2012] UKUT 00160 (IAC).  At  [39]  (he  told  me  that)  the  Judge
reverses the burden of proof, and so makes a material error of law. He  told
me that the Judge has applied the wrong test, and had the Judge applied  the
test set out in Ghising &  Others  (Ghurkas/BOCs:  historic  wrong;  weight)
[2013] UKUT 00567(IAC), the appellant's appeal would have met with  success.
He urged me to allow the appeal, set aside the  decision  and  substitute  a
decision allowing the appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision.

8.    Ms Savage for the  respondent  simply  told  me  that  the  respondent
accepts that the Judge did not follow the guidance  given  in  the  case  of
Ghising  &  Others  (Ghurkas/BOCs:  historic  wrong;  weight)  [2013]   UKUT
00567(IAC), and told me that she could see force in the  arguments  advanced
for the appellant

Analysis

9.    In Ghising and others (Ghurkhas/BOCs: historic wrong;  weight)  [2013]
UKUT 00567 (IAC) it was held that (i) In  finding  that  the  weight  to  be
accorded to the historic wrong in Ghurkha ex-servicemen cases was not to  be
regarded as less than that to be accorded the  historic  wrong  suffered  by
British Overseas citizens, the Court of Appeal in Gurung and  others  [2013]
EWCA Civ 8 did not hold that, in either Gurkha or BOC cases, the  effect  of
the historic wrong is to reverse or otherwise  alter  the  burden  of  proof
that  applies  in  Article  8  proportionality  assessments;  (ii)  When  an
Appellant has shown that there is family/private life and the decision  made
by the Respondent amounts to an interference with it, the burden  lies  with
the Respondent to show that a decision to remove is proportionate  (although
Appellants will, in practice, bear the responsibility of  adducing  evidence
that lies  within  their  remit  and  about  which  the  Respondent  may  be
unaware); (iii) What concerned the Court in Gurung and others  was  not  the
burden of proof but, rather,  the  issue  of  weight  in  a  proportionality
assessment. The Court held that, as in the case of BOCs, the historic  wrong
suffered by Gurkha ex-servicemen should be given  substantial  weight;  (iv)
Accordingly, where it is found that Article 8 is engaged and,  but  for  the
historic wrong, the Appellant would have been settled in the  UK  long  ago,
this will ordinarily determine the outcome of the Article 8  proportionality
assessment in an Appellant's favour, where the  matters  relied  on  by  the
SSHD/ ECO consist solely of  the  public  interest  in  maintaining  a  firm
immigration policy; (v) It can therefore be seen that Appellants  in  Gurkha
(and BOC) cases will not necessarily succeed, even though (a)  their  family
life engages Article 8(1); and (b) the evidence shows they would  have  come
to the United  Kingdom  with  their  father,  but  for  the  injustice  that
prevented the latter from settling here  earlier.   If  the  Respondent  can
point to matters over and above the public interest in  maintaining  a  firm
immigration policy, which argue in favour  of  removal  or  the  refusal  of
leave to enter, these matters  must  be  given  appropriate  weight  in  the
balance in the Respondent's favour. Thus, a bad immigration  history  and/or
criminal behaviour may still be sufficient to outweigh the powerful  factors
bearing on the Appellant's side of the balance.

10.   It is common ground that the Judge's findings can stand in this  case.
The difficulty that the judge ran into was a clear misdirection of  law.  At
[15] the Judge takes guidance from  the  case  of  Ghising  (family  life  -
adults- Ghurka policy) [2012] UKUT 00160 (IAC).  She was  wrong  to  do  so.
Guidance  in  a  case  of  this  nature  comes  from  Ghising   and   others
(Ghurkhas/BOCs:  historic  wrong;  weight)  [2013]  UKUT  00567  (IAC).   In
referring to Ghising (family life  -  adults-  Ghurka  policy)  [2012]  UKUT
00160 (IAC) the Judge manifestly applied the wrong test.

11.   At [34] & [35] the Judge finds that  family  life  exists  within  the
meaning of Article 8 ECHR.  At  [37]  the  Judge  narrates  "There  will  be
interference by the decision to exclude and it is  in  accordance  with  the
law. The question  for  me  is  whether  in  all  the  circumstances  it  is
proportionate."  In  the  second  sentence  of  [39]  the  Judge  says  "The
appellant does not provide evidence why his  exclusion  is  disproportionate
and how his circumstances are exceptional".

12.   In Ghising and others (Ghurkhas/BOCs: historic wrong;  weight)  [2013]
UKUT 00567 (IAC) it was held that when an Appellant has shown that there  is
family/private life and the decision made by the Respondent  amounts  to  an
interference with it, the burden lies with the Respondent  to  show  that  a
decision to remove is proportionate

13.   In the second sentence of [39] the Judge clearly reverses  the  burden
of proof. I therefore find that the decision  contains  material  errors  in
law and requires to be remade, however I find that there  is  no  error  the
Judge's findings of fact, and so they are preserved.

14.   At  [31]  the  Judge  finds  that  the  appellant  cannot  fulfil  the
requirements of the immigration rules. That is not  something  which  is  in
dispute. The Judge correctly directed himself in relation to the  five  step
test set out in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27, and considers section 117A & 117B  of
the 2002 Act.  The determinative question in this case is  whether  or  not,
on the facts as the Judge found them to be, the respondent's decision  is  a
disproportionate interference with the  appellant's  right  to  respect  for
family life.

15.   The appellant's mother is a British citizen, who settled in the UK  in
2006. Although the appellant is now an adult, the Judge  found  that  family
life exists between the  appellant  and  his  British  citizen  mother.  The
appellant's late father was a member of the Gurkha  Brigade.  The  appellant
is a student. He suffers from depression and has passive suicidal  thoughts.
He lives alone and is withdrawn and isolated. The appellant's father  served
in the British Army for 25 years until he was discharged in  1973.  He  died
in 2005, but if he had been given the opportunity he would have  settled  in
the UK.

16.   The Judge's findings in fact indicate that there has been an  historic
wrong suffered by the appellant's late father would have settled in  the  UK
if he had the opportunity to do so. That is a factor  which  weighs  in  the
appellant's favour. The effect of the  respondent's  decision  would  be  to
enforce continued separation of the appellant and his mother.  Although  the
appellant is an adult, he is a vulnerable young man who is in daily  contact
with his mother. The Judge found at [36] that the relationship  between  the
appellant and his mother goes beyond normal emotional ties.

17.   I turn to section 117B of the 2002 act. This case concerns  Article  8
family life,  so  that  subsections  (4)  (5)  &  (6)  are  irrelevant.  The
documentary evidence indicates that the appellant speaks English,  and  that
his mother has supported him. She is in a financially  comfortable  position
and continues her support. There are therefore more factors in section  117B
which were in the appellant's favour than count against  the  appellant.  In
addition the appellant's father was deprived of the  opportunity  to  settle
in UK. Had he  done  so  it  is  likely  that  a  significant  part  of  the
appellant's child been spent in the UK.

18.   The respondent's position is simply that entry  clearance  is  refused
solely on public interest grounds. Section 117B(1) of the 2002 act tells  me
that effective immigration control is in the public interest.

19.   When  I  weigh  those  factors  against  one  another  and  apply  the
guidelines in the  case  of  Ghising  and  others  (Ghurkhas/BOCs:  historic
wrong; weight) [2013] UKUT 00567 (IAC) I come to  the  conclusion  that  the
respondent's decision is a disproportionate interference with the  right  to
respect for family life within the meaning of Article 8 ECHR.

Decision

20.   The decision of the First-tier  tribunal  is  tainted  by  a  material
error of law.

21.   I set aside the decision & substitute the following decision.

22.   I dismiss the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

23.   The appeal is allowed on Article 8 ECHR grounds.


Signed      Date 15 October 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
