
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: oa 03628 2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24 April 2014                              |On 27 June 2014              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                       entry clearance officer warsaw
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              LIRJETA SEFEDINI
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms P Yong, Counsel instructed by MetroLaw Solicitors
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Entry Clearance Officer against  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of the respondent, who I
    will call the claimant, against the decision  of  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer refusing her entry clearance to the United Kingdom as the  wife
    of a person present and settled there.

 2. The application was refused because the claimant had not supported  her
    application with certain accounting documents specified in  the  Rules.
    In particular she had not produced an annual self-assessment tax return
    or statement of account or particular bank statements from her  husband
    to prove that he was in a position to support her  financially  in  the
    United Kingdom.

 3. The appeal came before a First-tier Tribunal Judge who  I  know  is  an
    extremely experienced immigration practitioner. She  was  satisfied  on
    the evidence before her that  the  claimant  would  be  supported  more
    generously or more substantially than the Rules required by her husband
    who, the judge found, was successful in his business and more than able
    to provide the money required.  She therefore  allowed  the  appeal  on
    human rights grounds.

 4. It is very easy to see why she has made the decision that she did.  The
    United Kingdom is under an obligation to promote a person's private and
    family life.  Generally there is a strong public interest in  promoting
    a genuine marriage. A countervailing factor may be that  the  appellant
    would have to be supported by the state but that simply does not  exist
    here. The evidence is clear. The claimant would  be  supported  by  her
    husband.

 5. The problem is that the decision to refuse the application  was  wholly
    lawful.  The Immigration Rules have been changed so that there are very
    precise  requirements  about  what  must  be  produced  to  support  an
    application and a failure to comply with those  requirements  according
    to the Rules will lead to the decision being  refused.   There  was  no
    possible basis for criticising the  decision  of  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer except on human rights grounds.  We  have  been  told  on  many
    occasions  by  the  Higher  Courts  and  indeed  the   Tribunal's   own
    jurisprudence, that human rights are not there as a near-miss mechanism
    to allow a person to succeed in an application that does not quite meet
    the requirements of the Rules.

 6. According to the Entry Clearance Officer the First-tier Tribunal should
    have made a clear finding that the applicant could  not  succeed  under
    the  Rules  and  then  asked  herself  if  there  were  compelling   or
    exceptional circumstances that made it appropriate to allow the  appeal
    on human rights grounds.  The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did  not  do
    that. I agree with the Entry Clearance Officer  that  she  should  have
    done. This is made clear in Gulshan (Article 8 - new  Rules  -  correct
    approach) Pakistan [2013] UKUT  640  (IAC).  The  decision  in  Gulshan
    declares the law but it published on the same  day  as  the  Tribunal's
    decision was promulgated. Clearly the First-tier Tribunal did not  know
    about it. She would have expressed herself differently if it  had  been
    before her.

 7. Miss Young has drawn my attention to paragraph 22 of the  determination
    where there is reference to authority  and  the  observation  that  the
    sponsoring husband has indefinite leave to remain and has  built  up  a
    successful business and was contributing to the economy through his tax
    and providing a public service as a taxi driver  and  was  interrupting
    these things to travel to Prestina to preserve  his  relationship  with
    his wife.  I do not see how these things can be seen as  compelling  or
    exceptional circumstances.  They are the kind of  things  that  can  be
    expected of anybody in regular work who would be making a  contribution
    to the community. I do not see now having to choose between living  and
    working in the United Kingdom or living outside the United  Kingdom  to
    be with a wife can be described properly as compelling and  exceptional
    circumstances within the meaning of the Rules.

 8. It is always possible that a person would be  able  to  show  on  human
    rights grounds compelling or exceptional reasons to succeed  even  when
    they cannot meet the strict requirements of the  Rules  but  there  was
    nothing before me to suggest there was any compelling reason  to  allow
    the application now. The appellant should have delayed her  application
    until her husband had accumulated the evidence required by the rules.

 9. I am aware of the  decision  of  the  High  Court  in  MM,  R  (On  the
    Application Of) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2013]
    EWHC 1900 (Admin). The First-tier Tribunal Judge referred to it in  her
    determination but did not purport to follow it. For  my  part  I  think
    that there are still issues to decide concerning the  correct  approach
    when it seems that a person will never  be  able  to  raise  the  funds
    required by the rules but will be  maintained.  This  instant  case  is
    about waiting until the rules can be met. I cannot see how such waiting
    can be described properly as  "disproportionate".  There  is  a  strong
    public interest in preserving the proper system of immigration  control
    which involves the consistent application of the Rules. Here there will
    be delay before a person can make a successful application but, in  the
    absence of compelling circumstances of a kind that  are  not  suggested
    here, I see no basis for allowing it on human rights grounds.

10. If the documents are as they appear to be there seems to be  no  reason
    at all why a future application cannot succeed.  Certainly nothing  has
    happened in these proceedings that in any way undermine  the  integrity
    of the claimant or her husband.

11. I remind myself that this decision I am making will be disappointing to
    the claimant and I remind myself that I must  not  interfere  with  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal merely because it is  not  the  one
    that I would have made.  I must be satisfied that it was wrong but  for
    the reasons  given,  in  my  judgment  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge
    misdirected itself or wrongly applied the law to the facts and  reached
    a conclusion that was not open to her and I therefore allow the  appeal
    of the Entry Clearance Officer.

12. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and I substitute  a
    decision  dismissing  the  claimant's  appeal  against   the   decision
    complained of.

Decision

The Entry Clearance Officer's appeal is allowed.  I  substitute  a  decision
dismissing the claimant's  appeal  against  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's
decision.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 25 June 2014                   |








