
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
OA/03895/2014




|At  Field House                       |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 3rd July  2015                     |On 6th July 2015                    |
|                                      |                                    |
|                                      |                                    |


                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between


                                    MR TD
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                          Appellant

                                     And


             THE  ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER FOR LABANON AT BEIRUT


                                                          Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr R, Sponsor.
For the Respondent: Ms Julie Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction


1. The proceedings before the first tier tribunal were anonymised. No
   application has been made to change this and so this should be
   maintained.

2. I will refer to the parties as they were in the First-tier Tribunal
   though the respondent is appealing in these proceedings.

3. The appellant sought a family permit under European Treaty provisions so
   as to gain entry clearance to join his partner, Mr R. The basis of the
   application was that Mr R, an Italian national, was exercising Treaty
   rights in the United Kingdom and that they were in a same-sex
   relationship. They were not married nor had they entered into a civil
   partnership.

4. The application was refused because the entry clearance officer was not
   satisfied that they were in a durable relationship. The Immigration (EEA)
   Regulations 2006 (the 2006 regulations) are the domestic application of
   the Treaty provisions. Regulation 7 deals with family members, which
   includes a person spouse or civil partner. Regulation 8 is concerned with
   extended family members, which at regulation 8(5) includes partners other
   than civil partners of an EEA national

5. It is necessary to establish the relationship is durable. For parity
   with domestic provisions the respondent normally expects the parties to
   have been together for two years though this is merely a rule of thumb.
   The entry clearance officer was not satisfied they were in a durable
   relationship. It was suggested that the appellant make a fee paid
   application under paragraph 294 of the immigration rules. This deals with
   leave to enter with a view to entering into a marriage or civil
   partnership.

6. The appellant's appeal was heard by First tier Judge Black on 27 January
   2015. The appeal was allowed with the decision promulgated on 30 January
   2015. The judge found that the appellant's sponsor was exercising Treaty
   rights. The sponsor was found to be a credible and reliable witness to
   the truth. The judge accepted that the couple had been in a relationship
   for four years and they intended to enter into a civil partnership as
   soon as they were able to do so. The decision records that the sponsor
   sends funds to the appellant who, although in employment, is meeting
   family commitments. The appellant had delayed making his application
   because his mother was experiencing ill health. Whilst the appellant and
   sponsor had never cohabited, the judge found ample evidence of the
   relationship through regular contact .At paragraph 20 the judge concluded
   they were in a durable relationship, allowed the appeal and made a whole
   fee award.

The Upper Tribunal

7. In seeking leave to appeal to the Upper Tribunal the respondent relied
   upon only one issue, namely, the fact the judge allowed the appeal
   outright, rather than referring the matter back to the respondent. This
   was because the grant of a family permit to an extended family member was
   in the respondent's discretion. The respondent had not had an opportunity
   to exercise that discretion by the appeal being allowed outright.

8. The sponsor has attended and displayed a good command of English. He
   appeared to appreciate the point being made by the respondent and
   emphasised his wish to marry soon.

9. Ms Isherwood takes no issue with the finding that the parties are in a
   durable relationship. Rather, the only objection relates to the fact the
   judge allowed the appeal outright.


Error of law

10. I am satisfied that there is a material error of law in the decision.

11. The leave application refers to regulation 17 which deals with the
   issue of residence card. However, the application is for a family permit
   under regulation 12.This is concerned with admission to the United
   Kingdom. Both provisions maintain the distinction between family and
   extended family members .

12. If regulation 12 of the 2006 regulations is considered it is clear
   there is a distinction between the status of a family member and that of
   an extended family members. By regulation 12(1) an entry clearance
   officer must issue a family permit to family member. However, regulation
   12(2) provides that an entry clearance officer may issue a family permit
   to an extended family member. Clearly this confers discretion on the
   entry clearance officer. Regulation 12(2)(b) requires the entry clearance
   officer to consider if in all the circumstances it is appropriate to
   issue the permit. Regulation 12(3) requires the entry clearance officer
   to undertake an extensive examination of the personal circumstances of
   the applicant.

13. The leave application referred to the decision of Ihemedu (OFM-meaning
   ) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00340(IAC). The head note states that Article 3(2)
   of Directive 2004/38/EC ("Citizens Directive") treats other family
   members ("OFMs") as a residual category .Regulation 17(4) makes the issue
   of a residence card to an OFM/extended family member a matter of
   discretion. Where the Secretary of State has not yet exercised that
   discretion the most an immigration judge is entitled to do is to allow
   the appeal as being not in accordance with the law, leaving the matter of
   whether to exercise this discretion in the appellant's favour to the
   Secretary of State.

14. My conclusion is that there was a material error of law in the judge
   allowing the appeal outright. Having found a durable relationship the
   judge should have allowed the appeal to the limited extent that the
   decision was not in accordance with the law and the matter referred to
   the entry clearance officer for consideration.

Decision.

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside as it contains a
   material error of law.

16. The entry clearance officer's appeal is allowed to a limited extent. I
   find the original decision of the entry clearance officer was not in
   accordance with the law but the First tier Judge was not entitled to
   allow the appeal outright.

17. I preserve all of the factual findings of the First tier Judge and
   direct the entry clearance officer to consider whether a family permit
   should be issued in all the circumstance, bearing in mind the findings of
   the First tier Tribunal.

Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly

Fee Order

18. The First-tier Tribunal made a full fee order because the appeal was
   being allowed. That no longer is the position.

Signed                                           Dated:

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly

























