

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/03633/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |                   Determination     |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 22nd July 2015                     |                   On 27th July 2015 |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between


                                ANXHELA MALAJ
                          (No anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - TIRANA
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Ms. T. Murshed, instructed by B G Lawyers LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms J. Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 History of Appeal


   1. The Appellant, who was born on 21st November 1993, is  a  national  of
      Albania. She married her sponsor on 25th April 2013. He  was  born  in
      Albania on 18th October 1980. She  applied  for  entry  clearance  and
      settlement as his partner on 8th November 2013.


   2. On 7th February 2014,  the  Respondent  refused  her  application.  He
      asserted that paragraph S-EC.2.2 of Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration
      Rules applied because, whether  or  not  to  her  knowledge,  a  false
      document had  been  submitted  in  relation  to  her  application.  In
      particular, the Respondent noted that her sponsor  had  submitted  his
      British passport, which stated that he had been born in  Prishtina  in
      Kosovo, but their "marriage certificate" showed that he had been  born
      in Fier in Albania. The Entry Clearance Officer also said that he  was
      not satisfied that the Appellant and her sponsor were in a genuine and
      subsisting relationship and that they intended to live together  on  a
      permanent basis or that their marriage was valid.

   3. In the refusal letter the Entry Clearance Officer also relied on  A  v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010] EWCA Civ 773.

   4. The Appellant appealed against this decision and her appeal was  heard
      by First-tier Tribunal Judge Braybrook on  18th  March  2015.  In  her
      determination and reasons, promulgated on 30th March 2015,  the  Judge
      found that the Appellant's marriage was  genuine  and  subsisting  and
      that  she  was  able  to  meet  the  financial  requirements  of   the
      Immigration Rules.

   5. In a statutory declaration the sponsor had admitted that he  had  been
      born in Albania but had said that he was from Kosovo when  he  arrived
      in the United Kingdom, as a child, in 1997 and had  not  revealed  his
      true nationality when applying for indefinite leave to remain and then
      British citizenship.

   6. At the hearing the Judge accepted that paragraph S-EC.2.2  had  to  be
      read in the context  of  paragraph  S-EC.2.1,  which  states  that  an
      "applicant will normally be refused on grounds of suitability  if  any
      of paragraphs S-EC.2.2 to 2.5 apply". Therefore, a  refusal  under  S-
      EC.2.2 was not mandatory.

   7. She then noted that in the refusal letter the Entry Clearance  Officer
      had relied on an extract from AA (Nigeria)  which  said  that  "it  is
      highly likely therefore that where an applicant uses in all  innocence
      a false document for the purpose  of  obtaining  entry  clearance,  or
      leave to enter or to remain, it is because some other party, it  might
      be a parent, or sponsor, or agent, has dishonestly promoted the use of
      that document. The response of a requirement of mandatory  refusal  is
      entirely understandable in such a situation". As  a  consequence,  she
      concluded that the Entry Clearance Officer had misdirected himself and
      considered that the refusal of  entry  clearance  was  mandatory.  The
      Judge allowed the Appellant's appeal on the  limited  basis  that  his
      decision had not been in accordance with the law.

   8. The Respondent's grounds of appeal against this decision  referred  to
      there being a decision under  paragraph  320(7A)  of  the  Immigration
      Rules when the decision had been taken  under  paragraph  S-EC2.2.  of
      Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules. Reliance was also placed  on  KB
      (paragraph: 320(7A): "false  representations")  Albania  [2009]  UKAIT
      00043. It was also asserted that the Judge's decision was not clear.

   9. First-tier Tribunal Judge Chohan granted permission to appeal  on  1st
      June 2015 on the basis that the Judge's decision had not been clear.

 Error of Law Hearing

  10. At the hearing before me the Home Office Presenting  Officer  accepted
      that the refusal had been  taken  under  paragraph  S-EC.2.2  and  not
      paragraph 320(7A).  She also agreed that the Entry Clearance Officer's
      decision had not been in accordance  with  the  law.  The  Appellant's
      counsel was in agreement with this analysis. They both submitted  that
      the case should be remitted to the entry clearance officer for a fresh
      decision on the Appellant's application.
 .
  11. I also note that the case of KB was not of relevance as it  considered
      circumstances in which a decision under  paragraph  320(7A)  would  be
      lawful.


  12. I also find that the decision reached by the First-tier Tribunal Judge
      was clear when paragraph 18 of her determination and reasons is  given
      its plain and ordinary meaning. She said that "on the evidence overall
      and given that the Respondent in referring to A  considered  that  the
      refusal was mandatory rather than  discretionary,  the  appellant  has
      satisfied me that the decision  was  not  a  proper  exercise  of  the
      respondent's discretion and is therefore not in  accordance  with  the
      law".

  13. For all of these reasons I am satisfied that there  were  no  material
      errors of law in the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  determination  and
      reasons and that her decision should not be set aside..



          Conclusions:

    1.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge's determination and reasons did  not
         include any material errors of law.

      2. The decision stands and the application for entry clearance  should
         be remitted to the Entry Clearance Officer  for  a  fresh  decision
         within the law.


     Directions

      1.        The  Appellant  and  the   Respondent   should   both   seek
         clarification as to the basis upon which the sponsor was  initially
         granted discretionary leave to remain and then subsequently granted
         indefinite leave to remain and submit this evidence  to  the  Entry
         Clearance  Officer  within  28  days   of   this   decision   being
         promulgated.


[pic]





                                    Date  24th July 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch
