
[pic]
IAC-PE-AW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/03138/2014
                                                               OA/03140/2014
                                                               OA/03145/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 22nd May 2015                         |On 15th June 2015                   |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

     MAh (first Appellant)
     atg (Second Appellant)
     mtg (third Appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Ball  of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Kandola


                            DECISION AND REASONS





Introduction

 1. The Appellants born on 1st January 1949, 22nd June 2000  and  1st  July
    1998 are all citizens of Somalia.  The first Appellant is the mother of
    the second and third Appellants.

 2. The Appellants had made application for entry  clearance  to  join  the
    Sponsor in the UK who is the son of the first Appellant and brother  of
    the second and third Appellants.  The first Appellant's application was
    under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules and the application  of  the
    second and third Appellants was under paragraph 319X of the Immigration
    Rules.  All three applications have been refused by the  Respondent  on
    11th February 2014.  The Appellants  had  appealed  that  decision  and
    their appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Chowdhury  sitting
    at Hatton Cross on 1st December 2014.  He had allowed  the  appeals  of
    all three Appellants under the Immigration Rules.  The  Respondent  had
    made application to appeal that decision and permission was granted  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Heynes on 20th February  2014.   It  is  said
    that it was arguable that the judge failed to consider the availability
    of medical treatment locally for the first Appellant and that error had
    infected the decisions relating to the children and additionally it was
    arguable that the judge had erred in applying Section 55  of  the  2009
    Act for children living overseas.

 3. Directions were issued for the matter to come before the Upper Tribunal
    firstly to decide whether or not an error of law had been made in  this
    case.

 4. The matter came before me in accordance with those Directions.

Submissions on Behalf of the Respondent

 5. It was submitted that the first Appellant did not meet the terms of  E-
    ECDR.2.5 and her claim failed under that section and it was an error to
    find that she succeeded.  It was further submitted  that  allowing  the
    children essentially under the terms of Section 55 of the  Borders  Act
    was an error as that was relevant only under Article  8  considerations
    rather than the method in which it had been done by the judge.  Further
    if the first Appellant's decision was flawed and she was in a  position
    to obtain treatment and care that would  not  disclose  any  compelling
    circumstances relating to the children.

Submissions on Behalf of the Appellant

 6. It was submitted that the matter of the children  and  the  mother  was
    separate and that the appeals of the children had been allowed and that
    was not challenged by the Respondent and it was said that the  mother's
    appeal should therefore follow their decision.  It was  submitted  that
    it was the spirit of Section 55 which was important.

 7. At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision to consider
    matters and I now provide that decision with my reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 8. Whilst all three Appellants are citizens of Somalia they were  residing
    together in Ethiopia.  The Appellants were aged 63, 16 and 14 years  of
    age respectively now.  The Entry Clearance  Manager  had  reviewed  the
    Entry Clearance Officer's refusal on 18th July 2014 and indicated  that
    other than a statement no  new  evidence  had  been  presented  on  the
    Appellants' behalf post the ECO refusal in February 2014.

 9. The Respondent had refused  the  first  Appellant's  application  under
    Appendix FM by reference to EC-DR.1.1 stating that the first  Appellant
    had not provided evidence required to show that she required  long-term
    personal care to perform everyday tasks  or  that  with  practical  and
    financial help from  the  Sponsor  she  could  not  obtain  such  help.
    Separately  the  ECO  did   not   consider   there   were   exceptional
    circumstances allowing the matter under Article 8 of the ECHR.

10. In respect of the second and third Appellants the  ECO  had  looked  at
    their applications under paragraph 319X of the Immigration Rules.   The
    ECO had found no  evidence  demonstrating  they  were  related  to  the
    Sponsor as claimed, nor that they formed part of the pre-flight  family
    of the Sponsor.  It was also stated that they had formed an independent
    family unit to the Sponsor.  Finally and briefly it  was  refused  also
    under Article 8 ECHR.

11. These were three separate applications under different aspects  of  the
    Immigration Rules and with separate  features  of  refusal  or  concern
    relating to the first Appellant on the one  hand  and  the  second  and
    third Appellants on the other.

12. The ECM had reviewed the refusals on 18th July 2014 noting that but for
    a statement no new evidence  had  been  submitted  since  the  date  of
    refusal and no concessions were made in respect of the original Grounds
    of Refusal.  As these were out of country appeals the judge was obliged
    only to consider circumstances appertaining at the date of decision.

13. At paragraph 30 the judge had identified the basis of refusal  relating
    to the first  Appellant.   The  issue  in  her  case  was  her  medical
    condition and whether she required long-term personal care  to  perform
    everyday tasks and secondly even with the practical and financial  help
    of the Sponsor that care was either not available or not affordable.

14. The judge referred to medical evidence and the  Sponsor's  evidence  to
    conclude that the first Appellant required long-term personal  care  to
    perform everyday tasks.  No medical evidence had been before  the  ECO.
    Medical evidence  before  the  judge  consisted  essentially  of  three
    letters.  In summary it noted  that  in  about  June  2013  she  had  a
    hysterectomy.  She was diagnosed in January 2014  as  being  unable  to
    walk or raise objects and  had  swollen  knee  joints,  chronic  pelvic
    inflammation disease and  it  was  recommended  that  she  should  have
    management  in  a  higher  health  institution.   The   higher   health
    institution thereafter provided a medical  summary  in  February  2014.
    They noted liver problems and suggested a biopsy and presented  various
    drugs.  In November 2014  the  Russian  Red  Cross  in  an  out-patient
    certificate  diagnosed  dementia  and  said   she   needed   in-patient
    treatment.

15. The evidence and circumstances at the date of decision i.e.  the  first
    two letters did not necessarily reveal a need  for  long-term  personal
    care.  The last letter diagnosing dementia, which  may  have  suggested
    long-term care needed (although that letter is very short and absent to
    clear evidence) postdated the date and circumstances  at  the  date  of
    decision.

16. At paragraph 33 the judge referred to the Russian Red Cross  letter  to
    find the first Appellant needed in-patient treatment.  He also referred
    to the first Appellant deteriorating and "requiring  better  evaluation
    and management in a higher health institution  as  soon  as  possible".
    The implication from paragraph 13 is that the judge  viewed  that  that
    was something that had not been done.  He certainly made  no  reference
    to the letter of February 2014 which is  from  a  "higher  clinic"  and
    written by a consultant gastroenterologist-heptologist which  does  not
    refer to in-patient treatment but merely to "further care  and  follow-
    up".  It seems the judge may have overlooked such significant  evidence
    and in so doing misled himself as to the need for the  first  Appellant
    to be fully admitted into hospital.  However even if it was  reasonable
    for him to conclude that she required long-term personal  care  he  did
    not consider, significantly, whether such would be available  with  the
    practical or financial help  from  the  Sponsor.   There  was  evidence
    before the judge suggesting medical care and medicines  were  available
    as evidenced from the contents of the first  two  letters.   There  was
    evidence the Sponsor supported  the  first  Appellant  financially  and
    there had been employment either in the past or currently of a carer in
    Ethiopia.  Those factors, if  considered,  may  have  led  a  judge  to
    conclude that with practical and financial assistance from the  Sponsor
    in the UK the first Appellant could receive long-term care and  support
    in Ethiopia if it was concluded there  was  a  sufficiency  of  medical
    evidence to demonstrate that that was needed.  However  the  judge  did
    not consider that significant aspect of E-ELDR.2.5 but simply concluded
    at paragraph 33 that if she was admitted to hospital  then  the  second
    and third Appellants would be left without their primary carer and that
    would be a breach of Section 55 of the Borders Act 2009.

17. It was an error for the judge not to consider an essential part  of  E-
    ECDR.2.5  in  relation  to  the   first   Appellant   particularly   in
    circumstances where there  was  evidence  that  could  have  led  to  a
    conclusion one way or the other.  Secondly it was an error to refer  to
    Section 55 in respect of the second and third Appellants who  were  not
    children within the UK which is the function of Section 55.  There were
    therefore material errors of law made in  consideration  of  the  first
    Appellant's case.

18. For the sake of completeness the judge was entitled  to  conclude  that
    there would be adequate accommodation and maintenance available for the
    reasons he provided at paragraphs 34 to 35.

19. In respect of the second and third Appellants the judge was entitled to
    conclude they were related to the Sponsor as claimed as demonstrated by
    DNA evidence.  Whilst that evidence was not available to the  ECO,  the
    fact they were related was a  circumstance  existing  at  the  date  of
    decision.  He was also correct to  identify  the  relevant  Rule  being
    paragraph 319(y) and 298(1)(d).  He found serious and compelling family
    or  other  considerations  present  because  "They  have  undergone   a
    tremendous amount of suffering and continue to  suffer.   I  find  that
    there are serious and compelling factors such that they should  not  be
    forced to  live  apart  from  their  mother".   There  was  no  further
    consideration of the second and third Appellants' case.

20. It seems clear that the judge's conclusions relating to the  children's
    suffering was based on the Sponsor's evidence as to the care  they  had
    to provide to their mother.  There appears on the face of it  no  other
    evidence to support that conclusion.  The judge had  already  concluded
    that the mother required long-term in-patient care and in paragraph  39
    found that the second and third Appellants should not be forced to live
    apart from their mother.  Unfortunately the judge's view on the  second
    and third Appellant's cases may already have been decided and  coloured
    by the decision that he had taken at paragraph 33 where he said "I find
    that it would be in breach of Section 55  to  propose  that  the  first
    Appellant is hospitalised in Ethiopia and her young  children  left  to
    emotionally and practically bring themselves up".  As  indicated  above
    it was somewhat tenuous to conclude on  the  evidence  that  the  first
    Appellant would be hospitalised for  more  than  merely  a  short-term,
    secondly there had been no examination of potential  support  and  help
    which rendered the presumption the children  would  be  left  to  bring
    themselves up inadequate and finally as noted above it was an error  of
    law to place those Appellants and essentially the decision  upon  those
    Appellants within the terms of Section 55 of the Borders Act 2009.

21. Although it was submitted that the Respondent had  not  challenged  the
    decision in relation to the second and third Appellants the application
    for permission made reference to the judge's finding under  Section  55
    in relation to her children and the permission for granting appeal also
    stated that it was arguably an error of  law  for  the  judge  to  have
    applied Section 55 to children overseas.

22. In summary I find that for the reasons  provided  there  were  material
    errors of law made by the judge in consideration of the appeals of  all
    three Appellants.

Decision

23. An error of law was made by the judge such that  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal should be set aside and remitted to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a de novo hearing.

24. Anonymity direction is made.





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



                                 DIRECTIONS

 1) This matter is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de  novo
    hearing.

 2) The parties shall serve on the Tribunal and the other party  not  later
    than 21 days after these directions were sent:

      a) An index and paginated bundle containing all  documentary  evidence
         upon which it is intended  to  rely  at  the  forthcoming  hearing,
         pursuant to Rule 15(2a).

      b) The parties not required to re-serve any documentary evidence  that
         has been previously filed with the First-tier Tribunal but an index
         of all material to be relied upon including that  previously  filed
         shall be served not later than 21 days after these directions.

      c) No interpreter will be booked for the forthcoming hearing unless  a
         party makes a specific written  request  to  the  Tribunal  for  an
         interpreter specifying the language and any dialect and the reasons
         for making the request  not  later  than  seven  days  after  these
         directions were sent.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever

