

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  OA/03876/2013
      OA/03877/2013;  OA/03878/2013
      OA/03879/2013;  OA/03880/2013
      OA/03881/2013;  OA/03882/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 22nd May 2014                              |On 5th August 2014           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        THE HONOURABLE LORD BANNATYNE
                 (Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal)

                                     and

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL

                                   Between

                               FARZANA KOUSAR
                               NAVAIRA NAVEED
                                INSHA NAVEED
                                ZAINIA NAVEED
                         RAJA MUHAMMAD AHMED NAVEED
                              RAJA ROSHAN KHAN
                                FARYAL NAVEED
                         (ANONYMITY ORDERS NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                   ENTRANCE CLEARANCE OFFICER - ISLAMABAD

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Nasim, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.    The appellants are all citizens of Pakistan.  Farzana Kousar
      (hereinafter referred to as "the first appellant") is the mother of
      all of the other appellants.

2.    On 19th September 2012 the respondent refused to grant the appellants
      clearance to enter the United Kingdom as the spouse and minor children
      of Raja Khan.  The appellants appealed that decision to the First-tier
      Tribunal.  The appeals were dismissed.  Permission to appeal to this
      Tribunal was granted by FTT Judge Cruthers.

Background


3.    The Refusal Notice dated 19 September 2012 sets out the respondent's
      reasons for refusing leave to enter.  Following enquiries to verify
      documents submitted by Farzana Kousar as evidence of her having taken
      and passed the requisite English language tests the respondent
      concluded that she had submitted false documents and refused her
      application under paragraph 320(7A).  Having refused her application
      the remaining appellants applications were refused as they would not
      be accompanying a parent who had been given limited leave to remain in
      the UK.  (See paragraph 4 of the First-tier Tribunal's determination).

4.    The particular documents which were held to be false by the
      respondent were these:  BULATS Candidate Test Report and the
      University of Cambridge ESOL Examination Certificate, submitted with
      the application by the first appellant.

5.    The issue before the First-tier Tribunal was this:  had the
      respondent on the balance of probabilities established that these
      documents were not genuine?

6.    The First-tier Tribunal held that the respondent had established that
      these documents were not genuine and set out its reasons for this at
      paragraph 12 of the determination:

           "That the documents are false is asserted in a Document
           Verification Report (DVR).  The DVR tells me that the test
           report was scanned and sent to the official email address of
           Cambridge ESOL.  The reply from a named individual was that
           'Based on the information provided we cannot find any records of
           results for the candidate Farzana Kusar and they do not appear
           to be a Cambridge ESOL candidate'.  In addition to this I have a
           series of emails exchanged between the respondent and the named
           individual culminating in the message quoted above.  The
           misspelling of the appellant's name is important as the Test
           Report and the Certificate show her name spelt differently.  It
           is the Certificate on which her name is misspelt.  Thus I am
           satisfied the document scanned and sent for verification was the
           certificate.  In addition to the misspelt name the certificate
           has a reference number and an accreditation number.  Thus I am
           satisfied that if the document was genuine, but the appellant's
           name had been misspelt this would have been revealed by the
           reference number and a different response received."


Submissions on behalf of the appellants

7.    The primary submission for the appellant was this:  The First-tier
      Tribunal had erred in treating the Document Verification Report
      produced by the respondent as conclusive of the allegation.

8.    At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal it had been argued:
      that the Verification Report was not of itself sufficient to discharge
      the burden of proof to the required standard.

9.    Mr Nasim so far as the standard of proof was concerned directed our
      attention to JC (part 9 HC 395-burden of proof) China [2007]
      UKAIT00027 in which this Tribunal held the following in relation to
      the standard of proof:

           "13.  So far as the standard of proof is concerned, we consider
                 that what the Immigration Appeal Tribunal said in Olufosoye
                 [1992] Imm AR 141 still holds good:  'insofar as the
                 justification consists of deception or other criminal
                 conduct the standard of proof will be at the higher end of
                 the spectrum of balance of probability' (see also R v IAT
                 ex parte Nadeem Tahir [1989] Imm AR 98 CA).  This approach
                 reflects that of the House of Lords in R v Secretary of
                 State for the Home Department ex p. Khawaja [1984] AC 74
                 and is consistent with subsequent case law [see e.g. Bishop
                 [2002] UKIAT 05532).  In R (AN and Anor) v Secretary of
                 State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 1605 Richards
                 LJ Stated at [62]:  "Although there is a single civil
                 standard of proof on the balance of probabilities, it is
                 flexible in its application.  In particular, the more
                 serious the allegation or the more serious the consequences
                 if the allegation is proven, the stronger must be the
                 evidence before a court will find the allegation proved on
                 the balance of probabilities.""


10.   The Document Verification Report upon which the First-tier Tribunal
      relied in reaching its conclusion that the documents submitted on
      behalf of the first appellant were not genuine resulted from a series
      of emails:

      The first email was sent from the Document Verification Officer at
      the British High Commission in Islamabad to
      a.kanwal@graftoncollege.edu.pk and was sent on 19th June 2012
      at 13:54.  It was in the following terms:

           "I am Document Verification Officer at the British High
           Commission in Islamabad, Pakistan.  I deal with visa
           applications of Pakistani nationals seeking to enter the UK.


           I should be grateful if you please verify authenticity of
           attached certificates purported to be issued by your
           institution.


           Thank you for your help in advance and I look forward to hearing
           from you before close of play today."


      The next email in the sequence was from the Document Verification
      Officer at Islamabad and was sent on 20th June 2012 at 08:34 and was
      sent to "esolhelpdesk@cambridgeeesol.org" and said this:

           "I have obtained your email address to verify attached document.
            Kindly reply by close of play."


      The reply to this email was in the following terms:

           "Please be advised that Cambridge ESOL has a procedure in place
           that has been agreed with the UK Border Agency whereby a Results
           Verification Form needs to first be submitted before we can
           conduct a search for a candidates results.  Please can I ask
           that you sign and submit the attached Results Verification Form?
            We will then investigate this candidate's results and will get
           back to you as soon as possible."


      The Document Verification Officer thereafter replied to that email as
      follows:


           "Kindly find attached required sheet.  I suggest you must delete
           columns of our name, phone and email contact from it as you will
           find these details in our stamp underneath."


      As a result of that email the following email was sent to the Document
      Verification Officer from ESOL:


           "Based on the information provided we cannot find any records of
           results for the candidate Farzana Kusar and they do not appear
           to be a Cambridge ESOL candidate."



      11.   In addition to the foregoing series of emails counsel directed
      our attention to this section of the Verification Form:

           "Test report scanned and emailed to the official email address
           of ESOL.  Toby Moult, ESOL helpdesk Cambridge ESOL Customer
           Services replied and stated 'Based on the information provided
           we cannot find any records of results for the candidate Farzana
           Kusar and they do not appear to be a Cambridge ESOL candidate.'
           "


12.   On the basis of these emails and the said section of the Verification
      Report counsel submitted that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in
      holding the certification and report to not be genuine in that:  the
      Document Verification Report related and referred to the "Test Report"
      and not the ESOL certificate.  Moreover, the First-tier Tribunal had
      erred in law in accepting the unsubstantiated observations of the
      author on the front page of the Document Verification Report, which
      stated that the test report had been scanned and emailed to the
      official email address of ESOL.  He submitted that if one looked at
      the evidence set out in the Document Verification Report, it was
      evident that the response from ESOL was based on the "Results
      Verification Form", which was not disclosed, and not the Test Report
      as asserted in the Document Verification Report.

      Beyond that it was his position that there was no evidence before the
      First-tier Tribunal to indicate that the response from ESOL was as a
      result of the Test Report having been scanned.  The First-tier
      Tribunal's finding at paragraph 12 that the "document scanned and sent
      for verification was the certificate" was irrational and perverse.

      It was his position that there had been a material error of law.

13.   Counsel's second argument was this:  the First-tier Tribunal had
      erred in failing to consider the first appellant's evidence relating
      to the passing of the test at another approved institution, which
      supported the first appellant's case that she had been a victim of a
      sophisticated fraud.  In addition the First-tier Tribunal had erred in
      holding against the first appellant, the fact that there was no
      documentary evidence relating to a police complaint.  The First-tier
      Tribunal had erred in failing to take into account paragraph 10 of the
      witness statement of the sponsor, where he had stated that the police
      required a bribe in order to register the complaint, which he had
      declined to pay.  The foregoing he contended amounted to a further
      material error of law.

14.   Finally he argued that the First-tier Tribunal had materially erred
      in law in failing to make a determination in terms of Article 8 which
      had been placed before it as a ground of appeal.  In support of the
      foregoing submission counsel directed our attention to Section 86 of
      the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 which provides that
      the Tribunal must determine any matters raised as a ground of appeal.

The reply on behalf of the respondent

15.   The respondent relied on the response to the grounds of appeal
      submitted under Rule 24 which was in the following terms:

           "...the respondent will submit inter alia that the judge of the
           First-tier Tribunal directed himself appropriately.


           The judge identified which of the appellant's documents were
           sent for verification at paragraph 12.  The judge gives adequate
           reasons for finding that the document submitted was not genuine.


           The appellant has provided no evidence from any source to
           counter the respondent's evidentially supported assertion.  This
           is despite the sponsor allegedly contacting the police on the
           matter.  His evidence at paragraph 16 and 17 suggests that there
           is truth in the respondent's position.


           In any event it is not a matter of whether or not the appellant
           is deliberately seeking to deceive.  The issue is whether a
           false document was submitted, whether knowingly or not.


           It is far from clear that Article 8 was raised as a ground of
           appeal."


Discussion

16.   Turning to the first ground advanced by counsel it is clear that the
      primary reason for the First-tier Tribunal holding that these
      documents were not genuine was the terms of the Verification Report,
      which concluded that they were not genuine.

17.   However in considering that conclusion the First-tier Tribunal had to
      consider the basis upon which it had been reached.  We are persuaded
      that on a proper examination of the series of emails the First-tier
      Tribunal was not entitled to hold it established that these documents
      were not genuine.

18.   In order to properly hold that the conclusion contained in the
      Verification Form was correct it appears to us that there required to
      be a proper and verifiable audit trail from submission of the
      documents for verification to the conclusion set forth in the
      Verification Report.  We are, without difficulty, satisfied that no
      such audit trail exists.

19.   We first observe that the initial email is from the Verification
      Officer to "a.kanwal@graftoncollege.edu.pk.  Thereafter there is no
      further correspondence sent to that address.  No explanation, appears
      from the terms of the First-tier Tribunal's determination, to have
      been proffered to it as to why that was the case.  In addition no
      explanation, appears from the terms of the First-tier Tribunal's
      determination, to have been proffered to it as to why all further
      correspondence was with "esolhelpdesk@cambridgeeesol.org".  We observe
      that in that first email "certificates" are said to be sent, although
      no details as to what these certificates are is given.

20.   The next email is to esolhelpdesk@cambridgeesol.org and we note that
      in that email all that is sent is an "attached document".  It is not
      clear which, if either, of the relevant documents is sent in this
      email.

21.   The Verification Officer is then asked by ESOL to fill in a Results
      Verification Form to allow a search for candidates' results to be
      carried out.  That form was not produced to the First-tier Tribunal
      (nor was it produced to us).  It is clearly a very significant
      document, in that on a fair reading of the emails it appears to be on
      the basis of that document that ESOL reply to say the first appellant
      was not an ESOL candidate.

22.   We are satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal on a proper
      understanding of the foregoing series of emails could not properly
      hold:  (a) which documents, if any, were sent to ESOL;  (b) whether
      ESOL came to its conclusion on the basis of the documents, or a single
      document and if so which documents or document formed the basis of its
      decision;  (c) whether ESOL considered any documents other than the
      Results Verification Form;  (d) whether ESOL reached its conclusion
      solely on the basis of the information in the Results Verification
      Form;  (e) what information was contained in the Results Verification
      Form;  and (f) whether that information was accurate.

23.   Having regard to these deficiencies in the audit trail the First-tier
      Tribunal could not be satisfied that there was a proper and verifiable
      trail from the initial seeking of the information by the Verification
      Officer to the conclusion stated within the Document Verification
      Report upon which it principally relied in order to make the finding
      that the documents were not genuine.  In our judgement the First-tier
      Tribunal was not entitled to accept the conclusion in the
      Documentation Verification Report when viewed in terms of that factual
      matrix.  It follows from these findings that the First-tier Tribunal
      was not entitled to hold that the documents were not genuine.

24.   The foregoing error went to the core of the First-tier Tribunal's
      decision and clearly amounts to a material error of law.

25.   As regards the second ground advanced by counsel on behalf of the
      appellants the findings of the First-tier Tribunal with respect to the
      sponsor's evidence are somewhat scanty.  In addition the First-tier
      Tribunal fails to consider the evidence of the sponsor as to why he
      was unable to produce any evidence, namely:  that the police demanded
      a bribe in order to provide him with said evidence.

26.   It appears to us that the evidence of the sponsor regarding the
      position of the police was critical to an assessment of his evidence
      and accordingly of some materiality when considering the first
      appellant's position (see: paragraphs 16 to 18 of the First-tier
      Tribunal's determination).  Thus we are persuaded that the failure of
      the First-tier Tribunal to consider this part of his evidence amounts
      to a material error of law.

27.   Equally there seems to be little or no consideration of the first
      appellant's position regarding these documents and we believe that
      this when taken in conjunction with the failure to consider the
      sponsor's position also amounts to a material error of law.

28.   Finally, with respect to the Article 8 argument, we believe that this
      is raised in the letter from the appellant's representatives in a
      letter to the British High Commission in Islamabad dated 7th November
      2012 (see:  page 2).  However, so far as we can identify there appears
      to be no further reference to this issue at any stage beyond that.  In
      particular it does not appear to have been an issue raised at all in
      the course of the argument before the First-tier Tribunal.  We
      accordingly hold that this was not an issue which was properly raised
      before the First-tier Tribunal and which required the First-tier
      Tribunal to deal with it.

Decision

29.   For the foregoing reasons we hold that there is a material error of
      law in the First-tier Tribunal's decision.  Accordingly we require to
      set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  We have given
      consideration as to whether it would be appropriate for this Tribunal
      to re-make the decision.  However, we have reached the conclusion,
      that given the reasons, above detailed, as to why we have decided that
      there is a material error of law, it would be appropriate for the
      matter to be remitted to a differently constituted First-tier Tribunal
      in order for them to re-hear this matter in relation to all issues.
      No anonymity order was sought and no anonymity order was made by the
      First-tier Tribunal and accordingly we do not make an anonymity order.




Signed                                  Date 22/07/2014

Lord Bannatyne




