
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/03915/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 6 March 2015                               |On 22 April 2015              |
|Determination prepared 12 March 2015          |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     aak
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Savage, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Decker


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of State appeals, with permission, against a decision  of
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Youngerwood, who  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 20 November 2014 allowed the appellant's appeal  against
    a decision of the Secretary of State to refuse to grant  him  leave  to
    enter after he had been deported to Sierra Leone in March 2014.   Judge
    Youngerwood had concluded that the appellant's  appeal  should  succeed
    under the provisions of Section 117C Exception 1  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, as amended.

2.   Although the Secretary of State is the appellant before me I  will  for
    ease of reference refer to  her  as  the  respondent  as  she  was  the
    respondent in the First-tier.  Similarly, I will refer to  AAK  as  the
    appellant as he was the appellant in the First-tier.

3.   The background to this appeal is that the appellant, who is  a  citizen
    of Sierra Leone born on 31  December  1984,  claimed  to  have  entered
    Britain on 30 August 1992 with his grandfather in order  to  visit  his
    mother.  He was  granted  an  extension  of  stay  in  April  1993  and
    indefinite leave to remain in October 1996.  On 13  June  2005  he  was
    convicted at the Inner London Crown Court of an offence of possessing a
    class A drug and he was later sentenced to two years  and  six  months'
    imprisonment.  He did not appeal either  the  conviction  or  sentence.
    Notice of intention to deport was made on 20 March 2006.  The appellant
    appealed.  His appeal was dismissed and on 9 August 2006 a  deportation
    order was made against him.

4.   On 30 April 2011 he was convicted of a further offence of assaulting  a
    police officer and sentenced to 84 days imprisonment.  It appears  that
    before that offence he had committed  six  further  offences  including
    several counts of  possession  of  cannabis  and  cannabis  resin.   In
    November 2012 he was convicted of criminal damage.

5.   An application to revoke the deportation order was made  in  which  the
    appellant claimed, falsely,  that  he  lived  with  his  wife  and  two
    children in London.  The Secretary of State,  however,  concluded  that
    the children's mother would be able to care for them  and  although  it
    was accepted that he had no ties with the country of his nationality it
    was considered that he could  use  his  qualifications  and  skills  to
    secure employment and re-establish his life in his  home  country.   It
    was pointed out that he had lived in Britain for less than twenty years
    before he was served with the notice of liability to  deportation.  The
    Secretary of State in effect stated that his criminality and the public
    interest in his deportation outweighed his rights under  Article  8  of
    the ECHR.

6.   The appellant appealed that decision and his appeal was  heard  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal in July 2013. The appeal was dismissed.

7.   The appellant then appealed to the Upper Tribunal.   Permission  having
    been granted his appeal came before me and Upper Tribunal Judge  Renton
    on 17 October 2013.  We found that there was no material error  of  law
    in the determination of the First-tier Tribunal and that  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal should stand.

8.   The fact that I had sat on that Tribunal did not come  to  light  until
    towards the end of the appeal before me.  Mr Decker made no application
    that I should recuse myself from the appeal and, given that I had heard
    detailed submissions, while it would have been the case that had I been
    aware before the hearing started that I had heard the  appeal  I  would
    have recused myself, I did not consider  that  at  that  stage  it  was
    appropriate that I should do so.

9.   The application made by the appellant for leave to  enter  was  refused
    under the provisions of paragraphs 390, 391, 391A, 398 and  399A(a)  of
    the Rules,  reasons being given in a refusal letter dated  14  February
    2014.  The Secretary of State took the view that the appellant did  not
    qualify for entry and there were no exceptional factors which made  the
    refusal of his application unduly harsh.  While it  was  accepted  that
    the appellant had a relationship with his two children from his ex-wife
    it was noted that she was now in a new relationship and could rely on a
    new partner and other family members in assisting her with the care  of
    the children and it was not accepted that he had formed any family life
    in relation to another child - he claimed to have  a  new  partner  who
    already had a child - and although the appellant had claimed that  this
    child was his there was no evidence that that was the case.

10.  With regard to the terms of paragraph 399A of the Rules  the  Secretary
    of State accepted that the appellant had lived continuously in  Britain
    for at least twenty years preceding the date of the decision  but  said
    that it was not the case that he no  longer  had  any  ties  to  Sierra
    Leone.  It was further considered that the decision did  not  interfere
    with the appellant's rights under Article 8 of the ECHR.

11.  Judge Youngerwood heard evidence from  Mrs  Petronella  West,  who  had
    visited the appellant in Sierra Leone  who  stated  that  he  had  been
    unable to find work in Sierra Leone, lived in a  slum  in  one  of  the
    poorest parts of Freetown and was living in "awful conditions  with  no
    proper sanitation  or  running  water".   The  witness  said  that  the
    appellant appeared to have been totally unprepared for the third  world
    standard of living  compared to that he had enjoyed in Britain since he
    had come to Britain at the age of 7, that he did not  speak  the  local
    dialect and was desperate to return to Britain.  He had been sick  with
    malaria and was at a very high risk of serious illness from the general
    water supply.

12.  A further witness, Benjamin Barker,  who was  present  at  the  hearing
    had stated in a statement which was accepted by the Presenting  Officer
    that the appellant had  become  a  Christian,  had  regularly  attended
    church here and had often brought  his  children  along  to  children's
    groups and that he was considered to be a  very  welcoming  and  loving
    personality.  Mr Barker said that he  would  send  him  money  when  he
    could.

13.  In paragraph 24 of the determination the judge set  out  his  findings.
    He stated, that "to a significant degree the current Rules differ  from
    those in force at the time of the decision of 14  February  2014."   He
    then quoted from the current Rules setting out paragraphs 390  to  391A
    and paragraphs 398, 399 and 399A.  He also set out  the  provisions  of
    part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  which  had
    been introduced by the Immigration Act 2014 including Sections 117A, B,
    C and D.

14.  The judge went on to say that following the decision of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in YM (Uganda) [2014] EWCA Civ 1292 he noted  that the Court  of
    Appeal had  taken note of  an explanatory memorandum which stated  that
    the new Rules took effect on 28 July  2014  and  should  apply  to  all
    claims made by criminals which are decided on or after  that  date  and
    therefore the 2014  Rules,  he  concluded,  applied  to  all  decisions
    concerning Article 8 claims that were made after  that  date  including
    decisions by Tribunals and the courts.

15.  The judge said that the new Rules meant that:

         "The effective introduction of Article 8  considerations  into  the
         Immigration Rules  and the 2002 Act  means that there will  now  be
         cases  where the Tribunal  will no longer, as before  ,  carry  out
         the   traditional   balancing  exercise   involving  questions   of
         deterrence  and the protection of the public. If the respondent has
         now effectively provided for cases where,  notwithstanding  serious
         convictions and threats to the public,  it  is  accepted  that  the
         public interest of the individual outweighs the public interest  in
         his deportation, then, in such circumstances, the Tribunal  has  no
         effective role other than to apply the law."

16.  He then turned to Section 117C of the rules and stated with  regard  to
    the provisions of Section 117C Exception 2 that the appellant could not
    succeed  because  he  could  not  conclude  that  the  effect  of   the
    appellant's deportation on his two children would be unduly harsh.

17.  However, in paragraphs 34 onwards, he stated:-

         "34. In relation to Exception 1, however, there is no issue  as  to
             the fact that the appellant has been lawfully resident in  the
             UK for most of his life, having lawfully  entered  the  UK  in
             1992 and, thereafter, obtaining indefinite  leave  to  remain.
             On that basis, it is clear that he has  become  'socially  and
             culturally integrated in the United Kingdom'  and,  given  the
             clear findings of the earlier  Tribunal  that  the  effect  of
             deportation would be 'exile', the appellant having  no  family
             or roots remaining in Sierra Leone, it is self-evident that he
             meets this  relevant  Exception  and  that,  accordingly,  the
             respondent takes the view that the public  interest  does  not
             require his deportation.  Mr Bose accepted that the  appellant
             did, indeed, meet Exception 1.

         35.  Similarly, in relation to the new Rules, Mr Bose accepted that
             the appellant met the provisions of paragraph  399A,  in  like
             terms to Section 117C (above).

         36.  The above findings remove any discretion in this  Tribunal  to
             consider the public interest because  it  is  clear  that  the
             appellant's Article 8 claim  must  succeed  as  he  meets  the
             requirement of the Rules and the 2002 Act.

         37.  For the purposes of completeness, I  would  have  found  that,
             even had the matter been considered under the  old  Rules,  in
             force at the time of the decision, the respondent  would  have
             faced the problem that,  in  the  current  refusal  letter  of
             February 2014, the respondent concedes that the appellant  met
             the requirements of over twenty years' residence  in  the  UK,
             and cannot argue, on the basis of the findings in the  earlier
             determination, that the appellant still has ties  in  the  UK,
             (sic)  notwithstanding  the  attempt  to  reopen  that  issue.
             Therefore, the appellant would have met the provisions of  the
             former Rules had that been effectively in issue.

         38.  Given that the appellant's Article 8 claim must  succeed,  and
             given his present dire circumstances following deportation  to
             Sierra Leone, I consider it appropriate to give a direction in
             this case."

18.  The judge's decision was to allow the appeal on Article 8  grounds  and
    find therefore that the decision was not in accordance  with  the  law.
    He directed that the respondent  take  "all  reasonable  and  necessary
    steps to secure the urgent  return  of  the  appellant  to  the  United
    Kingdom".  He then made an anonymity order.

19.  The Secretary of State appealed stating that the judge had  misdirected
    himself with regard to paragraph 399A of the Rules, that the judge  was
    wrong to find that the appellant was socially and culturally integrated
    in the United Kingdom for  the  purposes  of  paragraph  399A(b)  (with
    reference to Section 117C(b)) solely on the  basis  of  his  length  of
    residence and the fact that he had indefinite leave to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom.  It was stated that his length of residence and  status
    alone were entirely insufficient to  demonstrate  social  and  cultural
    integration in the United Kingdom and that in order to consider  social
    and cultural integration it was required that the  judge  consider  all
    relevant factors including criminality which  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    clearly had not taken into account.

20.  The grounds went on to say that there was no  evidence  of  a  positive
    contribution  to   society,   for   example   evidence   of   financial
    independence, employment and paying of taxes and therefore his level of
    integration could not be  said  to  outweigh  the  public  interest  in
    deportation.  Moreover, it was argued that  the  judge  had  failed  to
    properly consider whether there were very significant obstacles to  the
    integration of the appellant into  Sierra  Leone  and  that  the  judge
    "erroneously equates no ties with an inability to integrate".   As  the
    appellant could speak to others in Sierra Leone he should  be  able  to
    integrate.  The grounds further asserted that:

         "... the appellant is required to provide evidence that he has made
         a genuine and sincere attempt to reintegrate whilst he has been  in
         Sierra Leone.  There is no such evidence in this case and as  such,
         he cannot succeed."

21.  It was also argued that the judge had erred in law by  relying  on  the
    concession which he said had been made by the Presenting  Officer.   It
    was claimed that the concession "is not a concession fact but rather  a
    concession of law.  Consequently, in accepting this concession the  FtT
    has made a material misdirection of law" (sic).

22.  The third ground asserted that the judge had erred by stating that  the
    Immigration Rules had  "removed  any  discretion  in  the  Tribunal  to
    consider the public interest because the appellant's claim must succeed
    as he met the requirements of the Rules and the 2002 Act".

23.  The grounds went on to state:-

         "15. The Immigration Rules  provide  clear  statements  as  to  the
             government's and Parliament's view of how the  balance  should
             be struck under ECHR Article 8 between the qualified right  to
             respect for private and family life and the  public  interest.
             Section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014, which  inserts  a  new
             part 5A in the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002,
             gives  the  force  of  primary  legislation  to  the  policies
             reflected in the Immigration Rules by  requiring  a  court  or
             Tribunal, when determining whether a decision is in breach  of
             Article  8  ECHR,  to  have  regard  to  the  public  interest
             considerations as  set  out  in  the  Act.   As  such,  it  is
             submitted  that  the  Immigration  Rules  clearly  incorporate
             consideration of the public interest."

    Reference was then made to the judgment  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
    Richards v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 244 which emphasised the strong  public
    interest in deporting foreign criminals.

24.  Permission having been granted  to  the  Secretary  of  State,  a  very
    lengthy Rule 24 notice was submitted asserting that the decision of the
    judge was correct. The notice  referred to evidence given to the  judge
    that the appellant was living in appalling conditions in  Sierra  Leone
    and that the judge had taken that evidence  into  account  as  well  as
    evidence in the determination of the First-tier Tribunal who heard  the
    appellant's appeal against the decision to deport  that  the  appellant
    had no social, cultural or family ties in Sierra Leone and that removal
    would amount to exile and the evidence that "the language  barrier  and
    difficulty of the geography of Sierra Leone, and the  lack  of  support
    network" meant that the appellant was  struggling  to  cope  in  Sierra
    Leone and had little prospect of  coping  for  the  future  as  he  was
    totally unprepared for life in a country that he left at the age of  7.
    The notice also submitted that prior to his detention and  removal  the
    appellant had lived "a law-abiding life, was offering chef services  to
    St Mark, from which he received allowance, and was playing a great role
    in assisting the youth at the church".

25.  The notice  stated that the index offence had been committed  over  ten
    years before and apart from an 84 day  sentence  which  did  not  merit
    deportation the appellant had not committed any other offence  -  there
    had not been an increase in the appellant's criminality since 2005  and
    he was living a law-abiding life.  It was  stated  that  that  was  the
    basis on which the judge had allowed the appeal.

26.  It was then argued that there was no misdirection of  law  with  regard
    to paragraph 399A of the Rules as the judge was entitled to accept that
    the appellant was socially and culturally integrated into Britain where
    he had lived since the age of 7 - reference was made to the criteria in
    the judgment of the European Court of Human Rights in Maslov [2008]  GC
    ECHR 1638/03.

27.  With regard to the concession made by the Presenting  Officer,  it  was
    properly made and made on the evidence before the Tribunal.

28.  With regard to the third ground of appeal the Rule 24  notice  referred
    to the judgment of the Court of Appeal in MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA  Civ
    1192  stating  that  that  judgment  stated  that  the  Rules  provided
    implicitly that a person who meets the requirements  of  Rules  399  or
    399A and to whom 398(b) or (c) applies should succeed in their  Article
    8 claim.

29.  In her submissions Ms Savage referred to the terms  of  Rule  399A  and
    stated that the judge had not properly  assessed  whether  or  not  the
    appellant was  socially and culturally integrated  here.  She  referred
    to the Immigration Directorate Instructions dated 28 July  2014  headed
    "Chapter 13:  criminality  guidance  in  Article  8  ECHR  cases".   At
    paragraph 5.3.4 it stated that:-

         "Section 117B(3) of the 2002 Act states that it is  in  the  public
         interest that persons who seek to remain in the UK are  financially
         independent.  If a foreign criminal cannot demonstrate that  he  is
         financially  independent,  this  will  indicate  that  he  is   not
         integrated in the UK because he may be  reliant  on  public  funds,
         wider family members or charities rather than contributing  to  the
         economic wellbeing of the  country.   If  a  foreign  criminal  can
         demonstrate that he is financially independent, this alone will not
         be sufficient to demonstrate integration, but it will count in  the
         foreign criminal's favour when balancing all the evidence  for  and
         against integration."

    She stated that the appellant had not indicated that he was financially
    independent or that there was evidence that he  had  been  employed  in
    Britain.  Moreover, his criminal offending was  a  factor  which  would
    show that he was not integrated.  She stated that the burden was on the
    appellant to show social integration.

30.  She went on to refer to paragraph 5.3.7 which stated that:-

         "To outweigh any evidence of a lack  of  integration,  the  foreign
         criminal will need to demonstrate strong evidence  of  integration.
         Mere presence in the  UK  is  not  an  indication  of  integration.
         Positive contributions to society may be evidence  of  integration,
         e.g. an exceptional contribution to a local community or  to  wider
         society, which has not been undertaken at a time that  suggests  an
         attempt to avoid deportation.  If such a claim is  made,  decision-
         makers should  expect  to  see  credible  evidence  of  significant
         voluntary work of real practical benefit."

31.  She referred to paragraph 399A(c) and stated that  the  judge  had  not
    identified any factors which would mean that the  appellant  could  not
    integrate in Sierra Leone  nor  was  it  shown  that  he  required  any
    assistance to integrate.  She argued that it should be assumed that  he
    could integrate unless there was evidence to the contrary.  She  argued
    moreover that the conclusions of the judge were inadequately  reasoned.
    She stated in any event that the respondent was  entitled  to  withdraw
    the concession made but what had happened was that the judge's decision
    regarding that "concession" had led to a  misapplication  of  the  law.
    She went on to argue that the  judge  had  not  considered  the  public
    interest in the deportation of the appellant and again had erred in law
    in not so doing.

32.  In reply  Mr  Decker  referred  to  the  judgment  in  Maslov  and  the
    determination of the Upper Tribunal in Ogundimu (Article 8 - new rules)
    Nigeria  [2013]  UKUT  00060  (IAC).   In  the  head   note   to   that
    determination it was stated that "little weight should be  attached  to
    this Rule" (paragraph 399(a))  when  consideration  was  given  to  the
    assessment of proportionality under  Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
    Convention.

33.  He emphasised that the appellant's offences had taken place almost  ten
    years ago and that the appellant had never been to Sierra Leone nor did
    he have any family ties there.  He referred to the  evidence  from  the
    witness who had met with him in Sierra Leone and said that  his  health
    was failing and that he had no social network there.  It was not in the
    public interest, he argued,  that  the  appellant  should  be  left  to
    deteriorate in Sierra Leone.  He argued that the  appellant  could  not
    work here was because he had not been allowed to do so.  He  emphasised
    the appellant's ties with this country and  stated  that  these  should
    outweigh the interest  in  the  appellant's  remaining  away  from  his
    children and his partner.

Discussion

34.  It is a matter of concern that the Secretary  of  State  chose  not  to
    deport the appellant when his appeal against the decision to deport was
    dismissed but rather allowed him  to  remain  in  this  country  for  a
    further five years, strengthening his claim to an entitlement to remain
    here on Article 8 grounds. Nevertheless,  when the appellant  was  able
    to make an application for revocation of  the  deportation  order  that
    application was refused and the appeal was dismissed both in the First-
    tier Tribunal and in the Upper Tribunal.  The reality was that  on  the
    law as it stood at the date of hearing in the Upper Tribunal I  and  my
    colleague were entitled to conclude that the public interest lay in the
    deportation of the appellant and we gave  clear  reasons  for  reaching
    that conclusion in the determination.

35.  After that determination the Secretary of State amended the  Rules  and
    inserted Section 117A to D into the 2002 Act. The  rules  now  read  as
    follows:

         Revocation of deportation order

         390. An application for revocation of a deportation order  will  be
         considered in the light of  all  the  circumstances  including  the
         following:

             (i) the grounds on which the order was made;

             (ii) any representations made in support of revocation;

             (iii)  the  interests  of   the   community,   including   the
             maintenance of an effective immigration control;

             (iv)  the  interests   of   the   applicant,   including   any
             compassionate circumstances.

         390A. Where paragraph 398  applies  the  Secretary  of  State  will
         consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not,
         it will only  be  in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the  public
         interest in maintaining the deportation order will be outweighed by
         other factors.

         391. In the case of  a  person  who  has  been  deported  following
         conviction  for  a  criminal  offence,  the   continuation   of   a
         deportation order against that person will be the proper course:

             (a) in the case of a conviction for an offence for  which  the
             person was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less  than
             4 years, unless 10 years have elapsed since the making of  the
             deportation order when, if an application  for  revocation  is
             received, consideration will be given on a case by case  basis
             to whether the deportation order should be maintained, or

             (b) in the case of a conviction for an offence for  which  the
             person was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 4
             years, at any time, Unless, in either case,  the  continuation
             would be contrary  to  the  Human  Rights  Convention  or  the
             Convention and Protocol Relating to the Status of Refugees, or
             there  are  other  exceptional  circumstances  that  mean  the
             continuation is outweighed by compelling factors.

         391A. In other cases, revocation of the order will not normally  be
         authorised unless the situation has been materially altered, either
         by a change of circumstances since the order was made, or by  fresh
         information coming to light which  was  not  before  the  appellate
         authorities or the Secretary of State. The passage  of  time  since
         the person was deported may also in itself amount to such a  change
         of circumstances as to warrant revocation of the order.

         392. Revocation of a deportation order does not entitle the  person
         concerned to re-enter the United Kingdom; it renders  him  eligible
         to apply for admission under the Immigration Rules. Application for
         revocation of the order may be made to the Entry Clearance  Officer
         or direct to the Home Office.

         Deportation and Article 8

         A398. These rules apply where:

             (a) a foreign criminal liable to deportation claims  that  his
             deportation  would  be  contrary  to  the   United   Kingdom's
             obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention;

             (b) a foreign criminal applies for a  deportation  order  made
             against him to be revoked.

         398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary
         to the UK's  obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
         Convention, and

             (a) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
             the public good and in the public interest because  they  have
             been  convicted  of  an  offence  for  which  they  have  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;

             (b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
             the public good and in the public interest because  they  have
             been  convicted  of  an  offence  for  which  they  have  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but
             at least 12 months; or

             (c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
             the public good and in the public  interest  because,  in  the
             view of the Secretary of State,  their  offending  has  caused
             serious harm or they are a persistent  offender  who  shows  a
             particular disregard for the law,

         the Secretary of  State  in  assessing  that  claim  will  consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and,  if  it  does  not,  the
         public interest in deportation will only  be  outweighed  by  other
         factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
         above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c)  applies
         if -

             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
             relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is  in
             the UK, and

                  (i) the child is a British Citizen; or (ii) the child  has
                  lived in the UK continuously for  at  least  the  7  years
                  immediately  preceding  the  date   of   the   immigration
                  decision; and in either case (a) it would be unduly  harsh
                  for the child to live in the country to which  the  person
                  is to be deported; and (b) it would be  unduly  harsh  for
                  the child to remain in the UK without the person who is to
                  be deported; or

             (b) the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with
             a partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen or settled
             in the UK, and

                  (i) the relationship was formed at a time when the  person
                  (deportee) was in the UK lawfully  and  their  immigration
                  status was not precarious; and

                  (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live  in
                  the country to which the person is to be deported, because
                  of compelling circumstances over and above those described
                  in paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and

                  (iii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to  remain
                  in the UK without the person who is to be deported.

         399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c)  applies
         if -

             (a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK  for  most
             of his life; and

             (b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and

             (c)  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles   to   his
             integration into the country to which it is proposed he  would
             be deported.

36.  The amendments to the 2002 Act including sections  117A,  B,  C  and  D
state:

         117A - Application of this Part

         (1) This Part applies where a court  or  tribunal  is  required  to
         determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-

             (a) breaches a person's  right  to  respect  for  private  and
             family life under Article 8, and

             (b) as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human
             Rights Act 1998.

         (2) In considering the  public  interest  question,  the  court  or
         tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

             (a) in all cases, to  the  considerations  listed  in  section
             117B, and

             (b) in cases concerning the deportation of foreign  criminals,
             to the considerations listed in section 117C.

         (3) In subsection (2), "the public  interest  question"  means  the
         question of whether  an  interference  with  a  person's  right  to
         respect for private and family  life  is  justified  under  Article
         8(2).




         117B - Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in  all
         cases

             (1) The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in
             the public interest.

             (2) It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English-

                  (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                  (b) are better able to integrate into society.

             (3) It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-

                  (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

                  (b) are better able to integrate into society.

             (4) Little weight should be given to-

                  (a) a private life, or

                  (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

             that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

             (5)  Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a   private   life
             established  by  a  person  at  a  time  when   the   person's
             immigration status is precarious.

             (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,
             the public interest does  not  require  the  person's  removal
             where-

                  (a) the person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

                  (b) it would not be reasonable  to  expect  the  child  to
                  leave the United Kingdom.

         117C - Article 8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
         foreign criminals

             (1) The deportation of foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
             interest.

             (2) The more  serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
             criminal, the greater is the public interest in deportation of
             the criminal.

             (3) In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has  not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless  Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.

             (4) Exception 1 applies where-

                  (a) C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for
                  most of C's life,

                  (b) C is socially and culturally integrated in the  United
                  Kingdom, and

                  (c) there would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  C's
                  integration into the country to which C is proposed to  be
                  deported.

             (5) Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh.

             (6) In the case of a foreign criminal who has  been  sentenced
             to a period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public
             interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2.

             (7) The considerations in subsections (1) to  (6)  are  to  be
             taken into account where a court or tribunal is considering  a
             decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent  that
             the reason for the decision was the offence  or  offences  for
             which the criminal has been convicted.

         117D - Interpretation of this Part

             (1) In this Part-

                    .  "Article  8"  means  Article  8  of   the   European
                      Convention on Human Rights;

                    . "qualifying child" means a person who  is  under  the
                      age of 18 and who-

                           (a) is a British citizen, or

                           (b)  has  lived  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a
                           continuous period of seven years or more;

                    . "qualifying partner" means a partner who-

                           (a) is a British citizen, or

                           (b) who is settled in the United Kingdom  (within
                           the meaning of the Immigration  Act  1971  -  see
                           section 33(2A) of that Act).

             (2) In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-

                  (a) who is not a British citizen,

                  (b) who has been convicted in the  United  Kingdom  of  an
                  offence, and

                  (c) who-

                      (i) has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of
                      at least 12 months,

                      (ii) has been convicted of an offence that has caused
                      serious harm, or

                      (iii) is a persistent offender.

37.  The reality is that, whereas prior to the changes to the Rules and  the
    amendment to the 2002 Act the Secretary of State had been asserting the
    importance of the public interest in the deportation of  criminals,  by
    Section 117D and Rule 399A the Secretary of State  appeared  to  remove
    from the relevant proportionality exercise the emphasis to be placed on
    the public interest in the deportation of foreign criminals.  Rule 399A
    sets out circumstances where a foreign criminal should not be  deported
    and Section 117C(iv) makes a clear exception to the public interest  in
    the deportation of a foreign criminal.  The reality is that the law  as
    now drafted appears to ignore, in  certain  circumstances,  the  public
    interest in the deportation  of  a  foreign  criminal.     I  consider,
    however, that it was the duty of the judge to analyse in detail whether
    or not the appellant met the terms of Exception 1 of Section 117C.

38.  In the determination the  Judge  stated  that  the  Presenting  Officer
    accepted that the appellant did meet Exception 1 and the provisions  of
    paragraph 399A and that  therefore  the  appeal  must  succeed  as  the
    appellant met the requirements of the Rules.

39.  It is surprising  that  there  is  no  statement  from  the  Presenting
    Officer as to what concession he did or did not make.   Indeed  it  may
    have been that he accepted that if the appellant met the provisions  of
    paragraph 399A and Section 117C then  the  appeal  should  be  allowed.
    However, that has not been argued before me.  What is argued  was  that
    that concession has been withdrawn.    I follow  the  judgment  of  the
    Court of Appeal in NR (Jamaica) [2009] EWCA Civ 856 and  consider  that
    the respondent is entitled to withdraw that concession.

40.  In ant event, I find that there are errors of law in the  determination
    in that it is the duty of the judge to give reasons  for  the  decision
    which he has made.  In this case he has to give reasons as  to  why  he
    concluded that the appellant met the provisions of paragraph  399A  and
    Section 117C.

41.  Although in paragraph 37 of the determination  the  judge  stated  that
    while it was accepted that the appellant met the requirements  of  over
    twenty years' residence in Britain and the findings of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal,  which  the  judge  had  taken  into  account  following  the
    principles in Devaseelan, that the appellant still had ties in  Britain
    and that he would have met the terms of the former Rules that is not  a
    sufficiently clear analysis of the Rules as they stood at the  time  of
    the determination. He gives no reasons for his decision that the  terms
    of Rule  399 A  are met and he did not  even consider the provisions of
    Rule 399A (c ). That is a clear error of law. Similarly he  also  erred
    in that he did not   consider the terms  of  Section  117(C)   (4)  (c)
    Exception 1.  I therefore set aside the decision of the  Judge  of  the
    First-tier.

42. I have therefore considered afresh the Statute  and  the  Rules  and  in
    particular paragraph 117C (4) which states:-

         "Exception 1 applies where -

         (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of
             C's life,

         (b)  C is socially and culturally integrated in the United Kingdom,
             and

         (c)  there would be very significant obstacles to  C's  integration
             into the country to which C is proposed to be deported."

43.  It has been accepted that the appellant, who  entered  Britain  at  the
    age of 8 in 1992 and against whom the decision to deport  was  made  in
    2006, had been lawfully resident in Britain for most of his life.

44.  I turn to the issue as to whether or not the appellant is socially  and
    culturally integrated in the United Kingdom.  While I note the terms of
    the Immigration Directorate Instructions the issue of whether or not an
    appellant is socially  and  culturally  integrated  into  Britain  must
    depend on a large number of factors.  Neither the  Secretary  of  State
    nor the judge engaged with these to any extent.  It  must  be  relevant
    that the appellant came to Britain at the age of 8 and attended  school
    here. I note the evidence of Mrs West and the  evidence  of  the  other
    witnesses including Mr Barker.  Mrs West's evidence largely related  to
    the appellant's circumstances in Sierra Leone  and  in  particular  the
    very difficult circumstances in which he is living, his  difficulty  in
    finding work and his problems because  he  does  not  speak  the  local
    dialect. However, she referred to his being employed as a  chef  at  St
    Mark's Church in Battersea.   Mr Barker's evidence was that  he  was  a
    friend of the appellant whom he had known for over a year  and  a  half
    since the appellant had started  attending  St  Mark's,  the  appellant
    having become a Christian.   He  had  stated  that  the  appellant  was
    willing  to  contribute  to  the  group  discussions  "in  a  wise  and
    considerate manner", had regularly attended church and has brought  his
    children along to  children's  groups.   He  had  volunteered  to  help
    regularly in the church and Mr Barker understood that he was  quick  to
    make a good impression and was a hard worker.  Mr Barker described  him
    as being "a very welcoming and loving personality".  He helps him  with
    money.

45.  Juliet Barrett, the mother of his former partner  and  the  grandmother
    of his two children, referred to him as having studied electronics  and
    referred to the appellant working "with one of the world's known  chefs
    Mr Gordon Ramsay as his star apprentice". There  were  also  statements
    from the appellant's sister emphasising that his children missed  their
    father and stating that he had contributed immensely to  providing  the
    stability and continuity they needed.

46.  A statement from Richard Seychell praised the  appellant,  particularly
    with regard to his relationship with his children and nephew.  His wife
    had also prepared a statement in which she set out his children's  need
    for him.

47.  While it is the case that the appellant has not had paid employment  in
    Britain the reality is that he has been barred from  doing  so  by  the
    service of the deportation order.  While I accept that criminality is a
    factor to be taken into  account  when  assessing  whether  or  not  an
    individual is integrated into Britain I do not consider that it can  be
    determining factor and, taking into account all the evidence before  me
    and  indeed  noting  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  referred  to  the
    appellant being "exiled" from Britain, I conclude that the appellant is
    socially and culturally integrated into the United Kingdom.

46.  I then consider the terms of Section 17(C) (4) Exception  1  (c)  which
    is whether or  not  there  are  "very  significant  obstacles"  to  the
    appellant's integration into Sierra Leone.  The evidence  of  Mrs  West
    and indeed from the other witnesses was that the appellant  was  living
    in Sierra Leone in extremely difficult circumstances and  that  he  has
    been unable to find work there.  For some reason  the  factor  that  he
    would be unable to work as a driver  has  been  highlighted.   However,
    there is nothing to indicate that the appellant,  who  is  entitled  to
    work in Sierra Leone, would not be able to work there,  albeit  it  may
    well be a  country  of  high  unemployment.   There  is  no  background
    evidence before me to suggest that the appellant would either be barred
    from the workforce or that he could not make some sort of living  there
    let alone that he is unable to form relationships there.   The  reality
    appears to be that he has been taken in by a family in Sierra Leone and
    has some contacts with a church there through the church he attended in
    Britain.  I therefore conclude that he has not discharged the burden of
    proof upon him to show that there are very significant obstacles to his
    integration into Sierra Leone.  I therefore consider that  Exception  1
    does not apply.

46.  I  revert  to  the  terms  of  Rules  390  and  391A.   The  order  for
    deportation was made because of  the  appellant's  criminality.   There
    have of course been representations made in support of revocation which
    carry considerable weight both with regard to his relationship with his
    family and the wider community here including the relationships he  has
    formed while attending  St  Mark's  Church  and  also  the  distressing
    circumstances in which he is living in Sierra Leone.  These indeed  are
    compassionate  circumstances  which  should  be  taken  into   account.
    However, Rule 390A refers to exceptional circumstances and states  that
    where paragraph 398 applies if the circumstances set out in  paragraphs
    399 and 399A do not apply it will only be in exceptional  circumstances
    that the public  interest  in  maintaining  the  deportation  would  be
    outweighed by other factors.  It has been determined that the appellant
    did not meet the requirements of paragraphs 399 and 399A.  The  reality
    is that the appellant does not qualify under paragraph 399 and the test
    in 399A is the  same  as  that  in  Section  117C  of  the  Rules.   My
    conclusions thereon are the same.

47.  I therefore conclude that notwithstanding the  extremely  harsh  nature
    of the appellant's life in Sierra Leone this is a  case  where,  having
    been sentenced to a period of imprisonment for less  than  four  years,
    continuation of the deportation order is the proper course.

48.  I therefore set aside the decision of Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    Youngerwood, and remake the decision dismissing this appeal.


Signed        Date 12 March 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
