
[pic]
IAC-TH-CP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/03382/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 17th September 2014                     |On 15th April 2015             |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          Mr Ashford Yeboah Boateng
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr B Hoshi (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The  respondent's  appeal  against  a  decision  to  refuse  him  entry
    clearance was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Cooper ("the judge")
    in a decision promulgated on 29th May 2013.  The respondent applied for
    entry clearance, together with his sister, to join his sponsor  in  the
    United Kingdom.  His sister is the  biological  child  of  the  sponsor
    whereas the respondent's biological father left when  he  was  a  baby.
    The respondent and his sister have the same mother, who died in 2009.

2.   The judge found that the respondent's sister met  the  requirements  of
    the immigration rules ("the rules") under paragraph 297 and he  allowed
    her appeal on that basis.  So far as the respondent  is  concerned,  he
    could not meet the requirements of paragraph 297  as  he  was  not  his
    sponsor's biological child and  could  not  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 309A regarding adoption, as he and his sponsor could not show
    that they had been living together immediately before  the  application
    for entry clearance.  It was not a "de facto" adoption  falling  within
    the rules.  The judge did, however, accept the sponsor's evidence  that
    he had been the respondent's effective father since only a  few  months
    after the appellant was born.  He accepted a submission that this was a
    case where the circumstances were not catered for by the rules, so that
    a need for an Article 8 assessment outside them arose.  The judge  went
    on to find that family life existed  between  the  respondent  and  his
    sponsor  and  that  refusal  of  entry   clearance,   particularly   in
    circumstances where  his  sister  had  succeeded,  engaged  Article  8.
    Moving on to proportionality, the judge  found  that  the  respondent's
    circumstances were in all respects very similar to those of his sister,
    save that the sponsor was  not  his  biological  father.   Taking  into
    account  the  family  life  ties,  and  having  weighed  the  competing
    interests,  he  concluded  that  refusal  of  entry  clearance  in  the
    respondent's case was disproportionate.

3.   The Secretary of State  applied  for  permission  to  appeal.   It  was
    contended on her behalf that the judge erred  in  allowing  the  appeal
    under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.  Having found that  the
    respondent could not meet the requirements of the rules, only if  there
    were arguably good grounds for granting leave outside them would it  be
    necessary for the judge  to  proceed  to  consider  whether  compelling
    circumstances existed, not sufficiently  recognised  under  them.   The
    Secretary  of  State  contended   that   there   were   no   compelling
    circumstances in the respondent's case.  Refusal of entry clearance did
    not result in unjustifiably harsh  consequences,  as  required  in  the
    light of Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640.   The  respondent  had  spent  many
    years in Ghana without his sponsor and was now an adult able to lead an
    independent life.  He could visit his sponsor and his sister if  he  so
    wished.  Furthermore, there was no evidence before the Tribunal showing
    that the relationships  between  the  respondent  and  his  sponsor  or
    between the respondent and his  sister  went  beyond  normal  emotional
    ties, so as to suggest family life for Article 8 purposes.  The judge's
    finding to contrary effect amounted  to  an  error  which  led  to  his
    finding that refusal of entry clearance was disproportionate.  Finally,
    it was contended that the judge misdirected  himself  in  finding  that
    there were compelling circumstances in the case and  good  grounds  for
    granting leave outside the rules.

4.   Permission to appeal was granted.   The  grantor  of  permission  noted
    that it was common ground that the respondent was under the age  of  18
    years when he made his application  for  entry  clearance,  although  a
    young adult as at the date of decision.

5.   In a rule 24 response, the appeal was opposed.   The  respondent  would
    submit that the rules did not amount to a  complete  code.   The  judge
    followed the approach suggested in Gulshan and Nagre  [2013]  EWHC  720
    (Admin), without expressly mentioning those cases.  He found compelling
    factors justifying a grant of leave outside the rules,  being  entitled
    to find that the respondent's circumstances were not adequately catered
    for within them.  He moved  on  to  undertake  a  "traditional"  Razgar
    assessment and did not err in law in so doing.  Nor did the  judge  err
    in finding that family life existed  between  the  respondent  and  his
    sponsor.  There was an  abundance  of  evidence  before  the  Tribunal,
    written and oral, justifying the  judge's  findings.   The  judge  gave
    reasons for reaching a rational, evidence based conclusion  that  a  de
    facto father-son relationship  existed  between  the  sponsor  and  the
    respondent at the material date, at a time when the latter was still  a
    child.  Moreover, the judge was entitled to find that refusal of  entry
    clearance  to  the  respondent  also  constituted  a   disproportionate
    interference with the relationship with his sister,  whose  appeal  was
    granted and in relation to whom the Secretary of State did not seek  to
    overturn the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

Submissions on Error of Law

6.   Mr Jarvis said that the respondent's case was  put  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on the basis of a lacuna, the case not being  covered  by  the
    rules.  The Secretary of State's view was that the Article 8 assessment
    carried out by the judge was not lawful and that he  had  misunderstood
    the position.   There  was  no  lacuna.   On  a  proper  analysis,  the
    respondent's case was based on a "near miss", an argument  which  could
    not succeed in the light of the judgment of the Supreme Court in  Patel
    [2013] UKSC 72.  It created an illusion that a  separate  analysis  was
    required and invited the judge to speculate as to the policy behind the
    rules.   Seeking to succeed on the basis that the requirements  of  the
    rules were met, save for one  particular  requirement  in  a  sub-rule,
    amounted to an argument based on a near miss, not the identification of
    a lacuna.

7.   The rules contained provision for adoption, for example  in  paragraphs
    309A and 310.  There were also Article 8 rules and it was certainly the
    case that there was no particular  paragraph  in  Appendix  FM  dealing
    precisely with the respondent's circumstances.  The application he made
    in August 2012 simply could not succeed under the rules.  Paragraphs 44
    and 47 of the decision showed that the judge adopted a flawed  approach
    to Article 8 and he had not understood the proper balance to be  struck
    between the competing interests.  He mentioned  economic  wellbeing  at
    paragraph 48 but the public interest was not confined to  this  aspect.
    The proper approach was set out by the Court of Appeal  in  Haleemudeen
    [2014] EWCA Civ 558.  Before making an assessment  outside  the  rules,
    the was required to give proper weight to the fact that the  respondent
    could  not  qualify  under  them  and  then   search   for   compelling
    circumstances.  He failed to adopt the correct approach.

8.   The Court of Appeal in MM [2014] EWCA Civ 985 did  not  touch  directly
    on this  issue  and  the  need  to  identify  compelling  circumstances
    remained.  What was  missing  was  a  fair  assessment  of  the  public
    interest.

9.   Mr Jarvis said that the circumstances required to be identified had  to
    be compelling, so as to show a disproportionate outcome.  The judge  in
    the  present  appeal  narrowed  the   public   interest   to   economic
    circumstances.  In Haleemudeen, the  court  looked  at  the  rules  and
    Article 8.  The rules  contained  particular  requirements  and  showed
    where the  Secretary  of  State  considered  the  balance  to  lie.   A
    disproportionate outcome was not to be equated with the position  under
    the old, pre-9th July 2012 rules.

10.  Mr Hoshi said in reply that  there  was  no  requirement  expressly  to
    refer to Gulshan or Nagre [2013] EWHC 720  (Admin).   Those  two  cases
    gave guidance on how to approach the  proportionality  assessment.   MM
    also gave guidance in paragraph 134 of the judgment.  In any event, the
    judge was alive to the need to find reasons,  amounting  to  what  were
    described in Gulshan as good, arguable grounds.  The rules  simply  did
    not provide for a relationship such as that which existed  between  the
    respondent and his sponsor.  This  was  properly  a  parent  and  child
    relationship save that the two were  not  directly  related  by  blood.
    Article 8 sought to protect this sort of family life.   The  judge  was
    also clear that this was not a case concerning a near  miss.   He  also
    took into account recent jurisprudence and, at paragraph 49, the policy
    intention that the rules would encapsulate Article 8.

11.  It was clear from both MM and MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA  Civ  1192  that
    the rules were not a complete code, outside  the  deportation  context.
    They did not cover every circumstance.   In  the  present  appeal,  the
    rules provided that the respondent's sister should be allowed  to  join
    her father, which  the  Secretary  of  State  accepted  was  the  right
    outcome.  The judge was entitled to find that it  was  disproportionate
    to exclude the respondent as his  relationship  with  the  sponsor  was
    exactly the same as that enjoyed by his sister and,  in  addition,  the
    respondent and his sister had a relationship as siblings.

12.  So far as the  public  interest  was  concerned,  the  judge  expressly
    accepted submissions made on  the  respondent's  behalf,  contained  in
    paragraphs 32  and  47  of  Mr  Hoshi's  skeleton  argument.   Economic
    wellbeing was certainly a relevant factor but other arguments were also
    considered and taken into account.  Overall, there was no error of  law
    and certainly no material error.  Haleemudeen was no authority for  the
    proposition that a failure to meet the  rules  meant  that  a  claimant
    could not qualify for leave.  The assessment had  to  be  made  in  the
    light of the accepted evidence that  the  respondent  and  his  sponsor
    enjoyed a parental relationship and had done so for many years.

13.  In a brief reply, Mr Jarvis said that in MM, the court  had  not  heard
    argument on whether the rules amounted  to  a  complete  code  and  any
    comments regarding the extent to which the  proportionality  assessment
    was more at large were strictly obiter.  The correct approach  was  set
    out in Haleemudeen.  There  was  a  failure  on  the  judge's  part  to
    recognise this and he was led into an unnecessary diversion in  seeking
    to identify a lacuna in the rules.  This was not the  proper  approach.
    The closest relevant  rule  was  paragraph  309A,  regarding  de  facto
    adoption and this required a period in which a claimant and an adoptive
    parent had lived together for a particular period  of  time,  including
    twelve  months  immediately  preceding  the   application   for   entry
    clearance.  On the other side lay the public interest.   The  Secretary
    of State considered that this had not been properly understood  by  the
    judge, at least in regard to the weight to be given  to  a  failure  to
    meet the requirements of the new rules.  Compelling circumstances  were
    required to outweigh the public interest.  The  relevant  question  was
    whether the judge properly weighed the two competing interests.

Conclusion on Error of Law

14.  I conclude that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  contains  no
    material error of law and shall stand.

15.  As Mr Jarvis submitted, if the approach taken by the judge amounted  to
    an assessment based on a "near  miss",  by  virtue  of  the  respondent
    failing to meet the requirements of paragraph 297 of the  rules  solely
    on the basis that he is not the natural son of the sponsor, that  would
    be an error.  As has been made clear by  the  Supreme  Court  in  Patel
    [2013] UKSC 72, arguments based on a "near miss" cannot  succeed.   The
    proper focus is on the family life or private life  claimed  to  exist.
    In the present appeal, however, the judge did indeed properly focus  on
    the relationships the respondent enjoyed with his sponsor and with  his
    sister.  The decision shows that he had clearly in mind the  real  ties
    and relationships which existed.  His approach was consistent with  the
    guidance given by Lord Carnwath in Patel.

16.  Nor was he led into error by confusing a lacuna  with  a  "near  miss".
    In the light of the evidence before him, he was entitled to  find  that
    the family relationships were  not  catered  for  in  the  rules.   The
    decision shows that he had two particular aspects in mind here.  First,
    the respondent's relationship with his sponsor began a few months after
    his birth and continued thereafter, being indistinguishable as a parent-
    child relationship from that which existed between his sister  and  her
    father.  Second, the relationship between the respondent and his sister
    was also a component in the family life  he  enjoyed.   The  particular
    family circumstances, viewed overall, do not feature  in  Appendix  FM,
    insofar as that appendix is relevant, as the basis for a grant of leave
    and paragraph 297 does not cater for them either.  As a matter of fact,
    the date of application for  entry  clearance  was  16th  August  2012,
    before paragraph A277C of the rules came into effect on  6th  September
    that year.   Mr Jarvis suggested that the  closest  rule  is  paragraph
    309A, dealing with de facto adoption.  That may  well  be  so  but  the
    circumstances of a de facto adoption are, in reality, very far  removed
    from those of a family where  a  parental  relationship  begins  within
    months of a child's birth and where the child's natural mother and  (in
    the present case, from her birth some eighteen months later) sister are
    also present and where family life has endured for many years.

17.  I find that the judge was  entitled  to  conclude  that  an  Article  8
    assessment was required, not on the basis of  a  "near  miss",  but  in
    consequence of his finding on the evidence that the relationships  were
    not catered for under the rules and yet  amounted  to  family  life  to
    which weight was required to be given.

18.  Did the  judge  err  in  apparently  failing  to  identify  "compelling
    circumstances"?  I find that he did not.  Mr Jarvis  may  be  right  to
    describe paragraph 134 of the judgment in MM as  obiter  (where  it  is
    suggested that if the rules do not amount to a complete code, "then the
    proportionality test will be more at large, albeit guided by the  Huang
    tests and UK and Strasbourg case law") but that guidance is nonetheless
    deserving of very great respect and it is perfectly consistent with the
    approach of the Court of  Appeal  in  MF  (Nigeria),  where  the  rules
    considered in that case, contained in part 13, were held to amount to a
    "complete  code".   There  is  no  suggestion  in  any  of  the  recent
    authorities that other parts of the rules amount to a "complete  code",
    although  a  reference  to  "exceptional"  or,  perhaps,   "compelling"
    circumstances in a particular rule or set of rules might indicate  such
    a code.  In any event, the decision shows that the judge  did  identify
    arguably good grounds,  to  use  the  phrase  employed  in  Nagre,  for
    granting  leave  outside  the  rules  and  so  proceeding  to  make  an
    assessment outside them.  He did not expressly refer to either  Gulshan
    or Nagre but that does not  of  itself  amount  to  an  error  of  law.
    Paragraphs 44 and 45 of the decision show that the judge  moved  on  to
    make an Article 8 assessment, acting  consistently  with  the  guidance
    given in those cases and with the guidance given in  MM.   He  accepted
    submissions made on the respondent's  behalf,  contained  in  counsel's
    skeleton but, again, that does not disclose an error of itself  and  at
    paragraph  47,  he  accepted  submissions  which  were  based  on  Lord
    Bingham's structured approach in Razgar [2004] 2  AC  368,  nonetheless
    recording his own findings in the light of those submissions.

19.  Did the judge err in narrowing the public interest?   I  find  that  he
    did not improperly  narrow  the  public  interest  to  merely  economic
    circumstances, although  the  maintenance  of  immigration  control  is
    typically seen as an aspect of this particular legitimate aim.   It  is
    clear, as Mr Hoshi submitted, that he accepted  arguments  put  on  the
    respondent's behalf and contained  in  paragraph  32  of  the  skeleton
    argument before him.  In other words, he had in mind the maintenance of
    a firm  and  fair  system  of  immigration  control,  safeguarding  the
    economic wellbeing of the United Kingdom (as a factor in its own right)
    and the need to protect the rights and freedoms of others.

20.  Drawing  these  threads  together,  I  conclude  that  the  judge  gave
    sustainable reasons  for  finding  that  family  life  existed  in  the
    particular relationships the respondent has enjoyed for many years with
    his sponsor and with his sister, for his conclusion that the  rules  do
    not  cater  for  the  respondent's  particular  circumstances  and  for
    striking the balance between the competing interests as he did.  He did
    not err in law  in  his  approach.   The  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal shall stand.

21.  There has been considerable delay in the preparation  and  promulgation
    of this decision on error of law, entirely the fault of the author.  My
    conclusion that the judge did  not  err  was  reached  soon  after  the
    hearing and is unaffected by later guidance from the Court  of  Appeal,
    particularly in Singh [2015] EWCA Civ 74, where there is an analysis of
    the transitional provisions in HC194, the judgments in Edgehill  [2014]
    EWCA Civ 402 and Haleemudeen [2014] EWCA Civ 558 and approval of a "two
    stage approach".



DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.



Signed        Date 15th April 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell


ANONYMITY

There has been no application for anonymity and I make no direction on  this
occasion.



Signed        Date 15th April 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell
