
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/03620/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Determination Promulgated            |
|On: 21st May 2015                    |On: 28th May 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI


                                   Between

                      Entry Clearance Officer, Kingston
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          Mr Karlos Von David Simon
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mrs Simon, Sponsor


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The Respondent is a national of Grenada date of birth 24th  January
         1986.  In a determination dated the 26th January  2015  the  First-
         tier Tribunal (Judge Somal) allowed his appeal against  a  decision
         to refuse to grant him entry  clearance  as  a  spouse.  The  Entry
         Clearance Officer now has permission to appeal against  the  First-
         tier Tribunal's decision.




    Background and Matters in Issue

      2. The refusal notice is dated 3rd February 2014. The Entry  Clearance
         Officer had found there to be discrepancies in the information that
         the Respondent had supplied on different dates. On his  application
         form it was stated that he  had  only  one  child;  on  a  previous
         occasion he had told an Immigration Officer at Gatwick Airport that
         he had four children.  In light of this the Entry Clearance Officer
         was satisfied that the Respondent had  supplied  false  information
         and  the  application  was  therefore  refused  with  reference  to
         paragraph S-EC.2.2(a) of Appendix FM.  The refusal  notice  further
         notes some  discrepancies  in  respect  of  when  the  Respondent's
         relationship with his British sponsor was said to have started. The
         refusal notice addresses various pieces of evidence that  supported
         the application, and gives reasons  why  little  weight  is  to  be
         attached  to  each.  The  notice  concludes  "given  the   evidence
         described and the  fact  that  you  have  made  false  declarations
         regarding your children in Grenada, as well as other  discrepancies
         and omissions in your application, I am  not  satisfied  that  your
         relationship with your sponsor is genuine and  subsisting  or  that
         you intend to live together permanently in the UK".

      3. When the matter came  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  Entry
         Clearance Officer was not represented. The determination is  silent
         about why that might have been; before us Mr Duffy  suggested  that
         it was probably staff shortage. Mrs Simon attended and  was  called
         to give evidence by her husband's representative. Having heard that
         evidence the Tribunal records that it found Mrs  Simon  to  be  "an
         honest and credible witness".  The  Tribunal  correctly  identified
         that where allegations of fraud or dishonesty are made, it  is  for
         the party making the allegation to prove them: the burden of  proof
         therefore lay on the Entry Clearance Officer. Having had regard  to
         the credible live evidence of Mrs Simon as well as the  documentary
         evidence before it the Tribunal rejected the assertion that  either
         Respondent or Sponsor had been complicit in any attempt to deceive.
         They had produced credible evidence that the electronic application
         form had been incorrectly  completed  by  a  legal  representative.
         This included the pro-forma that they had completed and  handed  to
         that representative, which clearly gave  the  names  and  dates  of
         birth of each of the  Respondent's  four  children.   The  Tribunal
         accepted,  in  effect,  that  there  had  been  an  error  in  that
         information being transcribed onto the electronic form. As  to  the
         relationship the Tribunal  had  regard  to  the  oral  and  written
         evidence,  the  travel  records  showing  a   number   of   visits,
         photographs, and evidence of contact through telephone,  Skype  and
         social media. The Judge was satisfied on a balance of probabilities
         that this is a genuine and  subsisting  marriage.  The  appeal  was
         therefore allowed under the Immigration Rules and on  human  rights
         grounds.

      4. The Entry Clearance Officer now appeals on the following grounds:

          i) The Entry Clearance Officer did not have to prove  that  there
             had been an  attempt  to  deceive.  It  was  enough  that  the
             application contained false information, because paragraph  E-
             EC.2.2 specifies that the omission can be "with or without the
             applicant's knowledge".

         ii) The Tribunal erred in failing to address the specific  reasons
             given  by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  as   to   why   the
             relationship was not accepted.

      5. On the 4th March  2015  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Levin  granted
         permission in respect of ground ii); he noted that where the  Entry
         Clearance Officer was not  represented  the  Tribunal  should  have
         applied the Surendran[1] guidelines and taken  particular  care  to
         deal with all of the points raised in the refusal notice.

      6. Permission was refused in respect of Ground i)  with  reference  to
         the decision in Shen (Paper  Appeals;  proving  dishonesty)  [2014]
         UKUT 00236 (IAC).  Judge Levin found  that  the  reasoning  in  the
         determination was adequate and that there was no arguable merit  in
         the grounds.  The Judge had been entitled, on the  evidence  before
         her, to make the findings that she did.   Before us  Mr  Duffy  did
         not renew the application for permission on that  ground.   Instead
         he focused his concise submissions on ground (ii), referring us  to
         the detailed reasons given in the  refusal  notice  why  the  Entry
         Clearance Officer had not believed this to be a real  marriage.  In
         the circumstances where the Entry Clearance Officer  had  not  been
         present at the appeal it was incumbent on the Tribunal  to  examine
         that reasoning with care.

    No Error of Law

      7. Mr Duffy is correct to say that the refusal notice gave a number of
         reasons why the Entry Clearance Officer was dissatisfied  with  the
         evidence that supported the application.   Some  adverse  inference
         was drawn from the fact that neither he or his wife  mentioned  his
         children in their written statements; the fact that her sister Dana
         Gay had thought it pertinent to state that she did not believe this
         to be a "marriage  of  convenience"  was  thought  suspicious;  the
         evidence of contact, photographs and cards from friends were  found
         to be insufficient to discharge the burden of proof.

      8. We are satisfied that the Tribunal did not err in failing  to  make
         specific findings on  each  of  these  points.  It  is  clear  from
         paragraph 2 and 12 of the determination that Judge Somal  had  been
         well aware of the matters that were in issue before her,  and  that
         she had read the refusal notice.   In the second part of  paragraph
         12 she specifically refers to the evidence of intervening  devotion
         and finds - contrary to the view expressed in the refusal notice  -
         it to be "strong evidence" that this is a genuine relationship  and
         that  the  parties  married  following  a  romance.   She  had  the
         opportunity to hear oral evidence from Mrs Simon, whom she found to
         be honest and credible. Crucially, she had accepted that there  had
         been no attempt at deception.  It was clear from the refusal notice
         that the Entry Clearance Officer's decision on whether this  was  a
         genuine marriage was very much influenced by his finding  that  the
         application had contained  false  statements.  If  there  had  been
         deception this would of course have been an inference that was open
         for him to draw. The  Tribunal,  on  the  other  hand,  viewed  the
         remaining evidence through  a  prism  unclouded  by  a  finding  of
         deception, and in those circumstances Judge Somal was  entitled  to
         find that the evidence before her was sufficient to  discharge  the
         burden of proof.  We are satisfied  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         understood the reasons for refusal and that she  has  given  clear,
         intelligible reasons why she disagreed.

    Decisions

      9. The determination contains no error of law and it is upheld.

     10. We were not asked to make a direction as to anonymity  and  on  the
         facts we see no reason why one should be made.






                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                               25th May 2015
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Surendran v SSHD (1997) approved by the Upper Tribunal in MNM v SSHD
[2000] INLR 576.

