
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: OA/03117/2014
                                                               OA/03119/2014
                                                               OA/03121/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On February 23, 2016                 |On February 24, 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                               MRS ZHOULAN FAN
                                MISS QUIAN HE
                               MISS XIAOBIN HE
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                         THE ENTRY CLEARANCE MANAGER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant   Mr Pipe, Counsel, instructed by Lin & Co
Respondent  Mr Richards (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are Chinese nationals. The sponsor, Tianen He,  and  the
    first named appellant claimed to have married in 1993. The  second  and
    third-named appellants were born on March 12,  1996  and  February  23,
    1998 respectively. The sponsor left China in 1997 and went to Russia at
    a time when his wife was pregnant with the third  named  appellant.  He
    arrived in UK in 1999 and  applied  for  asylum.  His  application  was
    refused but he remained  here  unlawfully  supporting  himself  through
    illegal work. On September 24, 2010 he was granted indefinite leave  to
    remain under the legacy provisions albeit the name he was granted  this
    in was Tian Ming He. The appellant then applied for a Chinese  passport
    and was issued one in the name of Tianen He but the consequence of this
    was he had indefinite leave to remain in the name of Tian Ming He and a
    Chinese passport in the name of Tianen He.

 2. The appellants applied for entry  clearance  on  December  5,  2013  as
    spouse and children of the sponsor.  The  respondent  considered  their
    applications and refused them on February 7, 2014.

 3. The appellants appealed against those decisions under section 82(1)  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on February 27,  2014.
    The entry clearance manager reviewed the grounds of appeal  but  upheld
    the decision in a letter dated July 22, 2014.

 4. The matter was heard by Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Nixon  on
    November 18, 2014 and in a decision promulgated on  November  24,  2014
    the Tribunal refused their applications for entry clearance.

 5. The appellants applied for permission to appeal on  December  16,  2014
    submitting the Tribunal had erred in its approach to the evidence.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Simpson on January 27, 2015 on the basis it was arguable  the  Tribunal
    had erred.

 7. The matter came before me on the above date  and  I  heard  submissions
    from both representatives. At the conclusion  of  those  submissions  I
    reserved my decision but noted that both representatives agreed that in
    the event of an error in law that I could remake  the  decision  having
    regard to the evidence previously submitted and also a copy of a recent
    Tribunal decision in respect of the sponsor.

 8. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity  direction  and
    pursuant to Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I see no reason to make an order now.

    SUBMISSIONS

 9. Mr Pipe adopted the grounds of appeal and submitted there had  been  an
    error in law. The starting point was that the respondent  accepted  the
    sponsor had indefinite leave to remain and that  he  had  been  granted
    this in September 2010. Prior to that date he  had  no  status  in  the
    United Kingdom and he submitted it was not until the respondent  sorted
    out the "two names" issue on his passport and leave paperwork that  the
    sponsor would have been able to visit the appellants. He  also  pointed
    out that DNA evidence identified the children as those  of  the  first-
    named appellant and himself. The sole issue  between  himself  and  the
    first-named appellant was whether they were in a genuine and subsisting
    relationship and intended to live together as husband and wife.

10. Mr Pipe submitted the First-tier Judge applied to a  high  a  test  and
    should have approached  the  evidence  of  contact  in  line  with  the
    decision of Goudey (subsisting  marriage-evidence)  Sudan  [2012]  UKUT
    00041. The First-tier Judge had available before her telephone  records
    that matched the telephone numbers on the VAF forms and she had applied
    to a high a burden of proof when finding at paragraph  [16(6)]  of  her
    decision that the appellants had not shown the numbers  called  between
    March and November 2013 were her numbers. She also erred  by  attaching
    insufficient weight to the internet conversations and money  transfers.
    This evidence together, he submitted, satisfied the  test  set  out  in
    Goudey.

11. Whilst the findings between paragraph [16(2) and (4)] of the First-tier
    Judge's decision were unchallenged Mr Pipe submitted  that  the  First-
    tier Judge had erred by  placing  too  much  weight  on  the  sponsor's
    immigration history, the fact he had not been able to visit his  family
    and these adverse findings.

12. Mr Richardson relied on the Rule 24 letter dated February 17, 2015.  He
    argues there were a number of adverse findings (unchallenged today) and
    the First-tier Judge had been entitled to place such weight as she felt
    appropriate  when  considering  the  parties'  intentions.  Whilst  the
    telephone numbers appeared  on  the  VAF  form  this  was  clearly  not
    something that either the sponsor or previous counsel had drawn to  the
    First-tier Judge's attention and bearing in mind genuineness  of  their
    relationship was questioned it was wrong to  expect  the  Judge  to  go
    through a large bundle of evidence looking  for  something  that  might
    support the appellants' claim. The decision of  Goudey  does  not  mean
    there is no test to satisfy-that test is the Judge has to be  satisfied
    the parties intended to live together as husband and wife. The  grounds
    amount to a mere disagreement and the appeal should be rejected.

13. Mr Pipe responded to these submissions arguing that  it  was  incumbent
    upon the Judge to consider the VAF form and she did not have  to  trawl
    through the large bundle to do this. The fact the sponsor's immigration
    history was  poor  did  not  mean  he  was  dishonest.  The  Judge  and
    respondent accepted he had two names for the reasons given by him.  The
    evidence of contact plus the  fact  they  are  clearly  connected  were
    factors Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Nixon did not have regard  to.
    He invited me to find there had been an error in law in relation to the
    Immigration Rules. As regards Article 8 ECHR he  acknowledged  that  if
    the  first-named  appellant's  application  failed  on  the  basis  the
    relationship was not subsisting and  continuing  then  the  first-named
    appellant could not succeed under article 8 ECHR. He did however invite
    me to consider the children's position under article 8 ECHR.

    DISCUSSION AND FINDINGS

14. In considering whether there has been an error I have had regard to  my
    record of proceedings, the grounds of appeal, the rule 24 response  and
    submissions.

15. The following was agreed:
      a. The sponsor's immigration history as set out in paragraph [1] above
         was accepted.
      b. The second and third-named appellants  were  the  children  of  the
         first-named appellant and sponsor.
      c. There were discrepancies in the marriage documentation. The parties
         claimed they married in 1993 but the marriage certificate was dated
         2005 and did not refer to the fact  it  was  a  "replacement".  The
         sponsor and first-named appellant both gave differing accounts  for
         why the certificate was only dated in 2005.
      d. The application forms were in part unreliable because:
          i. The three appellants claimed they  last  saw  the  sponsor  on
             October 1, 1999. The sponsor claimed he left China in 1997 and
             went to Russia.
         ii. The third-named appellant claimed she first saw her father  on
             February 3, 1998 although she was not born until February  28,
             1998.
        iii. The third-named appellant claimed she first saw her father  on
             February 3, 1998 even though the sponsor stated  he  had  left
             China before she was born in 1997.
      e. The sponsor's Chinese registration card is dated February 12,  2012
         and has him living at the appellants' address in Fuqing  City.  The
         first-named  appellant  had  not  told  the  authorities   of   his
         whereabouts.

16. It is against this background that the First-tier Judge considered  the
    applications under the Immigration Rules.  The  appellants  could  only
    succeed under the Rules as  a  family.  If  the  first-named  appellant
    failed, then the remaining appellants would also fail under  the  Rules
    because the children's claim was based on their  mother  going  to  the
    United Kingdom.

17. At paragraph [16(5)] of her decision she made clear that  she  did  not
    find the sponsor's use of two names was for dishonest reasons  although
    she had unanswered  questions.  She  also  found  that  he  had  worked
    unlawfully but concluded by saying these two  factors  were  indicative
    that  he  was  prepared  to  act  dishonestly.  She  rejected  previous
    counsel's submission that no regard should be paid to his history.

18. Mr Pipe submitted that her approach to the sponsor's use of  two  names
    undermined her assessment to the evidence. If she had  merely  rejected
    their "genuineness" claim then I am satisfied that would amount  to  an
    error in law but in assessing the sponsor's and first-named appellant's
    credibility I  am  satisfied  the  First-tier  Judge  was  entitled  to
    consider all of the matters which led her to have concerns.

19. This was not a  case  where  paternity  was  disputed.  The  respondent
    questioned the basis of the  application  namely  whether  this  was  a
    genuine spousal settlement application. Although permission  to  appeal
    was given I am satisfied the  Judge  was  entitled  to  consider  these
    maters as they went to explain aspects of their relationship. The  fact
    they remained married did not necessarily mean they were in  a  genuine
    and subsisting relationship and intended to live  together  as  husband
    and wife.

20. I therefore find that Mr Pipe's submission that  too  much  weight  was
    attached to these factors has no basis. The Judge did not reject  their
    relationship for these reasons but took them into account.

21. Those findings have to be considered against the evidence  of  contact.
    The sponsor claimed not to have seen his wife  and  children  for  over
    sixteen years as at the date of the application.  The  parties  claimed
    they had been financially supported for many years and they had kept in
    touch by cards, phone calls and the internet. The Judge considered  the
    evidence of phone calls and money transfers. She  also  considered  the
    photographs and the internet conversations and  she  made  findings  on
    each aspect of their contact between paragraphs [16(6) and (8)] of  her
    decision.

22. These documents show contact between the appellants and the sponsor and
    Mr Pipe submits that this  evidence  satisfied  the  test  set  out  in
    Goudey.

23. However, in Goudey the  Upper  Tribunal  made  clear  that  a  lack  of
    corroborative evidence does not mean the claim should be  rejected  out
    of hand. Mr Pipe rightly pointed out that the VAF  form  contained  the
    two telephone numbers relied on by the  parties  for  contact.  No  one
    raised this at the hearing but this evidence in itself  does  not  mean
    the first-named appellant's claim succeeds. The Tribunal in Goudey made
    clear at paragraph [11]-
         "Everything else is neutral in this case. There is no  evidence  of
         lies, poor immigration history or deception. There is some evidence
         of financial sponsorship  though  the  judge  was  entitled  to  be
         unimpressed by it for the reason he gave the absence of receipts is
         not a factor that goes to the discredit of the application."

24. In  a  case  therefore  where  there  is  no  evidence  of  lies,  poor
    immigration history or deception then the parties would be entitled  to
    the benefit of the doubt but where these issues  are  raised  then  the
    Judge is entitled to look at the evidence, or lack of it, more closely.



25. Whilst evidence was submitted the  First-tier  Judge  was  entitled  to
    comment on its limited nature in circumstances where  doubts  over  the
    marriage existed and the sponsor's own account were  questionable.  The
    sponsor's  overstay  and  unlawful  activities  were  factors  she  was
    entitled to have regard.

26. Mr Pipe's submission is that  the  First-tier  Judge  placed  too  much
    weight on adverse factors  and  too  little  weight  on  the  documents
    submitted. However, the First-tier Judge was entitled to  consider  all
    of the available evidence and I am satisfied  that  the  principles  of
    Goudey were followed.

27. Mr Pipe argued that her approach in paragraph [16(9)] of  her  decision
    demonstrated an erroneous approach. Whilst some  of  her  findings  may
    have been speculative I am satisfied that the core findings,  including
    the finding that the sponsor displayed little interest in visiting  his
    daughter in China if these applications failed, were open to her.

28. Mr Richardson  submitted  that  the  arguments  presented  by  Mr  Pipe
    amounted to a mere disagreement. Having carefully considered all of the
    evidence and taking into account the submissions I am drawn to the same
    conclusion.

29. There was no error of law in her approach to  the  decision  under  the
    Immigration Rules in  respect  of  the  First-named  appellant  and  no
    separate grounds of appeal were raised under the Rules  in  respect  of
    the second and third-named appellants. I accordingly find no  error  of
    law in respect of the Immigration Rules.

30. Mr Pipe accepted that if the first-named  appellant  failed  under  the
    Rules then the first-named appellant's article 8 claim would also  fail
    as family life could not be engaged.

31. Mr Pipe did seek to rely, to a limited degree, on  article  8  ECHR  in
    respect of the two children.

32. The First-tier Judge considered article 8 outside of the Rules and I am
    satisfied that based on her  previous  findings,  the  conclusions  she
    reached  when  considering  proportionality  were  open  to  her.   She
    concluded the second and third-named appellants  had  lived  all  their
    lives in China and had been cared for by their mother. The sponsor  had
    played a limited role and she found  it  was  not  disproportionate  to
    refuse them admission. At the date of decisions, the children were aged
    17 and 16 years old respectively and whilst her assessment was brief  I
    am satisfied her findings were open to her. There was no error  of  law
    in respect of the article 8 decision.

    DECISION

33. There was no error in law. I uphold Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Nixon's decision and I dismiss the appeals.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
