
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/03832/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 September 2016                          |On 06 October 2016            |



                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                                sitan diaoune
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ACCRA

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms O Revill Counsel instructed by Lords Solicitors
LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Guinea  born  on  1  January  1990.   She
    applied to join her husband, the sponsor, in the United Kingdom  on  22
    July 2014.  The application was  refused  on  16  November  2014.   The
    respondent considered the appellant was not  exempt  from  the  English
    language requirement under paragraph E-ECP.4.2.  She was not a national
    of a majority English speaking country noted in the Rules and  did  not
    hold a relevant qualification.  In her application she had  stated  she
    had passed a six months' English language programme but the  respondent
    considered that neither of the schools or colleges attended were on the
    list of approved  English  language  test  providers.   There  were  no
    exceptional circumstances why the  appellant  could  not  undertake  an
    approved  English  language  test.   The  application  was  accordingly
    refused under EC-P1.1.(d) of Appendix FM(E-ECP.4.1).

2.   The appellant appealed and her appeal came before  a  First-tier  Judge
    on 2 March 2016.

3.   The judge heard oral evidence from the sponsor which is  summarised  at
    paragraphs 17 to 19 of the determination as follows:

         "17. The sponsor adopted his written statements  dated  01/02/2016.
             He said that he travelled to Conakry with his  wife  and  that
             they were told that there was  no  English  Test  centre.   He
             states that his wife has obtained two English certificates but
             he has been told that they are not issued by the  test  centre
             approved by the UKBA.  He said that  they  also  went  to  Sri
             Leone (SL) but there no English Test Centre there either.   He
             said that they submitted his wife's application in SL but  the
             decision was made in Accra, Ghana.


         18.  In cross-examination, the sponsor said his wife's  application
             was completed by someone for them in SL (vague).  He said that
             his wife had sent all the details to him in the UK and he  had
             asked his lawyer for advice.  He said that the application was
             made on 25/08/2014, his wife had travelled to SL in  order  to
             make the application.  He said that before his wife  made  her
             application, they were in contact with each other, he went  to
             the lawyer to seek advice for his wife's application.


         19.  The sponsor said that his lawyer told him  about  the  English
             language test and that he had been sent a Home  Office  letter
             about the requirements.  When asked if he  accepted  that  his
             wife did not have a recognised English test, the sponsor  said
             that other people have had visa given to them on the same test
             that his wife had done.  When asked if his  wife  had  applied
             for an exception, he made no reply.  He said that he had  made
             number of application for his wife in the  past  and  if  they
             fail in this  appeal,  they  will  continue  to  make  further
             applications (the sponsor became very emotional)."

4.   The judge concluded his decision as follows:

         "23. I heard oral evidence from the sponsor, his evidence is  noted
             above.  The sponsor was unable to say as to why his wife could
             not take English test at a centre which is recognised  by  the
             respondent.  He said that there were no such centres in Guinea
             or SL.  He did not say why if there  is  no  English  language
             centre in Guinea, his wife did not  apply  for  an  exception.
             There is evidence in the appellant's bundle where the  English
             test could be taken but the sponsor did not give any reason as
             to why his wife could not travel to other parts of  Africa  to
             take the required test or as to why she did not apply  for  an
             exception, which she could have done.


         24.   The  appellant  is  not  exempt  from  the  English  language
             requirements under paragraph E-ECP4.2.  In addition she is not
             a national of a majority English speaking  country  listed  in
             paragraph GEN 1.6 and has not passed an English language  test
             (A1 Level  of  Common  European  Framework)  with  a  provider
             approved by UKBA and/or do not hold an academic  qualification
             recognised by NARC UK to be the equivalent to the standard  of
             a Bachelor's or Master's degree or PhD in  the  UK  which  was
             taught in English, therefore she needs to provide the  English
             language certificate from a provided recognised by the UKBA.


         25.  There are exceptions if it is not  practicable  or  reasonable
             for an applicant to  take  an  approved  A1  test  in  another
             country.  This may be where it may be difficult  for  them  to
             obtain an exit visa or restrictions make it difficult for  the
             applicant to travel abroad.  The  full  requirements  for  the
             exceptions to apply are set out in guidelines which are in the
             appellant's bundle.   The  applicant  has  to  set  out  their
             exceptional circumstance to the Entry Clearance Officer before
             they  make  their  application  for  entry   clearance.    The
             appellant in this case has made no such application.


         26.  On the evidence before me, on the  balance  of  probabilities,
             for the above-mentioned reasons, I am not satisfied  that  the
             appellant meets all the requirements of  paragraph  EC-P1.1(d)
             (E-CP.4.1.).


         27.  As for the appellant's Article 8 rights to family and  private
             life, she has never lived in the UK, the  sponsor  travels  to
             Guinea to be with her.   The  appellant  has  made  number  of
             previous applications.  I find that either the  appellant  can
             travel to another country to take a recognised test  or  apply
             for an exception under the rules, if she thinks she meets  the
             requirements of the exceptions.  I find that  the  appellant's
             family and private life can continue in Guinea."


5.   There was an application for permission to appeal where it was  pointed
    out that the application had been submitted on line on 22 July 2014 and
    this was before there had been a change in policy on the requirement of
    English language from applicants from Guinea.  The  appellant  had  had
    the benefit  of  an  automatic  exemption  from  the  English  language
    requirement because she was a long-term resident of Guinea which had no
    approved A1 test provision.  The appellant had  not  been  required  to
    submit any evidence at all of her competence in the English language.

6.   In relation to Article 8 it was submitted that  the  decision  was  not
    proportionate and the guidance that had been given to the respondent as
    to how the Rule should have operated at the  time  of  the  appellant's
    application had not been considered - the judge had  erred  in  finding
    that the appellant was not exempt from the language requirements.

7.   A response was filed by the Entry  Clearance  Officer  on  8  September
    2016. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  had  referred  to  the  policy  at
    paragraph 25 of his decision and has properly found that the  appellant
    was  required  to  set  out  exceptional  circumstances  to  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer before they made the application and also  to  travel
    to  another  country  to  take  a  recognised  test.   More  than  mere
    inconvenience or reluctance to travel was required  and  it  was  clear
    that the appellant did not have  the  relevant  English  language  test
    results  and  failed  to  show  why  she  should  be  exempt  from  the
    requirement.

8.   At the hearing Counsel relied on her  skeleton  argument.  It  was  not
    disputed that there  was  no  approved  test  centre  in  Guinea.   She
    referred to the April 2013 Immigration Directorate  Instructions  which
    she submitted applied to the appellant's application on the date it was
    submitted - 22 July 2014.  The concluding paragraph of paragraph 5.7 of
    the Instructions read as follows:

         "Applicants who are nationals of a country with no test centre  and
         who have made an application for  entry  clearance/leave  to  enter
         from that country  will  be  exempt  from  the  requirement.   This
         exemption does not apply  to  applicants  applying  in-country  for
         leave to remain as test centres and facilities to learn English are
         readily available in the UK."

9.   Counsel then referred to paragraph 7.2 of the  Instructions  introduced
    in July 2014, the third paragraph of which reads as follows:

         "Applications submitted before 24 July 2014 can continue to rely on
         the exceptional circumstances exemption if there were  no  approved
         A1 English language test available in their country  of  long  term
         residence at the date of application."

10.  There was no need to apply for an  exemption  and  the  judge  and  the
    Entry Clearance Officer had been wrong in taking the point.

11.  In relation to Article 8 the judge's consideration had been very  brief
    and it was clear there had been  an  interference  with  the  protected
    rights.

12.  Miss Isherwood  submitted  that  at  part  7  of  the  application  the
    appellant had been asked  whether  she  was  exempt  from  the  English
    language requirement and had replied "No".  She was then asked how  did
    she meet the English language requirement and replied "Completed a  six
    months English language programme as  a  second  language  level  1  at
    Canadian College of Business and Computers in Conackry Guinea."

13.  The sponsor's evidence had been found to be vague.

14.  In the second paragraph of the July 2014 guidance  it  was  made  clear
    that the applicant must demonstrate

         "In Box 8.1 in Part 8 of the VAF 4A form  for  an  entry  clearance
         application as a partner or parent, that as a result of exceptional
         circumstances they are unable to learn English before coming to the
         UK or it is not practicable or reasonable for  them  to  travel  to
         another  country  to  take  an  approved  English  language   test.
         Partners of members of HM Forces must demonstrate this in  Box  9.1
         of the VAFAF form."

15.  In addition evidence of  the  nature  and  impact  of  the  exceptional
    circumstances needed to be provided clearly.   Examples  of  situations
    were given including the example 'Is a long term resident of a  country
    with no approved A1  test  provision  and  it  is  not  practicable  or
    reasonable for the applicant to travel to another  country  to  take  a
    test (see Section 7.2 below).'"

16.  The judge's approach could not be faulted and  there  was  no  material
    error of law in relation to his conclusion on Article 8.  She  referred
    to Quila v Secretary of State [2011] UKSC 45 applied  in  Secretary  of
    State v SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387. The appellant could  travel  to
    another country and comply with the Rules.

17.  In reply, Counsel submitted that the appellant had  not  been  required
    to demonstrate she was exempt as a long term resident of  Guinea.   The
    guidance in the July 2014 Instructions at paragraph 7.1 about what  the
    applicant needed to demonstrate in Box 8.1  referred  to  the  position
    after the  appellant  had  submitted  her  application.   She  was  not
    required  to  provide  this  evidence  in   her   circumstances.    The
    respondent's decision had not been in accordance with the law  and  the
    case was governed by the former Instructions.

18.  At the conclusion of the submissions I  reserved  my  decision.   I  am
    grateful for the clear submissions made by both sides  in  relation  to
    this matter.

19.  It does not appear to be the subject of dispute  that  the  appellant's
    application was submitted prior to the change in the  policy  reflected
    in the Immigration Directorate Instructions.   At  that  stage  it  was
    clear that the appellant was exempt and that exemption was preserved as
    is again clear from paragraph 7.2 of the July 2014 exemptions.

20.  In Part 7 of the application made by appellant it  is  clear  that  she
    should have written "yes" rather than "no" in answer  to  the  question
    "Are you exempt from the English language requirement?"

21.  Is this fatal to her case?

22.  The entry clearance was refused on the basis "You are not  exempt  from
    the English  language  requirement  under  paragraph  E-ECP.4.2."   The
    evidence provided did not demonstrate that the appellant  had  met  the
    requirements of the English language section of our application or that
    there were any exceptional  circumstances  as  to  why  she  could  not
    undertake an approved English language test.

23.  In fact, the appellant was exempt.  In the  Entry  Clearance  Manager's
    decision it was noted that the grounds of appeal had  stated  that  the
    decision made by the Entry Clearance Officer was not in accordance with
    the law or the Immigration Rules and continued

         "However, no specific reasons have been cited in  support  of  this
         assertion. Therefore it has not been possible to  analyse  why  the
         appellant considers this to be  the  case.   Nevertheless,  I  have
         carefully reviewed the decision and supporting  evidence  available
         to me  and  I  am  satisfied  that  the  ECO  applied  the  correct
         provisions of the Immigration Rules and that  the  decision  is  in
         accordance   with   the   law,   contrary   to   the    appellant's
         unsubstantiated assertions.

         The grounds of appeal  assert  that  discretion  should  have  been
         exercised differently.  This implies that the  appellant  does  not
         meet the requirements of the relevant Rule  and  thus  reliance  is
         being  placed  [on]  discretion  as  an  alternative.  However   no
         explanation is offered as to why the appellant believes this to  be
         the case.  In the absence of further evidence I have in  any  event
         reviewed the decision and supporting evidence available to me and I
         am satisfied that the decision is  correct.   I  am  not  therefore
         prepared to exercise discretion in the appellant's favour."

24.  The Entry Clearance Manager also noted that the appellant had  provided
    a certificate of attendance on  an  English  language  course  but  the
    establishment was not on the list of  approved  English  language  test
    providers and  accordingly  the  appellant  had  not  met  the  English
    language requirement.

25.  The error in this case  is  a  simple  one.   The  respondent  had  not
    applied the relevant policy that  was  applicable  to  the  appellant's
    application made shortly before the change of policy on 24  July  2014.
    The appellant had submitted her application before  24  July  2014  and
    could continue to rely on the exemption.  Even if this  point  had  not
    been picked up by the Entry Clearance Officer, on a careful  review  by
    the Entry Clearance Manager it  should  have  been  apparent  that  the
    appellant had the benefit of the former policy.

26.  I do not consider it fatal that the appellant made a mistake.   It  was
    clear on the face of the application that it was submitted prior to  24
    July.  It was clear on the face of the application that  the  appellant
    was a long term resident of Guinea.  She  should  not  be  in  a  worse
    position by having undertaken courses which were  not  effective  under
    the revised policy.  In stating that the appellant was not exempt  from
    the language requirement there was a  misdirection  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent.  The decision was not in accordance with the law.

27.  There was a further opportunity at the hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Judge for the respondent's representative to correct matters.

28.  The First-tier Judge's  attention  was  not  drawn  to  the  underlying
    failing  in  the  respondent's  decision.   However,  the  respondent's
    decision and decision making process was fundamentally  flawed  because
    of the application of the wrong policy to the appellant's  application.



29.  In short, the fact that the error was not appreciated  by  either  side
    does not make it less of an error. The respondent as I have pointed out
    had at least one opportunity to correct it.

30.  The appellant's appeal is allowed on the basis  that  the  decision  of
    the respondent was materially flawed in law.  This error  affected  the
    decision of the First-tier Judge whose attention was not drawn  by  the
    respondent to the error.

31.  I remake the decision of the First-tier Judge.

32.  The appeal is allowed  to  the  extent  that  it  is  remitted  to  the
    respondent to reach a lawful decision on the basis of the  policy  that
    applied at the date of the appellant's application.

33.  Appeal is allowed as indicated.

Anonymity Order

34.  The First-tier Judge made no anonymity directions and I make none.

Fee Award

35.   The  First-tier  Judge  made  no  fee  award  and  in  the  particular
    circumstances of this case I do not find a fee award to be appropriate.









Signed                                  Date 5 October 2016


G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal

