
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/03102/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 November 2015                   |On 30 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WIKELEY


                                   Between

                              Mrs Marwa Al Aji
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Heller, Counsel instructed by Cham Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Wright promulgated on 11 March 2015,  following  a  hearing  at  Hatton
    Cross on 27 February 2015, in which the judge dismissed under both  the
    Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds by reference to Article 8
    ECHR, the appellant's appeal against the refusal of an Entry  Clearance
    Officer to grant her leave to enter the United Kingdom as the spouse of
    a refugee.

2.   There is no dispute so far  as  we  can  see  between  the  parties  in
    relation to the sponsor's status in terms of his nationality,  date  of
    entry to the United Kingdom, and subsequent grant of refugee status.

3.   We have seen a considerable volume of  documentation,  photographs  and
    other evidence purporting to show that the sponsor  and  the  appellant
    were married but whether they were married or not is not the key  issue
    that the judge was asked to decide or required to make findings  on  in
    relation to this case.  The crux of the appeal  is  a  claim  that  the
    marriage between the appellant and sponsor occurred prior to  the  date
    that the sponsor came to the United Kingdom, i.e. that she was his pre-
    flight spouse.  That is a very important distinction  when  considering
    the requirements of paragraph 352A(i) and (ii) of the Immigration Rules
    as the refugee reunion provisions apply to pre-flight spouses  and  not
    spouses  whose  status  has  come  into  existence  since  the   person
    subsequently recognised as a refugee left their own country as a result
    of persecution.  It is effectively a family reunion provision.

4.   Ms Heller relied on two points before us.  One was  an  assertion  that
    in coming to  the  conclusions  that  the  judge  did,  the  judge  has
    effectively ignored or failed to take into account  relevant  evidence.
    The two specific items of evidence that were referred to by  Ms  Heller
    are a series of photographs which we have been  able  to  look  at  and
    consider in the blue photographic album which was shown  to  the  court
    and which the sponsor confirmed  was  handed  up  at  the  hearing  and
    reference to entries said to be taken from the sponsor's passport.

5.   The judge records the nature of documents submitted with the appeal  in
    paragraphs 6 and 7 of the  determination,  the  nature  of  the  appeal
    hearing and the evidence called in paragraphs 8 to 14,  before  setting
    out findings and conclusions from paragraph 17 onwards.

6.   The photographic evidence  provided  was  not  ignored  by  the  judge.
    There is specific reference in the determination to photographs  having
    been provided on the day of the hearing and the judge thereafter states
    "some photos had dates [on them] and some did not as  were  taken  with
    two different cameras.  Video camera shows date.  Videos  were  on  his
    laptop in court  (not  called/led  in  evidence  by  Mrs  Ali  for  the
    appellant)".

7.   The second document we have been referred  to,  the  photocopy  of  the
    sponsor's passport, appears to be in a document faxed  on  26  February
    2014 and it has not been suggested that this document  was  not  before
    the court.

8.   The judge was fully aware of the claim that was being made in  relation
    to the sponsor's presence in the United Kingdom and in Syria or in  the
    Emirates at the relevant time.  We have  considered  whether  the  fact
    that within the copy pages of the sponsors passport there appears to be
    an immigration entry stamp headed UAE dated 11  November  2011  in  any
    arguable material way should have impacted upon the judge's conclusions
    in paragraphs 19 and 20 of the determination.

9.   The problem with this evidence is twofold.  Firstly, accepting that  Ms
    Heller was not Counsel on the day, we cannot see in  the  documentation
    before us or the judge's note at the hearing any specific submission or
    reference being made to this particular document  or  more  importantly
    permission being sought to adduce this document in evidence, bearing in
    mind that the majority of the document is in Arabic, is not translated,
    and therefore according to the Rules of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  not
    admissible.

10.  The importance of that is this.   Although  there  is  an  entry  stamp
    showing re-entry to the UAE on 11 November  2011,  in  the  absence  of
    proper translation of all the other stamps  and  visa  exit  and  entry
    stamps written in Arabic and not clearly written in English, it is  not
    possible and would not have been possible  for  the  judge  to  clearly
    establish the pattern of the sponsor's immigration history.

11.  We do not find the submission  that  the  judge  failed  to  take  into
    account all the evidence that was put before him to  be  arguably  made
    out on the basis of the submissions we have  received.   As  Ms  Heller
    accepted, the core question in relation to this matter relates  to  the
    weight that the judge gave  to  the  evidence.   The  evidence  in  the
    appellant's favour including the photographs that had been referred to,
    a marriage statement, a judgment  of  the  First  Sharia  Court  and  a
    document headed Registry for the Syrians residing in Lebanon purporting
    to record the appellant's place and date of marriage to be in  Homs  in
    Syria on 2 November 2011, was noted.

12.  In addition to considering that evidence the judge also considered  the
    evidence that had been relied upon by the Secretary of  State  that  is
    referred to in paragraphs  19  and  20  of  the  determination  in  the
    following terms:

         "19. I have had the benefit of seeing and hearing the sponsor  give
             evidence and be cross-examined in person  before  me,  finding
             his  evidence  to  contain   significant   discrepancies   and
             inconsistencies and to be  less  than  truthful  (as  well  as
             lacking any support from the appellant herself in the form  of
             any witness statement),  the  timeline  clearly  speaking  for
             itself in this case and, amongst other things, giving the  lie
             to the appellant's (and sponsor's) claim to have married on  2
             November 2011 in Syria at a time when, even on  the  sponsor's
             own evidence (see question 40 of his asylum interview), he had
             already 'returned to the Emirates on 1 November 2011'.

         20.  The appellant's  application  (and  appeal)  is  also  fatally
             undermined by, amongst other things: (i) the sponsor's initial
             claim in his screening interview on  23  October  2012  to  be
             single, as  opposed  to  married  and  rejecting  his  alleged
             'misinterpretation' claim as  disingenuous,  self-serving  and
             simply too convenient in the circumstances,  especially  given
             the lack of any attempt on his part to explain that whilst  he
             was not married to or in a relationship with anyone in the UK,
             he was however [allegedly] married to his  wife/the  appellant
             overseas; (ii) the sponsor's failure to give  the  appellant's
             correct date of birth in interview; (iii) the  delay  of  more
             than one year in the making of the  application  (19  December
             2013) from the date of grant of refugee status to the  sponsor
             (15 November 2012)."

13.  We did not trouble Ms Heller with regard to submissions in relation  to
    (ii) and (iii) as they are matters that particularly in regard to (iii)
    most judges would not have thought needed to be considered in  relation
    to the credibility of a claim but some judges do.  This judge did think
    it was relevant but we do not find that it is the key point.

14.  The key point is simply this, that in the Asylum  Interview  Record  in
    reply to question 40 the sponsor when asked about dates he  transferred
    money gave the following reply:

         "I don't remember  exactly  but  before  joining  the  coordinating
         members  so  nothing  to  do  with  the  organisation.   I   didn't
         physically travel with the money on the first occasion but  on  the
         second time I physically  took  20,000  dirham  on  28/10/2011  and
         returned to the Emirates on 1/11/2011."

15.  No evidence was adduced to the judge to show  that  in  making  such  a
    statement in a document that the sponsor would  have  been  invited  to
    sign as a statement of truth, that any error was in  fact  made.   When
    one looks at the rear of the interview record it is clear that  a  copy
    of the audio recording was provided and a receipt of that  acknowledged
    by the applicant.  It is also clear when one  looks  at  the  interview
    record that the applicant states that he understood all  the  questions
    that had been put to him and understood the interpreter.  The judge was
    therefore entitled, in our view, to place weight upon  that  statement.
    That statement on the face of it does appear to be material for if  the
    sponsor left Syria on 1 November 2011 his claim to have been  in  Syria
    and to have married his wife on the following  day,  2  November  2011,
    cannot be credible.

16.  The judge did not, however, only refer to  that  document.   The  judge
    also took into account a second document, namely the replies  given  by
    the sponsor in his screening interview.  Whilst  it  is  accepted,  and
    there is case law to this effect, that  caution  should  ordinarily  be
    taken with regard to replies in screening interviews, especially  where
    they occur shortly after an individual having travelled for a long time
    on a long, tortuous or arduous journey is tired and  because  they  are
    not supposed to contain a full record of the  individual's  case  which
    appears in the asylum interview, there  is  an  expectation  that  when
    people give replies to the questions asked in the  screening  interview
    that they will tell the truth.

17.  The time of the screening interview was  23  October  2012  at  5.37pm.
    The statement by the sponsor that this was after  a  long  journey  and
    that he was tired has to be considered by reference to  the  fact  that
    his flight to the United Kingdom was only  from  Abu  Dhabi  and  Dubai
    which, although it may be tiring for some depending  on  circumstances,
    does not suggest the type of journey that many who flee  their  country
    to come to the United Kingdom are forced to embark upon.  The screening
    document is quite important.  We have Stage Two, Part Six, dealing with
    family background before us which was clearly the copy provided to  the
    judge as the judge has marked it, noting that it was  received  on  the
    day of the hearing.

18.  The sponsor was asked his last permanent  address  of  his  country  of
    origin, which he provided  within  Damascus  in  Syria.   Question  6.2
    states "what is your marital  status?  to  which  the  sponsor  replied
    "single".  It is suggested that there was an error by the  interviewing
    officer in not going on to the second part of question 6.2 which states
    "if the applicant is not married ask: are you in  a  relationship  with
    another person in the UK or abroad?"  It is suggested in  the  skeleton
    argument that had that question been asked the sponsor  may  well  have
    had the opportunity to give a different answer or to  correct  what  is
    now claimed to be an inaccurate answer when he stated  he  was  single.
    We do not know why that question was  not  asked  by  the  interviewing
    officer but that does not in itself  cast  sufficient  doubt  upon  the
    reply given to the question asked such that the judge was not  entitled
    to place any weight upon the assertion by the sponsor that at that time
    he was single, i.e. not married.

19.   In  paragraph  21  the  judge  goes  on  to  examine  aspects  of  the
    documentary evidence provided by the appellant in support of her  case.
    It  was  submitted  in  the  skeleton  argument  that   there   was   a
    contradiction or unfairness in some documents provided by the  sponsor,
    namely the passport,  being  accepted  and  documents  referred  to  in
    paragraph 21(i) to (v) relating to the marriage not being accepted when
    it is stated that they originated from the same source.

20.  We accept there is arguable merit in the submission made  by  Mr  Duffy
    that a passport is an original official document issued  through  state
    bodies  containing  security  features  which  give  some  weight   and
    assurance to an  individual  considering  whether  it  is  an  original
    document.  The papers referred to in paragraph 21 of the  determination
    do not appear to contain similar security features and it is  important
    to consider those documents in the context of  the  case  as  a  whole.
    Those documents were submitted to the court in  support  of  the  claim
    that the sponsor and appellant had married on  2  November  2011.   The
    judge,  having  considered  all  the  evidence,  concluded   that   the
    discrepancies we have referred to set  out  in  paragraphs  19  and  20
    originating from the sponsor  himself  on  an  earlier  occasion,  cast
    serious doubt upon whether the claim was true.

21.  Having decided that the evidence on balance supported  a  finding  that
    the appellant had not discharged the  burden  of  proof  to  provide  a
    satisfactory   explanation   for   the   anomalies   and    significant
    discrepancies and inconsistencies it was arguably open  for  the  judge
    then, having considered the evidence as a whole,  to  deal  with  those
    documents via the application of  Tanveer  Ahmed,  which  reflects  the
    weight that he or she would have given to that part  of  the  sponsor's
    evidence.

22.  The Court of Appeal in 2012 gave  judgment  in  the  case  of  SS  (Sri
    Lanka) [2012] EWCA Civ 155 in which they were considering  a  challenge
    to the weight a former colleague, Upper Tribunal Judge Spencer, gave to
    a medical report in a Sri Lankan asylum claim.  The challenge was  that
    the judge had misapplied or given insufficient weight  to  that  report
    when assessing whether the appellant in that case had suffered scarring
    as a result of ill-treatment whilst in Sri Lanka.

23.  The Court of Appeal found that provided it has been  demonstrated  that
    the judge considered the evidence he or she had been asked to  consider
    with the required degree of anxious scrutiny and provided the judge has
    given adequate reasons for findings that have been made in the judgment
    or determination, the weight to be given to the evidence  is  a  matter
    for the judge.

24.  Mr Duffy in his submission  specifically  referred  to  the  fact  that
    there is  no  challenge  to  this  determination  on  the  basis  of  a
    suggestion of perversity or irrationality or one  that  enables  us  to
    find that the weight given to the  evidence  the  judge  was  asked  to
    consider admits a finding of an arguable legal error  material  to  the
    decision to dismiss the appeal.

25.  On the basis of the evidence that was before the judge we do  not  find
    this was a decision that the judge  was  not  entitled  to  arrive  at,
    having considered the evidence and weight of the competing  cases  with
    the appropriate degree  of  anxious  scrutiny,  as  a  reading  of  the
    determination clearly shows the judge did.

26.  As we do not find that the appellant has made out  that  there  is  any
    arguable  material  legal  error  our  decision  has  to  be  that  the
    determination shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed. No legal error material to the decision to  dismiss
the appeal is made out. The determination shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 24 November 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

