
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/03542/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons promulgated     |
|On 5 May 2015                        |On 8 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis


                                   Between

                            Alice Abuye Bosumiye
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          Entry Clearance Officer,
                                   Nairobi
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms.  C.  Simpson  of  Counsel  instructed  by  Auleys
Reeves.
For the Respondent:    Mr. T. Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox
    promulgated on 23 October 2014, dismissing the appeal of the  Appellant
    against a decision of the Respondent dated 4 February  2014  to  refuse
    entry clearance to join her maternal aunt in the UK.



Background

 2. The Appellant is a national of the Democratic  Republic  of  the  Congo
    born on 14 January 1999.

 3. She is the niece of Ms Leonnie Bosumiye ('the  sponsor').  The  sponsor
    entered the UK in December 2003 - shortly before the Appellant's  fifth
    birthday. She claimed asylum; in due course, in 2009, she  was  granted
    indefinite leave to remain, she became a naturalised British citizen in
    2011.

 4. The Appellant's mother suffered from a disability.  This  affected  her
    ability to look after her daughter. The  identity  of  the  Appellant's
    father is said to have been unknown: in  any  event  it  has  not  been
    disputed that he has had no role in the Appellant's  life.  Because  of
    the  Appellant's  mother's  disabilities  assistance  was  received  in
    respect of her care from a neighbour Adeline Mbumba.

 5. I pause to note that it is said  in  the  sponsor's  witness  statement
    "Alice was given to my sister's neighbour Adeline who looked after  her
    since birth" (paragraph 9). However,  it  appears  that  there  was  no
    formal transfer of parental responsibility or adoption, but rather  the
    neighbour looked after both the Appellant and her mother -  necessarily
    the Appellant's relationship with her mother continuing.

 6. Be that as it may, unfortunately on 9 July 2010 the Appellant's  mother
    died. From then on the Appellant was looked after by Adeline in her own
    home.

 7. In December 2013 an application for entry clearance to join the sponsor
    in the UK was made.

 8. The application was refused for  reasons  set  out  in  the  Notice  of
    Immigration Decision dated 4 February 2014 with reference to  paragraph
    297(i) of the Immigration Rules and Article 8 of the ECHR.

 9. I pause to note that, amongst other  things,  the  Respondent  did  not
    accept the aunt/niece relationship claimed between the sponsor and  the
    Appellant. However that relationship is now  accepted  further  to  the
    finding of the First-tier Tribunal Judge (paragraph 14).

10. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  for
    reasons set out in his determination.

11. The  Appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  which  was  granted  by
    Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Taylor on 6 January 2015.

12. The Respondent has filed a Rule  24  response  dated  19  January  2015
    resisting the  challenge  -  and  indeed  Mr  Melvin  has  provided  an
    amplified version of that by way of Skeleton Submissions.



Consideration

13. In the premises it is to be noted that the level of contact between the
    Appellant and the sponsor has been relatively limited. The sponsor left
    the DRC for the UK when the Appellant was 4  years  old  and  has  only
    visited on 2 occasions since, although  there  has  been  some  contact
    through written and telephone communication and some limited  financial
    support. In contrast  the  Appellant's  current  carer  has  known  the
    Appellant all her life and has assisted in  her  upbringing  throughout
    her life. Further the Appellant has been in  the  effective  day-to-day
    care of her current carer since her mother's death.

14. Nonetheless it is said that the Appellant was to be handed over to  the
    care of the sponsor: this is expressed in letters  in  the  Appellant's
    bundle at pages 37 and 40.

15. It is also said that the Appellant has psychological problems which are
    referred to variously in  the  letters  of  support  contained  in  the
    Appellant's bundle.

16. The First-tier Tribunal Judge dealt with these matters at paragraphs 12-
    17 of his decision.

17. At paragraph 18 of his decision the First-tier Tribunal Judge  observes
    that Article 8 was not being pursued as a 'freestanding' matter, adding
    "I am satisfied that no arguable case could be made for making such  an
    application". He was overt in stating that he was "satisfied  that  the
    Immigration Rules deal with any Article 8 issues". In other  words  the
    Judge expressed himself to be satisfied that there were no  exceptional
    matters that took this case beyond the ambit of the Rules  such  as  to
    justify a relaxation of the Rules, a matter he recorded as accepted  on
    the Appellant's behalf by Counsel.

18. Permission to appeal was granted on  this  basis:  "The  grounds  argue
    inter alia that the Judge erred in applying  too  high  a  standard  of
    proof and in concluding that  there  were  no  serious  and  compelling
    circumstances  of  the  case;  that  the  appellant  should  have  been
    permitted to join her only living  relative  who  is  in  the  UK.  The
    grounds are arguable".

19. I am not persuaded that there is any such error of law  in  respect  of
    the application of standard of proof.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    properly directed himself to the appropriate standard of  proof  -  the
    civil standard of a balance of probabilities - at paragraph 8. I cannot
    detect anything in the fact-finding that suggests a  misapplication  of
    that standard of proof. In my judgement the way in which the matter  is
    pleaded in the Grounds in support of the application for permission  to
    appeal does not  represent  a  challenge  to  the  application  of  the
    standard  of  proof  in  evaluating  primary  facts.  Rather  it  is  a
    disagreement with the Judge's conclusion that those primary  facts  did
    not amount to serious and compelling circumstances. The  evaluation  of
    whether such facts amounted to serious and compelling circumstances  is
    not a matter that is the subject  of  an  application  of  standard  of
    proof; it is an evaluation - or judgement - of all of the circumstances
    (as established pursuant to the standard  of  proof  of  a  balance  of
    probabilities) against the ultimate test propounded in  the  Rules.  In
    short: did the established  facts  amount  to  serious  and  compelling
    circumstances? I find it was open to the Judge to  conclude  that  they
    did  not;  the  challenge  is  essentially  a  disagreement  with  that
    evaluation, and  such  disagreement  is  not  properly  founded  on  an
    allegation of inappropriate primary fact finding.

20. As regards  the  Judge's  findings  it  is  to  be  noted  that  having
    appropriately directed himself at  paragraph  8,  and  having  reminded
    himself as to the  burden  of  proof  at  paragraph  10,  he  concludes
    paragraph 10 with the words "I find  as  follows".  The  recitation  of
    matters thereafter at paragraphs 11-17 are the findings,  which  in  my
    judgement do not depart significantly  from  the  matters  asserted  as
    essential elements of the Appellant's case.

21. Ms Simpson argues in  particular  that  the  Judge  had  not  made  any
    findings in respect of the Appellant's mental health.  I  am,  however,
    persuaded that the Judge has dealt with this matter adequately.

22. Issues in respect of the Appellant's mental health were asserted in the
    supporting letters, in particular at pages 37 and 40 of the Appellant's
    bundle. It is clear  that  the  Judge  has  taken  into  account  these
    matters: "I note what the appellant claims in regard to  her  emotional
    state. This carries  some  support  in  the  letters  attached  to  the
    Appellant bundle, coupled with the oral evidence of the sponsor  today"
    (paragraph 15). However, the Judge appropriately noted that the sponsor
    could not take this evidence much further, before noting in  particular
    that the Appellant did not seem to be in receipt of any kind of medical
    treatment, counselling, medication or other  support  in  circumstances
    where there was  no  suggestion  that  such  facilities  would  not  be
    available if required (paragraph 17). In my judgement it  was  open  to
    the Judge to conclude that the  Appellant  circumstances  were  not  so
    serious as  to  require  any  such  support  from  medical/professional
    services.

23. In such circumstances it seems clear to me that the Judge had regard to
    what was being said about  the  Appellant's  emotional  state,  made  a
    finding, adequately reasoned, to the effect that it was not so grave as
    to require intervention by healthcare  professionals,  and  necessarily
    factored such circumstances into his overall  evaluation  of  the  case
    under the Immigration Rules.

24. For the avoidance of any doubt I do not consider that the  Judge's  use
    of the word  dramatic  at  paragraph  15  -  "dramatic  or  exceptional
    circumstances" - is indicative of a misunderstanding or  misapplication
    of the wording of paragraph 297(i)(f). In context, in my  judgement  it
    is clear enough that the Judge was simply listing a number  of  matters
    the absence of which in toto meant  that  there  were  not  "sufficient
    grounds to consider the  Appellant  meeting  the  requirements  of  the
    immigration rules" (paragraph 15).

25. In the circumstances I find no error of law or material  inadequacy  of
    reasoning. The decision to dismiss the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules stands.

26. In her oral submissions in respect of Article 8 Ms Simpson denied  that
    any concession had  been  made  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  She
    acknowledged, however,  that  this  presented  her  with  a  procedural
    difficulty. There was nothing by way  of  dispute  in  the  Grounds  in
    support of the application for permission to appeal in respect  of  the
    Judge's recording of a concession in the determination;  far  less  was
    there any affidavit evidence from Counsel in this regard. Indeed as  Ms
    Simpson had been Counsel before the First-tier Tribunal not only  would
    it have been necessary for affidavit evidence to be filed but she would
    have had to consider passing the case to  alternative  counsel  in  the
    absence of any acceptance of the claimed circumstances before the First-
    tier Tribunal by the Respondent. The matter had not been raised in  the
    Grounds, and appropriate procedures  had  not  been  followed  in  this
    regard. In such circumstances I was not prepared to allow the Article 8
    issue to be reopened. In this context in any event I note that there is
    nothing obvious  that  indicates  any  material  facts  that  would  be
    relevant to Article 8 that would not be encompassed by the  wording  of
    the Rules at paragraph 297(i)(f).

27. Accordingly the Judge's observations  and  conclusions  in  respect  of
    Article 8 remain intact.

28. For the avoidance of any doubt I have noted and taken into  account  Ms
    Simpson's observations  in  respect  of  section  55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and the case of T  (Jamaica).  The
    Judge has not made express reference to section 55: however because  it
    has no extra-territorial effect it is not of direct application  in  an
    entry clearance case. Whilst it is of application by analogy  -  see  T
    (Jamaica) - on the facts of this particular case I am satisfied for the
    reasons already given that the Judge had regard to issues  in  relation
    to the Appellant's welfare as identified in the supporting letters,  as
    discussed above. In all such circumstances I do not consider  that  the
    absence of any express reference  to  section  55  or  to  T  (Jamaica)
    constitute a material error.

29. Because I have concluded that there was no error  of  law  I  have  not
    taken into account the further evidence that the  Appellant  sought  to
    submit at the commencement of the hearing - a medical  report  dated  2
    February 2015.

Notice of Decision

30. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  involved  no  material
    error of law and stands.

31. The appeal remains dismissed.




Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     5 September 2015
