
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/04788/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 17th June 2013                               |On 26th June 2013          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR



                                   Between

                                 RASHAN MANA
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           Entry Clearance Officer

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Ahmed of Bankfield Heath Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  Robson
    made following  a hearing at Bradford on 18th January 2013.

Background

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Eritrea born on 10th December  1995.  She
    applied for entry clearance to come to the UK on 5th November  2011  to
    join her sister who had been granted refugee status.

 3. The judge dismissed the appeal on the grounds that the Appellant  could
    not  meet  the  maintenance  requirements  of  paragraph  319X  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 4. There seems to have been some confusion as to what  the  issues  before
    the judge were.  In the original refusal the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    stated that he was not satisfied that the Appellant  was  living  alone
    outside the UK in the most exceptional compassionate circumstances.

 5. This of course is not a requirement of  paragraph  319X.  The  relevant
    requirement is :

         "The relative  has  limited  leave  in  the  UK  as  a  refugee  or
         beneficiary of  humanitarian protection and there are  serious  and
         compelling family or other considerations to which  make  exclusion
         of the child undesirable and suitable arrangements have  been  made
         for the child's care."

 6. The Entry Clearance Officer, in addition  to  raising  the  maintenance
    issue, also said that he was  not  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  and
    Sponsor  were  related  as  claimed  nor  that   there   was   adequate
    accommodation available.

 7. The judge stated that he dealt with two matters which had been  agreed,
    namely the relationship and accommodation and then wrote as follows

         "Both representatives agreed  that  the  only  issue  now  was  the
         question of finance.  I did  note  the  letter  from  the  Eritrean
         Orthodox Church in Khartoum and also the statement by  the  Sponsor
         dated 8th January 2012 wherein she had explained that  she  had  no
         idea where her and therefore the Appellant's brothers were although
         she tried to trace them unsuccessfully."

 8. The judge said that Article 8 was raised but he noted and recorded  the
    fact that there was insufficient evidence for him to make a decision in
    that regard.

 9. He concluded:

         "I conclude therefore that the Appellant has  failed  to  discharge
         the obligation on her to be maintained without recourse  to  public
         funds and for that reason alone I dismiss the appeal.

         I record that I have not addressed the issue of Article 8, a matter
         to which I refer to above earlier in this determination."







The Grounds of Application

10. The Appellant sought permission to  appeal  on  a  number  of  grounds.
    Firstly, the judge had erred in law by failing to consider  Article  8.
    Secondly, he had erred by failing to consider the best interests of the
    child.  Thirdly, he had failed to assess whether the UKBA had  followed
    their own policy and/or exercised discretion  correctly  in  accordance
    with their policy published on the UKBA website.

11. Permission to appeal was granted by  Judge  Campbell  for  the  reasons
    stated in the grounds on 10th  April 2013.

12. On 23rd April 2013 the Respondent served a reply stating that  she  did
    not oppose the application on  the  basis  that  the  decision  not  to
    consider Article 8 would appear to be erroneous.

Consideration of whether there is an Error of Law

13. Manifestly the judge erred in declining to decide one  of  the  grounds
    pleaded before him.  The decision is set aside to that extent.

The Hearing

14. At the commencement of the hearing Mr Ahmed asked the Tribunal to  find
    there had been a concession by the Secretary of State on  the  previous
    occasion that  there  were  serious  and  compelling  family  or  other
    considerations which made the exclusion of the  Appellant  undesirable,
    since the judge had recorded that both representatives had agreed  that
    the only issue was the question of finance. However Mrs Petterson could
     find no record of such a concession in the Presenting Officer's minute
    of the hearing and the lack of clarity in this determination  does  not
    satisfy me that one was made.

The Sponsor's Evidence

15. The Sponsor adopted her witness statement to stand as her  evidence-in-
    chief. She came to the UK in 2008 and claimed asylum which was  granted
    following interview. Her account of having been detained following  her
    husband's arrest in June 2008 was accepted by the  Respondent  i.e  she
    was imprisoned for two months and then taken to hospital in August 2008
    from where she escaped to the Sudan. She reached Khartoum in  September
    2008 and left on 30th November 2008.

16. At her screening interview she said that her parents had both died  and
    she had two brothers born in 1989 and 1992 and a sister, the Appellant,
    born in 1995. In her full interview she said her father died in the war
    and her mother very soon after him, in 2002.  She finished her  studies
    in tenth grade in 2003 because after her mother died she  had  to  look
    after the children because nobody was there for them. In her  statement
    she said that she had no idea where her brothers were now. The older of
    the two boys went to do national service and the  other  left  to  find
    work. She thought that the older one left in 2010 and  the  younger  in
    2011.

17. In 2011 the Appellant went to Khartoum and  she  is  now  living  in  a
    church.  There is  a letter from the Eritrean Orthodox  Church  in  the
    bundle which states that the Appellant is an Eritrean refugee and under
    age living in Khartoum under  the   providence  of  the  Church  of  St
    Michael  and  Aba  Aregwari.  The  church  gives  her  protection   and
    financially she is supported by the Sponsor who lives in  the  UK.  The
    Sponsor said that her sister was almost destitute because she  did  not
    have proper accommodation with the church and she was not safe.

18. The Sponsor was asked how the Appellant reached Khartoum. She said that
    her brother-in-law was a merchant and he went to and fro.  He found the
    Appellant in a desperate situation in Eritrea and he took  her  to  the
    border.  He gave her the Sponsor's telephone number  and  sent  her  to
    Khartoum.

19. Under cross-examination she said that her brother-in-law  had  got  the
    telephone number from a shop which she knew  in  the  Sudan.   She  had
    asked people who went to the Sudan to deliver  a  letter  to  the  shop
    enquiring about her sister.  The shopkeeper delivered it to her brother-
    in-law because he went there when he went to the Sudan, which was every
    one or two months.

20. The Sponsor  was  asked  why  the  brother-in-law  had  not  taken  the
    Appellant to Khartoum rather than leaving her on  the  border  and  the
    Sponsor said that he  could  not  do  that  because  she  was  crossing
    illegally. She had asked her brother-in-law to go and  see  her  sister
    since then but he did not have time.  She  was  also  asked  about  her
    brothers. She said that she had asked the Red Cross  to  try  to  trace
    them in August 2012 but they had not done so, but she had  no  evidence
    of the contact.

Submissions

21. Mrs Pettersen accepted that the Appellant and Sponsor were  related  as
    claimed and that the focus of this Tribunal's determination would be on
    the circumstances as they were as at the date of decision. There was no
    documentary evidence from the Red Cross as to the  whereabouts  of  the
    Sponsor's brothers and in any event she had not  tried  to  trace  them
    until August 2012, sometime after they had abandoned the Appellant.  It
    was not credible that she had been left in the manner described and not
    credible that the brother-in-law would not visit her in  Khartoum.  The
    Appellant had sought to exaggerate the difficulty of her circumstances.

22. She accepted that there may have been family life between the Appellant
    and Sponsor when the Sponsor left Eritrea  but  reminded  me  that  the
    Sponsor was not in fact the Appellant's mother  and  there  were  other
    siblings available to look after her. It was proportionate for  her  to
    be refused since she could not meet the requirements of the  Rules  and
    the family's circumstances were unclear.

23. Mr Ahmed submitted that the  assessment  of  this  case  must  be  made
    through the prism of the Respondent's acceptance that the  Sponsor  had
    given a credible account of the events which led to her leaving Eritrea
    i.e an unexpected arrest which had spilt the family.

24. The Sponsor had looked after the Appellant as her daughter between 2002
    and 2008.  She had no choice but to leave  her  behind.  There  was  no
    reason why the Appellant should be required to live with  her  brothers
    when the family bond was between the  Appellant  and  the  Sponsor.  He
    asked me to accept that the Sponsor  had  given  credible  evidence  in
    respect of the separation of the brothers from the Appellant.

25. Finally, the decision was not in accordance with Home Office policy  as
    stated on their website:

         "Under  the  Immigration  Rules  only  your   pre-existing   family
         (husband, wife, civil partner or unmarried/same  sex  partner  plus
         any children under 18 who form part of the  family  unit  when  you
         fled to seek asylum) can apply to enter the  UK  under  the  family
         reunion  programme.  However we may allow family reunion for  other
         family members if there are compassionate reasons  why  their  case
         should be considered outside the Immigration Rules."

Findings and Conclusions

26. As Mrs Pettersen accepted, at the time that the  Sponsor  left  Eritrea
    there was  family  life  between  her  and  her  younger  sister.   The
    Sponsor's evidence when she came to the UK was accepted as credible  by
    the Respondent.  It was her evidence that from 2002 until  she  herself
    left Eritrea, the Sponsor looked after the  Appellant  as  her  mother.
    For those formative years i.e. between 7 and 13,  the  Appellant  would
    have looked on her older sister as her parent. Their  relationship  was
    severed, not because any choice on the Sponsor's part  but  because  on
    the accepted facts  she  was  detained,  imprisoned  and  had  to  flee
    persecution from Eritrea. Since then the Sponsor has assumed  financial
    responsibility for the Appellant's welfare. According to the church  in
    Khartoum, the Sponsor sends money to  her  there.  She  produced  money
    transfers which were accepted by the previous judge as evidence of  her
    financial support to her sister.

27. There was and remains family life in this case  between  the  Appellant
    and Sponsor.

28. The refusal of entry clearance is undoubtedly an interference with that
    family life but lawful because it has been found that the Appellant  is
    not in a position to meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

29. I turn to the question of proportionality.  As at the date of  decision
    the Appellant was a child and her best interests have therefore  to  be
    considered first.  I do not accept that the  evidence  today  has  been
    wholly credible in respect of what contact the Appellant has with other
    members of her family.  The Sponsor has not produced  any  evidence  of
    her attempts to contact them though the Red Cross, and it may  well  be
    that the Appellant has some contact with them,  although  there  is  no
    reason to believe that her brothers are in the Sudan, since  they  were
    last heard of in Eritrea.  I  also  find  it  highly  likely  that  the
    Appellant is  in  touch  with  the  Sponsor's  brother-in-law  who  was
    responsible for taking her to Khartoum.

30. Section 55 of the UK Borders Act 2009 only applies to  children  within
    the UK. In Mundeba (Section 55 and paragraph 297(1F)) [2013] UKUT 00088
    the Tribunal held:

         "Where an immigration decision engages Article 8 rights, due regard
         must be had to the UN Convention on The Rights  of  The  Child.  An
         entry clearance decision for the admission of a child under  18  is
         'an action concerning children ... undertaken by ..  administrative
         authorities' and so by Article 3 'the best interests of  the  child
         shall be a primary consideration."

31. The broader duty explains why the  Secretary  of  State's  IDI  invites
    entry clearance officers to  consider  the  statutory  guidance  issued
    under Section 55.  The Tribunal said that the focus needs to be on  the
    circumstances of the child in the light of   his  or  her  age,  social
    background and developmental history.  As a  starting  point  the  best
    interests of a child are usually best served by being with both  or  at
    least one of their parents.  Continuity of residence is another factor.
     Change in the place of residence where a child  has  grown  up  for  a
    number of years, when socially aware, is important.

32. In this case the Appellant's natural parents have died but the  Sponsor
    acted as her  mother since the age of 7, looking after  her  until  she
    was 13 and thereafter providing for her financially.  At  the  date  of
    decision the Appellant was still a child, 17  years  old,  without  any
    guardian in Sudan.  Her situation in  Khartoum  appears  precarious  in
    that she is described by the church which is looking after  her  as  an
    "under age refugee" and being at risk.

33. This is not a case where the Appellant would be removed from the  place
    where she has grown up. As at the date of decision she had only been in
    Khartoum for a number of months.  She will undoubtedly have  made  some
    friends whilst there and I am not persuaded that  she  has  no  contact
    with the Sponsor's  brother-in-law  and  possibly  has  some  means  of
    contacting her brothers.  However her clear best interests  are  to  be
    reunited with her sister who has been akin to a mother to her since she
    was 7 years old. There are no countervailing factors here, for  example
    nothing in this family history which indicates  a  lack  of  compliance
    with immigration control.

34. The question of whether the Appellant's appeal ought to be  allowed  as
    not in accordance with the law as a consequence of UKBA  not  following
    its own policy in relation to family reunion for other  family  members
    in compassionate circumstances was not explored during this hearing. No
    reference was made to  the  policy  by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer,
    perhaps unsurprisingly because he did not accept that the  relationship
    was as claimed.  The fact that the policy exists and  would  appear  to
    cover situations such as this where there is  a  stranded  child  lends
    weight to the argument that the refusal of  entry  clearance  would  be
    disproportionate.







Decision

35. The decision of the judge is set aside and is remade as  follows.   The
    Appellant's appeal is dismissed under the  Immigration  Rules.   It  is
    allowed with respect to Article 8.




Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

