
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  OA/04333/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 19 July 2017                        |On 20 July 2017                     |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                               [OYINKASOLA M]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, ABUJA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J M Rene, Counsel instructed by Queen's Park
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  There  is  no  good
reason to make an anonymity direction in this case.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.    The Appellant appeals against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge N J Bennett promulgated on 14 November 2016 ("the Decision").  By  the
Decision  the  Judge  dismissed   the   Appellant's   appeal   against   the
Respondent's decision dated 14 October 2014 refusing her a family permit  as
the child of the durable partner of an EEA national.

2.    The facts of the Appellant's case are not in dispute and nor is  there
any credibility issue in play.  The Appellant is a national of Nigeria  born
on [  ]  2005.   She  applied  to  visit  her  father  ("the  Sponsor")  and
stepmother, a Spanish national, ("the EEA  national")  in  the  UK.   It  is
common ground that the Sponsor is neither the spouse nor the  civil  partner
of the EEA national.  He has however been given  a  residence  permit  as  a
durable partner and is therefore a person who falls within  regulation  7(3)
of the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  ("the  EEA
Regulations).  The Appellant was, it appears, cared  for  by  her  Sponsor's
father in Nigeria until he died and now attends boarding school there.

3.    Although the above facts were  disputed  by  the  Respondent,  it  was
conceded by the Presenting Officer before Judge Bennett that the Sponsor  is
the Appellant's father  ([23]).   There  were  however  legitimate  concerns
raised about the extent to which the Appellant's mother  continues  to  have
any involvement in her life and whether it  was  genuinely  the  Appellant's
and Sponsor's intention that the Appellant should visit  the  UK  since  the
evidence appeared to be that the Appellant wished to settle in the  UK  with
her father ([21]).  The Appellant's representative  submitted  however  that
her intention is irrelevant because the Appellant is entitled  to  a  family
permit under regulation 12 of the EEA  Regulations  2006  as  of  right  and
family permits are valid only for six months ([22]).

4.    The Judge rejected that latter argument  finding  that  the  Appellant
does not fall within the definition of "family member" for the  purposes  of
Regulation 7 of  the  EEA  Regulations.   Accordingly,  he  found  that  the
Appellant is not entitled to be issued with a family permit.  He noted  that
the Appellant could make an application  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and
Article 8 ECHR if she so wished but there was no reliance  placed  on  those
provisions before him.

5.    Permission to appeal was refused  by  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Murray on 11 May 2017 in the following terms (so far as relevant):-


      "... [2]    The grounds of application state that the judge failed  to
      correctly understand, consider and  apply  the  law  set  out  in  the
      Immigration EEA Regulations 2006 when he stated that  Regulation  7(3)
      does not assist the appellant.  The grounds state that the  judge  did
      not consider Regulation 7(3) in tandem with Regulation 7(1)(a) or (b).
       The grounds go on to state that the judge  failed  to  give  adequate
      reasons for his findings.
      [3]   The Judge has given  detailed  reasons  for  his  findings.   He
      pointed out that the appellant is not  a  family  member  of  the  EEA
      sponsor although she is a family member of the  unmarried  partner  of
      the EEA sponsor.  Regulation 7(3) does not assist the appellant.  This
      paragraph relates to the EEA  sponsor's  unmarried  partner.   I  have
      considered Regulation 7(1)(a) and (b)  but  the  appellant  is  not  a
      family member of the EEA sponsor as the  EEA  family  member  and  the
      appellant's  father  are  not  married  and  do  not  have   a   civil
      partnership"

6.    Permission was however granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Clive  Lane  on
7 June 2017 in the following terms:-

      "The  assertions  made  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  as  regards  the
      construction of regulations 7  and  8  of  the  Immigration  (European
      Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (as amended) are arguable.  The  Upper
      Tribunal will need  to  consider  whether  the  conclusions  of  Judge
      Bennett at [29] are correct in law."

7.    The appeal comes before me to determine whether there  is  a  material
error of law in the Decision.  As I note at [8] below, the decision  whether
there is a material error of law will be determinative  of  the  appeal.   I
was not therefore invited to resume for  a  further  hearing  or  remit  the
appeal and I was invited to either uphold the appeal or allow it (if I  find
that there is a material error of law).

Decision and Reasons

8.    At the outset of the hearing, Mr Rene drew my attention  to  the  Rule
24 statement filed on behalf of the Respondent which  is  in  the  following
terms (so far as relevant):-

      "2.   The respondent does not oppose the appellant's  application  for
      permission to appeal and invites the Tribunal to determine the  appeal
      with a fresh oral (continuance) hearing to consider the  applicability
      of Regulation 7."

It was apparent that Mr Duffy had not seen this  Rule  24  statement  before
the hearing.  He indicated that he did not  agree  with  it  and  wished  to
withdraw reliance on it.  I permitted him to do so, first,  because  it  was
not a clear concession that there is an error of law (reference is  only  to
the application for permission to appeal) and in any  event,  as  transpired
in the course of submissions, the point is  one  of  construction.   If  the
Appellant is right and is the family member of the Sponsor,  then  not  only
is there an error of law but she is entitled to a  family  permit  (so  that
the appeal is allowed).  If she is wrong in her interpretation  of  the  EEA
Regulations, there is either no error of law or none that  can  be  material
and the Decision  would  stand  with  the  result  that  the  appeal  stands
dismissed.

9.    I also record that Mr Rene very frankly accepted at the outset of  his
submissions that there is what he described as a "lacuna" in  Regulation  7.
I enquired of him whether that "lacuna"  might  not  be  a  deliberate  one,
having regard to the distinction which is often  drawn  in  EU  law  between
family members such as a spouse or civil partner on  the  one  hand  and  an
extended family member such as a durable partner on  the  other.   His  only
submission in  response  was  that  the  Appellant  could  not  come  within
Regulation 8 (as that applies only to a relative  of  the  EEA  national  or
his/her spouse or civil partner).  She therefore has no  other  avenue  open
to her under EU law except  to  be  "treated  as"  a  family  member  within
Regulation 7(1)(d) because of her relationship  with  the  Sponsor  and  the
Regulation should be construed accordingly.

10.   I also record that Mr Duffy did not accept what is  said  at  [28]  of
the Decision.  He submitted that the Sponsor  is  not  a  person  who  falls
within Regulation 7(1)(d).  However, he said, the Decision read as  a  whole
does not disclose any material error because the  Appellant  cannot  succeed
applying Regulation 7(1)(d) unless she  is  "treated  as  a  family  member"
under Regulation 7(3) and she has not been treated as such because  she  has
not been issued with a family permit.  There would appear to be a degree  of
circularity about that position since  it  is  a  family  permit  which  the
Appellant seeks.

11.   As it  is,  for  the  reasons  which  follow,  in  my  judgement  both
representatives are  wrong  in  their  submissions  and  Judge  Bennett  has
reasoned the Decision correctly. I start therefore with  the  basis  of  the
Decision as set out not just in [29] (as noted in the grant  of  permission)
but also from [24] onwards as follows:-


      "[24] I therefore  start  with  Regulation  12,  which  sets  out  the
      circumstances in which family permits can be issued to family  members
      of an EEA national.  So far as it is relevant, Regulation 12 provides:-


           "12(1)      An Entry Clearance Officer must issue an EEA  family
           permit to a person who applies for one if the person is a family
           member of an EEA national; and
   a) the EEA national -
   i) is residing in the UK in accordance with these Regulations; or
  ii) will be travelling to the United Kingdom within six months of the date
      of the application and will be an EEA national residing in the  United
      Kingdom in accordance with these Regulations on arrival in the  United
      Kingdom; and
   b) the family member will be accompanying the EEA national to the  United
      Kingdom or joining the EEA national there."
      [25]  Regulation 7 defines what is meant by a "family member".  So far
      as it is relevant the regulation provides
           "7(1) Subject to  paragraph  (2),  for  the  purposes  of  these
           Regulations, the following  persons  shall  be  treated  as  the
           family members of another person
   a) his spouse or civil partner;
   b) direct descendants of his spouse or his civil partner who are-
   i) under 21; or
  ii) dependents of his, his spouse or his civil partners,
   c) dependent direct relatives in his ascending line or that of his spouse
      or his civil partner;
   d) a person who is to be treated as  the  family  member  of  that  other
      person under paragraph (3)
           (2)   Not relevant
           (3)   Subject to paragraph (4), a  person  who  is  an  extended
           family member and has been issued with an EEA family  permit,  a
           registration certificate or a residence card shall be treated as
           the family member of the relevant EEA national for as long as he
           continues to satisfy the conditions in  Regulations  8(2),  (3),
           (4) or (5) in relation to that  EEA  national  and  the  permit,
           certificate or card has not ceased to be valid or been revoked."
      [26]  As paternity is not disputed, the  Appellant  is  the  Sponsor's
      family member for the  purposes  of  Regulation  7.   However,  to  be
      eligible for a family permit under Regulation 12, the  Appellant  must
      show that she is the EEA Sponsor's family member because  the  Sponsor
      is not a citizen of the European Union.
      [27]  As this issue was not canvassed at the hearing, I  arranged  for
      directions to be issued to the parties on 14th October  2016  inviting
      the Appellant to file and serve a marriage certificate which shows the
      Sponsor  and  the  EEA  Sponsor  are  married  to   each   other   or,
      alternatively, submissions showing how the Appellant qualifies as  the
      EEA Sponsor's family member.
      [28]  Mr Darboe wrote to me on the 21st  October  2016.   He  accepted
      that the Sponsor and the EEA Sponsor were not married but argued  that
      the Appellant was to be treated as a  family  member  of  the  Sponsor
      under Regulation 7(1)(d).  he also argued that she was to  be  treated
      as a family member of an EEA national under  Regulation  7(3)  because
      the Sponsor was to be treated as a family member of the  EEA  Sponsor,
      as he had been granted a residence card in 2010 as the  EEA  Sponsor's
      partner and he had subsequently been  granted  a  permanent  residence
      card as the EEA Sponsor's partner.  He argued that this was  confirmed
      by RK (OFM - membership of household - dependency) India  [2010]  UKUT
      421 which, he submitted, established that  an  applicant  could  be  a
      dependant of an EEA national or the non-EEA spouse or partner.
      [29]  In my judgment, Regulation 7(3) does not assist  the  Appellant.
      It makes the Sponsor the EEA Sponsor's family member for the  purposes
      of the Regulations but it does not confer any rights on the  Appellant
      or, therefore, make her the EEA Sponsor's family  member.   She  would
      only be the EEA Sponsor's family member if the EEA  Sponsor  were  the
      Sponsor's spouse.  An unmarried partner is not a spouse: Netherlands v
      Reed [1986] ECR 1283 and ex parte Lopez [1997] Imm AR 11. That is  why
      separate provision is made for unmarried partners in Regulation 8.  RK
      India does not assist the Appellant because it was concerned with  the
      admission of an EEA national's dependent son's  wife  as  an  extended
      family member under Regulation 8, and not with  the  admission  of  an
      unmarried partner's child.  Regulation 8,  like  Regulation  7,  makes
      provision for the relatives of spouses and civil partners but not  for
      relatives of unmarried partners.  I am not  therefore  satisfied  that
      the Appellant is the EEA Sponsor's family member or that  she  is,  or
      could be, a member of the EEA Sponsor's extended  family  member.   In
      any event, the Appellant would not have a right of appeal if she  were
      only a member of the EEA Sponsor's extended family.  It  follows  that
      the appeal must fail under the Regulations."

12.    Before turning to provide my reasons for finding  that  there  is  no
material error of law in the above passage, it is convenient to set out  two
further legal provisions of  relevance,  namely  Regulation  8  of  the  EEA
Regulations (as that stood at the date of Decision) and Articles 2 and 3  of
Directive 2004/38/EC (the Citizens' Free Movement Directive).


      Regulation 8: 'extended family member'
      " 8 - (1)   In these Regulations  'extended  family  member'  means  a
      person who is not a family member of an EEA national under  regulation
      7(1)(a), (b) or (c) and who satisfies the conditions in paragraph (2),
      (3), (4) or (5).
      (2)   A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if the person
           is a relative of an  EEA  national,  his  spouse  or  his  civil
           partner and -
                 (a)   the person is residing in a country  other  than  the
                 United Kingdom and is dependent upon the EEA national or is
                 a member of his household;
                 (b)   the person satisfied the condition in  paragraph  (a)
                 and is accompanying the EEA national to the United  Kingdom
                 or wishes to join him there; or
                 (c)   the person satisfied the condition in paragraph  (a),
                 has joined the EEA  national  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
                 continues to be dependent upon him or t be a member of  his
                 household.
      (3)    A person satisfies the  condition  in  this  paragraph  if  the
           person is a relative of an EEA national or  his  spouse  or  his
           civil partner and, on serious health grounds, strictly  requires
           the personal care of the EEA national, his spouse or  his  civil
           partner.
      (4)   A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if the person
           is a relative of an EEA national and would meet the requirements
           in the immigration rules (other than  those  relating  to  entry
           clearance) for indefinite leave to enter or remain in the United
           Kingdom as a dependent relative of the EEA national were the EEA
           national a person present and settled in the United Kingdom.
      (5)   A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if the person
           is the partner of an EEA national (other than a  civil  partner)
           and can prove that he is in a durable relationship with the  EEA
           national.
      (6)   In these Regulations 'relevant EEA national' means, in  relation
           to an extended family member, the EEA national who is  or  whose
           spouse or civil partner is the relative of the  extended  family
           member for the purpose of paragraph (2), (3) or (4) or  the  EEA
           national who is the partner of the extended  family  member  for
           the purpose of paragraph (5)."


      Directive 2004/38/EC (Citizens' Free Movement)
      Article 2
      Definitions
      For the purposes of this Directive:
   1) 'Union citizen' means any person having the nationality  of  a  Member
      State;
   2) 'Family member' means
   a) the spouse;
   b) the partner with whom the Union citizen has  contracted  a  registered
      partnership on the basis of the legislation of a Member State, if  the
      legislation of the host Member State treats registered partnerships as
      equivalent to marriage and in accordance with the conditions laid down
      in the relevant legislation of the host Member State;
   c) the direct descendants who are under the age of 21 or  are  dependants
      and those of the spouse or partner as defined in point (b);
   d) the dependent direct relatives in the ascending line and those of  the
      spouse or partner as defined in point (b);
   3) 'Host Member State' means the Member State to which  a  Union  citizen
      moves in  order  to  exercise  his/her  right  of  free  movement  and
      residence.
      Article 3
      Beneficiaries
   1. This Directive shall apply to all Union citizens who move to or reside
      in a Member State other than that of which they are a national, and to
      their family members as defined in point 2 of Article 2 who  accompany
      or join them.
   2. Without prejudice to any right to  free  movement  and  residence  the
      persons concerned may have in their own right, the host  Member  State
      shall, in accordance with its national legislation,  facilitate  entry
      and residence for the following persons:
   a) any other family  members,  irrespective  of  their  nationality,  not
      falling under the definition in point 2  of  Article  2  who,  in  the
      country from which they have come, are dependants or  members  of  the
      household of the Union citizen having the primary right of  residence,
      or where serious health grounds strictly require the personal care  of
      the family member by the Union citizen;
   b) the partner with whom the Union citizen has  a  durable  relationship,
      duly attested.
           The host Member State shall undertake an  extensive  examination
           of the personal circumstances and shall justify  any  denial  of
           entry or residence to these people."
           [my emphasis]

13.   I begin with the submission made by Mr Rene that the Appellant  cannot
qualify as an extended family  member  under  Regulation  8  since  that  is
pertinent in my view to  what  is  intended  by  Regulation  7.   Mr  Rene's
submission is rightly made.   The  Appellant  could  potentially  apply  for
entry as an extended family member based on  the  Sponsor's  maintenance  of
her in Nigeria if the Sponsor were the spouse or civil partner  of  the  EEA
national.  He is not.  The Appellant is not a relative of the  EEA  national
and it is not said in any event that the EEA  national  is  supporting  her.
It is her  father,  the  durable  partner  (and  therefore  extended  family
member) of the EEA national who is related to  the  Appellant  and  supports
her.

14.   I turn next then to the construction of Regulation  7.   I  asked  the
representatives whether it  was  accepted  that  the  Sponsor  falls  within
Regulation 7(1)(d).  Neither submitted that  he  did.   Both  said  that  he
falls within Regulation 7(3).  Here in my estimation lies the  misconception
by both representatives about the proper  interpretation  of  Regulation  7.
To paraphrase the submission, it is that the Sponsor is treated as a  family
member  by  Regulation  7(3).   Following  on  from  that  submission,   the
Appellant says that she is the family  member  of  a  person  treated  as  a
family member under Regulation 7(3) and therefore is entitled to be  treated
herself as a family member of the EEA  national  (by  reason  of  Regulation
7(1)(d)).  The Respondent says that, whilst it is right that the Sponsor  is
treated as a family member under Regulation 7(3), the  Appellant  is  not  a
family member and cannot become one under Regulation 7(1)(d) unless she  too
is treated as such under Regulation 7(3).  I have already  remarked  on  the
potential circularity of that submission if the analysis is correct.

15.    In   my   judgement,   however,   those   submissions   fundamentally
misinterpret  Regulation  7(1)(d).   It  became  clear  in  the  course   of
submissions that this misinterpretation arises from the  words  "that  other
person" in Regulation 7(1)(d).  Both representatives appear  to  be  reading
that as being the person who is to be  treated  as  a  family  member  under
Regulation 7(3) i.e. the  Sponsor.   If  one  reads  that  sub-paragraph  in
context though it is clear that the "person" there referred to  is  the  EEA
national.  Regulation  7(1)  begins  with  reference  to  "another  person".
There can be no dispute based on what follows at Regulation 7(1)(a)  to  (c)
that "another person" in this context  is  the  EEA  national  to  whom  the
family member is  related  as  specified.   Once  that  is  understood,  the
reference to a person being treated "as the  family  member  of  that  other
person" can only mean the extended family member  of  the  EEA  national  on
whose right of residence the extended family member is dependent and who  is
recognised as coming within the definition of Regulation 7(1)(d)  by  reason
of Regulation 7(3).

16.   Whilst I recognise  that  there  is  some  ambiguity  of  drafting  in
Regulation 7, I am reassured that my interpretation is the correct  one  for
three reasons. The first is Mr  Rene's  acceptance  (as  I  record,  rightly
made) that the Appellant could not claim to be  an  extended  family  member
under Regulation  8.   If  that  is  right,  it  is  difficult  to  see  why
Regulation 7 would be drafted in such a way as to put  the  Appellant  in  a
better position than that of an extended family member.  The second  is  the
Directive on which Regulations 7 and 8 are  based.  Article  2  makes  clear
that family members are limited to the categories  specified  in  Regulation
7(1)(a) to (c).  Article 3 makes clear  that  extended  family  members  are
limited to the categories set out in Regulation 8.  There is  a  very  clear
differentiation between dependent relatives on  the  one  hand  and  durable
partners on the others.  The Directive provides no mechanism for a right  to
be accorded to the dependent relative of a person who is a durable  partner.
 The  third  is  that,  whilst  there  is  some  ambiguity  of  drafting  in
Regulation 7, if the draftsperson had intended that regulation to cover  the
dependents of extended family members, it would have been very easy to  make
that plain by including at Regulation 7(1)(b) that  family  members  was  to
include also the direct descendants of a person recognised  as  an  extended
family member under Regulation 7(3).

17.   As Judge Bennett observed, the case of RK (India)  cannot  assist  the
Appellant.  That case turned on the dependency of the spouse of the  son  of
an EEA national.  However, the dependency of the Appellant in that case  was
directly on the EEA national parent in-law.

18.   The point of interpretation is succinctly resolved  by  Judge  Bennett
at [29] of the Decision on the basis that "Regulation 7(3) does  not  assist
the Appellant.  It makes the Sponsor the EEA  Sponsor's  family  member  for
the purposes of the Regulations but it does not confer  any  rights  of  the
Appellant or, therefore, make her the EEA Sponsor's family member."   I  can
do no better than repeat what is there said.  There is no error  of  law  in
the Decision.


DECISION
The First-tier Tribunal Decision did not involve the making  of  a  material
error on a  point  of  law.  I  therefore  uphold  the  First-tier  Tribunal
Decision of Judge N J Bennett promulgated  on  14  November  2016  with  the
consequence that the Appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Signed           [pic] Dated:  20 July 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
