
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/04089/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 26 September 2012, 20 May 2013             |On 7 June 2013               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                               Gurpreet singh

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, NEW DELHI
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant: Mr D Coleman and Mr R Sharma (20 May 2013 only)
instructed by London Immigration
For the respondent: Ms M Tanner (26 September 2012), Miss L Kenny (20 May
2013), Home Office Presenting Officers

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Tribunal regrets the delay in its deliberations on this appeal.  Lack
of full assistance from the parties with relevant information following  the
first hearing in September accounts for some of  the  delay,  but  certainly
not all. In further directions sent to the parties  in  February  2013,  the
panel made clear that there were two matters on which we needed the  benefit
of  further  evidence  and  submissions.  The  appellant's   representatives
submitted in response a skeleton  argument  addressing  both  of  them.  The
respondent, by contrast, did nothing. In these directions we  indicated  our
view that the  panel  would  benefit  from  respondent's  submissions  by  a
Treasury  Counsel.  We  learnt  from  Ms  Kenny  that  our  directions  were
overlooked and she herself sought an adjournment to enable attention  to  be
given belatedly to them. We refused. Over three months had gone by  with  no
response  from  the  respondent  and  Ms  Kenny  was  unable  to  offer  any
explanation for why our directions were ignored.

2.The appellant, a citizen of India, appeals with permission  to  the  Upper
Tribunal against the determination of First-tier Tribunal (FtT)  Judge  Camp
notified on 18 July 2011 dismissing his appeal against  a  decision  by  the
respondent dated 21 December 2010 refusing  to  grant  him  entry  clearance
pursuant to paragraphs  320(3)  and  320(11)  of  HC  395.   Following  this
refusal decision an Entry Clearance Manager  (ECM)  had  reviewed  the  case
upon receipt of the appeal.  This review was carried out on  3  April  2011.
In dismissing the appellant's appeal the judge decided that  the  respondent
had not shown that paragraph 320(3) applied against the  appellant  but  was
satisfied she had shown that paragraph 320(11), another "general  ground  of
refusal", did.  The respondent does not pursue the paragraph 320(3) matter.

3. The two main contentions advanced by the appellant  in  challenging   the
FtT decision in respect of paragraph 320(11) are:

    (1)  that he erred in concluding that the ECO's decision that paragraph
         320(11) applied against the appellant was "in accordance  with  the
         law" notwithstanding that it failed to show that it had been  taken
         in accordance with relevant policy guidance.


    (2)  that he should have found that the ECO's decision was contrary  to
         the appellant's Article 8 right to respect for family  and  private
         life.

4. Paragraph 320(11) states:

         "Grounds on which entry clearance or  leave  to  enter  the  United
         Kingdom should normally be refused


         (11) where the applicant has previously contrived in a  significant
             way to frustrate the intentions of these Rules. Guidance  will
             be published giving examples  of  circumstances  in  which  an
             applicant who has previously overstayed, breached a  condition
             attached to  his  leave,  been  an  Illegal  Entrant  or  used
             Deception in an application  for  entry  clearance,  leave  to
             enter or remain (whether successful or not) is  likely  to  be
             considered  as  having  contrived  in  a  significant  way  to
             frustrate the intentions of these Rules."


5. As regards the guidance to which reference is made in this paragraph,  we
did not have that before us but noted that its text as it was  at  the  date
of decision in 2010 was helpfully recorded by the Tribunal in PS  (paragraph
320(11) discretion: care needed) India [2010] UKUT 440 (IAC) as follow:

         "Please  note  that  the  list   below   is   not   an   exhaustive
         list. Aggravating circumstances can include actions such as:


         absconding;


         not  complying  with  temporary  admission  /  temporary  reporting
         conditions / bail conditions;


         not complying with reporting restrictions;


         failing  to  comply  with  removal  directions  (RDs)  after   port
         refusal of leave to enter (RLE);


         failing to comply with RDs after illegal entry;


         previous working in breach on visitor conditions within short  time
         of arrive in the UK (that is, pre-meditated intention to work);


         previous recourse to NHS treatment when not entitled;


         previous receipt of benefits (income, housing, child, incapacity or
         otherwise) or NASS benefits when not  entitled;  using  an  assumed
         identity or multiple identities;


         previous use of a different identity  or  multiple  identities  for
         deceptive reasons; vexatious attempts to prevent removal  from  the
         UK, e.g. feigning illness; active attempt to  frustrate  arrest  or
         detention by UK Border Agency or police;


         a sham marriage / marriage of convenience / polygamous marriage  in
         the UK; harbouring an immigration offender; facilitation  /  people
         smuggling; escaping from UK Border Agency detention;


         switching of nationality;


         vexatious or frivolous applications;


         not complying with re-documentation process."

6. This guidance goes on to state:


         "All cases must be  considered  on  their  merits,  the  activities
         considered in the round to see  whether  they  meet  the  threshold
         under paragraph 320 (11), taking into account family life in the UK
         and, in the case of children, the level of responsibility  for  the
         breach.


         Where an applicant falls to be refused under  320(7A)  or  320(7B),
         the ECO must also consider whether it is also appropriate to refuse
         the applicant under paragraph 320(11). Where 320(7C) applies which
         makes an applicant  exempt  from  320(7B),  an  ECO  must  consider
         whether a refusal under paragraph 320(11) is appropriate."

Submissions

7. It is convenient if we condense into one the  submissions  made  by  both
parties at the two different hearings as follows. In relation to  contention
(1), Mr Coleman and Mr Sharma submitted that the  Entry  Clearance  Guidance
manual expressly stated that before applying  a  paragraph  320(11)  general
ground of refusal the ECO should consult with an  Entry  Clearance  Manager;
this was a separate stage of the  decision-making  process  from  the  post-
decision review (which it is  known,  by  contrast,  did  take  place).   In
describing this prior ECM authorisation stage  in  the  determination  as  a
"purely administrative" requirement which did not affect the  lawfulness  of
the decision, the FtT judge had erred in law.  Ms Tanner  and Ms Kenny  said
that we should  find  that  the  FtT  judge  did  not  err.   There  was  no
requirement set out in the rules or  background  instructions  for  ECOs  to
record that an ECM had been consulted prior to a  refusal  decision.   There
was no basis for considering that consultation had not taken  place  in  the
appellant's  case.   It  was  a  purely  administrative,  not  a  procedural
requirement.

8. As regards contention (2), Mr Coleman and Mr Sharma  submitted  that  the
judge's determination was based on a  mistake  as  to  fact  concerning  the
issue of whether the appellant and his wife had lived together  in  the  UK.
In fact they had lived together in the UK for seven  months  and  thus  what
the judge said at paragraph 37 (that "[t]he appellant and the  sponsor  have
not lived together as husband  and  wife  in  the  United  Kingdom")  was  a
misdirection amounting to an error of  law,  since  it  led  him  to  ignore
important factual content to the appellant's right  to  respect  for  family
and private life.  Ms Kenny had nothing to add to Ms Tanner's submission  at
the first hearing  that even if the judge  misdirected  himself  as  to  the
couple's cohabitation for seven months before the  appellant  left  the  UK,
that  had  no  material  bearing  on  the   outcome   of   the   Article   8
proportionality assessment.

9. Before proceeding further it will assist  if  we  set  out  the  relevant
    guidance.

The Entry Clearance Guidance

10. Prior to the first hearing a UKBA document was produced to  us  accessed
from the UKBA website section "policy and law/guidance/ecg".  It  is  headed
"RFL03 - General grounds of refusal".  Immediately below this heading it  is
stated that "[t]his is internal guidance for use by  entry  clearance  staff
on the handling of refusal for visa applications made outside  the  ...  UK.
It is a live document under constant review and for information  only."   It
then proceeds to  explain  the  difference  between  mandatory  grounds  for
refusal set out  in  paragraphs  320(1)-(7)  and  discretionary  grounds  of
refusal set out in paragraphs 320(8)-(20).  Under a subheading "RFL3.3  What
if there are exceptional, compelling circumstances?",  the  grounds  explain
what an ECO  needs  to  consider  if  there  are  human  rights  grounds  or
exceptional circumstances and then state:

         "Where no such exceptional,  compelling  circumstances  exist,  the
         grounds set out in 320(1)-(7) are mandatory  grounds  for  refusal.
         The grounds set out in paragraphs  320(8)-(20)  are  discretionary.
         ECMs are required to review all refusals under 320(7A), (7B),  (7C)
         and (11) and to ensure that their ECM review is recorded on Proviso
         and on the Documentation Verification Report (DVR) /  Documentation
         Examination Report (DER) ..."

11. There then  follows  a  table  summarising  GGFR  (General  Grounds  for
Refusal)  relevant  to  visa  applications.   In  the  relevant  column  for
paragraph 320(11) under the heading  "Refer  before  decision?"  is  written
"Yes - ECM".

12. In the course of our deliberations immediately following  the  September
hearing we  discovered  through  our  own  researches  two  entries  in  the
archived content of previous Entry Clearance Guidance:


    1)   One, dated 5 November 2008 and headed "Entry Clearance Guidance  -
         General Instructions",   contains the following paragraphs:


         -Paragraph 26.16.8, headed  "Refusal  process  for  refusals  under
         paragraph  320(7A)  (Updated  9  July  2008]".  This  states   that
         "[b]efore  you  refuse  an  applicant  you  need  to...obtain   ECM
         authorisation for the refusal".


         -Paragraph 26.17.11, headed "What is the process for refusing under
         320(7B)", states "Please read 26.16.8 above".


         -Paragraph 26.18.1, headed "What does "contrived in  a  significant
         way to frustrate the intentions of the  immigration  rules"  mean?"
         concludes with the sentence:
             " ECOs will need to obtain ECM authorisation for all  refusals
             under Paragraph 320(11)".  (Emphasis added)


    2)   The second entry, dated 23 September 2011,  located  on  the  same
         Archived Content site under  the  heading  "RFL07  Frustrating  the
         intentions of the immigration Rules - paragraph  320(11)"  contains
         this passage:


             "RFL7.6 Will I need to refer the case to an ECM?
             Yes ECOs  will  need  to  obtain  ECM  authorisation  for  all
             refusals under paragraph 320(11)". (Emphasis added)

13. Our own research also brought to light a UKBA document on their  website
entitled "The UK Border Agency Response to the Independent  Chief  Inspector
Report: A Global Review 1 December 2010-30 June 2011".  Noting that  one  of
the advisory recommendations of this Global Review  is  to  "strengthen  the
quality assurance methods currently used  by  Entry  Clearance  Managers  to
create a more effective and robust decision-making process",  this  response
states:

         "3.  ... The UK Border Agency accepts this recommendation.


         3.1  Following a recommendation  made  by  the  former  Independent
             Monitor  Independent  Monitor  of  Entry  Clearance   Refusals
             Without the Right of Appeal in  2007,  the  UK  Border  Agency
             agreed to move from the universal  ECM  Review  of  all  entry
             clearance decisions  to  a  targeted  approach.  In  May  2010
             guidance  on  ECM  review  was   further   updated   and   now
             incorporates similar methodology to that used by the ICI  when
             reviewing cases. Although there are minimum  levels  in  place
             for certain case types, ECM reviews are targeted towards cases
             in  categories  where  there  are  indications  that  decision
             quality is not good enough.  All  applications  refused  under
             paragraphs 320 (7A) and (7B) are required to be reviewed by an
             ECM. ECMs must complete reviews of all decisions for any  new,
             inexperienced  or  underperforming  staff  until  the  ECM  is
             satisfied that the ECO is consistently making good decisions.

         3.2  The ICI's report 'A Thematic Inspection  of  the  Points-Based
             System: Tier 2 (Skilled Workers)'  included  a  recommendation
             that the UK Border Agency "set a minimum figure of  PBS  cases
             to be reviewed by managers in line with other  limited  rights
             of appeal cases and implements  a  consistent  formal  quality
             assurance framework within overseas posts...". The  UK  Border
             Agency accepted this recommendation  and  agreed  to  consider
             whether the quality assurance frameworks for overseas and  in-
             country caseworkers can be more closely aligned. The UK Border
             Agency will widen the  scope  of  this  work  to  include  the
             current operation of ECM Review of visa  decisions,  which  is
             underway."

14. We decided that it was necessary  to  make  known  to  the  parties  our
discovery of the above items and to afford them an  opportunity  to  comment
(which we did in our further directions made in February 2013).

15. In their skeleton argument Mr Coleman and Mr Sharma  submitted  that  we
could infer from  the  above  materials  relating  to  the  policy  guidance
(leaving  aside  the  ICI  report)  that  they  stated  the  policy  of  the
respondent as at the date of decision in December 2010. Miss Kenny  did  not
seek to dispute  that  submission  and  we  consider  Mr  Coleman's  and  Mr
Sharma's submissions on  this  matter  well-made.  It  is  clear:  that  the
requirement  for  paragraph   320(11)   refusals   to   obtain   prior   ECM
authorisation was in place at least by July 2008; that it was  on  the  UKBA
website in May 2010 (the version from that date having  been  reproduced  in
word format in an early appellant's skeleton argument); and that it  was  in
place as recently as 13 May 2013 when the appellant's representatives  again
created a word format document of the  website  entry.  In  the  absence  of
anything  to  suggest  that  policy  to  this  effect   was   withdrawn   or
significantly altered  between  July  2008  and  the  date  of  decision  in
December 2010, we find that it was in place on the latter date.

Error of law

16. It is apparent from the extracts cited earlier from the Entry  Clearance
Guidance  that  the  instruction  regarding   the   need   for   prior   ECM
authorisation of  paragraph  320(11)  refusals  is  expressed  in  mandatory
terms. As such it is to be understood  as  an  instruction,  not  merely  as
guidance: see NA (Iraq), R (on the application of) v Secretary of State  for
Foreign & Commonwealth Affairs & Ors [2007] EWCA Civ 759 at [19].

17. In light of the existence of policy guidance  instructing  in  mandatory
terms prior  ECM  authorisation  of  ECO  refusal  under  para  320(11),  we
consider that the FtT  judge  erred  in  law  in  two  respects.   First  we
consider he was wrong to regard the lack of any record of whether there  had
been prior ECM authorisation of the refusal decision against  the  appellant
as a purely administrative matter having no bearing on the legality  of  the
decision. In the absence of any record of the procedure  that  was  followed
by the ECO in this case, the judge simply could not  have known whether  the
decision was made in accordance  with  the  applicable  policy  guidance  or
whether, if it had been, that entailed a fettering of the judgment  the  ECO
was obliged to make under the terms of paragraph 320(11).

18. In the latter regard it is pertinent to  recall  the  case  law  of  the
Upper Tribunal and its predecessors which has emphasised that in respect  of
"General Grounds of Refusal" such as paragraph 320(11) the burden  of  proof
rests on the ECO and requires more than a mere dissatisfaction on  the  part
of the decision-maker: see JC (Part 9 HC395, burden of proof)  China  [2007]
UKAIT 00027; MZ (Pakistan) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
[2009] EWCA Civ 919. Existing case  law  has  also  seen  paragraph  320(11)
refusals to call  for  particular  care  on  the  part  of  decision-makers.
Uniquely amongst the general grounds of refusal dealt with in Part 9 of  the
Rules, the rule itself  refers  to  published  Guidance.   The  guidance  in
question only relates to examples of circumstances likely to  be  considered
as "contrivances", but it is thereby made clear that ECOs are  not  to  make
decisions without regard to published Guidance.  In  PS  (paragraph  320(11)
discretion: care needed) India [2010] UKUT  440  (IAC)  the  Upper  Tribunal
emphasised  the  need  for  "an  adequate  balancing  exercise   under   the
guidelines".  As observed by the Upper  Tribunal  in  Mumu  (paragraph  320;
Article 8; scope) [2012] UKUT 00143  (IAC),  at  paragraph  20,  "[w]hatever
guidance is in  force  at  the  relevant  time  will  need  to  be  properly
applied".

19. We consider that the FtT judge  also  erred  in  his  treatment  of  the
appellant's family and private life circumstances.  He appeared to  consider
that because when the appellant was in the UK the couple  were  not  married
this meant that there was no  relevant  factual  content  for  Article  8(1)
purposes to their close emotional tie.  It is not in dispute  that  in  fact
the appellant and his wife had cohabited for seven  months  before  he  left
the UK. Under established  jurisprudence  on  Article  8  the  existence  of
"family life" between a couple is essentially a matter of the de facto,  not
the de jure,  nature of their tie.

20. In our judgement the judge's error of  law  in  respect  of  the  policy
guidance was a material one necessitating that we set aside his decision.

Our decision

21. The decision we re-make is that the refusal of the respondent  based  on
paragraph 320(11) was not in accordance with the law.

22. In the instant case,  the  respondent  has  known  since  the  appellant
lodged his grounds of appeal in early 2011 that there  was  a  challenge  to
the procedure that had  been  followed  when  making  the  refusal  decision
against the appellant. The respondent has also known for  some  considerable
time that the Upper Tribunal had directed further  evidence  and  submission
from the respondent on whether "...the refusal  decision  in  this  case....
was not in accordance with the law  through  the  lack  of  any  information
confirming that such prior  authorisation  has  been  given".  Yet  no  such
information has been forthcoming.

23. In our judgement the failure of the respondent means that we  cannot  be
satisfied that the decision taken was in accordance with  the  law  for  two
reasons.

24. First of all, in the light of the failure of the respondent  to  confirm
whether or not the decision under  appeal  was  the  subject  of  prior  ECM
authorisation such as is required by Entry Clearance Guidance  instructions,
we are not satisfied it was  made  in  accordance  with  established  policy
instructions. As such  it  falls  foul  of  D.S.  Abdi  [1996]  Imm  AR  148
principles.

25. Second, even if we  were  to  accept  that  the  decision  was  made  in
accordance with   Entry  Clearance  Guidelines  instructions  on  prior  ECM
authorisation,  we  cannot,   without   more,   be   satisfied   that   this
authorisation process  did  not  in  fact  have  the  effect  of  improperly
restricting the individual ECO (as distinct  from  the  ECM)'s  exercise  of
judgement under paragraph 320(11). Applying the  guidance  set  out  by  the
Court of Appeal in NA (Iraq) at [26] and [38], and in light of  the  failure
of the respondent to furnish relevant  information,  we  are  not  satisfied
that the procedure, if followed (as Ms Tanner  and  Ms  Kenny  urged  us  to
accept must have been followed) did not restrict the freedom of the  ECO  to
make his own decision on the  particular  facts.  Indeed,  bearing  in  mind
that in NA the focus was on paragraph 320(3) which required only a  judgment
on whether there had been a failure to produce a valid national passport  or
other document "satisfactorily establishing" his  identity  or  nationality,
it might be thought that  in  respect  of  a  provision  such  as  paragraph
320(11), requiring a much broader discretionary  judgement,  the  importance
of ensuring policy instructions did not fetter the ECO from making  his  own
decision were even more pressing.

26. We are conscious that when we issued our further directions in  February
2013 we had in mind what we shall term "concern (a)",  namely  the  possible
need for a decision by an Upper Tribunal panel seeking to  reach  a  general
view on whether current ECO refusal  decisions  made  on  paragraph  320(11)
Grounds are in compliance with current Entry Clearance Guidance relating  to
paragraph 320(11) (and a number of other General Grounds of refusal).  Given
however  the  conspicuous  failure  of  the  respondent  to  offer  adequate
assistance to the Upper Tribunal on this matter, we consider that this  case
is not an appropriate  one  in  which  to  seek  to  enunciate  any  general
guidance.

27. We recognise too that in the course of our discussions with the  parties
at the second hearing, we identified a  separate  concern,  which  we  shall
term "concern (b)", namely whether, even if followed  by  ECOs  when  making
paragraph 320(11) refusal decisions, the existent Entry  Clearance  Guidance
was compatible  with  the  principle  set  out  in  NA  (Iraq)  that  policy
instructions  cannot  lawfully  fetter  the  judgement  to  be  made  by  an
individual ECO under the Immigration Rules. And  we  have  just  found  this
concern to be one basis for  finding  that  the  ECO  decision  was  not  in
accordance with the law.  Here we  consider  that  there  is  also  a  valid
reason  not  to  attempt  to  formulate  any  general  position  beyond  our
particular finding.

28. Our reluctance lies in the fact that to an  extent  these  two  concerns
are conflicting. Under the first the alleged unlawfulness can only arise  if
the policy mandating prior ECM authorisation has not taken place. Under  the
second,  the  alleged  unlawfulness  can  only  arise  if  the   prior   ECM
authorisation has taken place. Given (i) that  neither  Mr  Coleman  nor  Mr
Sharma was able to assist us with learning from decided cases  on  how  such
concerns interacted; and (ii) that in any event we had  no  input  from  the
respondent (despite  our  directions  urging  the  involvement  of  Treasury
Counsel), it seems to us wholly imprudent to do anything more than  identify
unlawfulness in the specific decision under appeal in this case.

29. The consequence of our decision will be that the respondent is  required
to make a fresh decision and it will then be for her to decide how  best  to
do that in light of our decision.

Article 8

30. Had there been no issue about the lawfulness of  the  refusal  decision,
we very much doubt that we would have found that  it  was  contrary  to  the
appellant's human rights, notwithstanding that he and  his  wife  had  lived
together in the UK for seven months prior  to  his  departure.  But  in  the
light of our conclusion that the ECO's decision was not in  accordance  with
the law, we consider it would be  inappropriate  for  us  to  seek  to  rule
definitively on the Article 8 grounds of  appeal.  As  just  explained,  the
respondent will now have to make a fresh  decision.  Necessarily  that  will
have to take account  of  the  current  family  life  circumstances  of  the
appellant, not those that  obtained  in  December  2010  (the  date  of  the
decision under appeal).



31. For the above reasons:

    The FtT judge materially erred in law and his decision is set aside.


    The decision we re-make is that the appeal is  to  be  allowed  to  the
    limited extent that the decision of the respondent has been found to be
    not in accordance with the  law  and  therefore  requires  to  be  made
    afresh.


    Signed:




    Upper Tribunal Judge Storey 05/06/2013
