
[pic]
`
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/04256/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 22 April 2014                                |On 30 April 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                      entry clearance officer - manila
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                            damion zachery thomas
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs R Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Did not attend and was not represented


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The respondent, Damion Zachery Thomas, was born on 1 January  1964  and
    is a male citizen of New Zealand.  I shall refer to the  respondent  as
    "the appellant" and to the Entry Clearance Officer  at  Manila  as  the
    respondent as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.  The  appellant
    had applied for entry clearance for  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom as the partner of Ms Deborah Brown (hereafter  referred  to  as
    the sponsor) a British citizen.  The sponsor had returned to the United
    Kingdom from New Zealand in January 2013 her two eldest children having
    returned in November 2012.  Having been refused entry clearance by  the
    respondent, the appellant  had  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Dickson) which, in a determination promulgated on  14th  January
    2004, had allowed the appeal under the Immigration  Rules.   The  Entry
    Clearance Officer now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The first ground is that the judge wrongly applied EX1 of  Appendix  FM
    of the Immigration Rules in this instance; EX1 has  no  application  in
    out of country entry clearance cases.  At [33], the judge had concluded
    that "I reach the conclusion that EX1 applies and  that  the  appellant
    succeeds on the Immigration Rules.  If I am wrong then I will  consider
    the appellant and the sponsor's Article  8  claim  in  respect  of  the
    existing case law as set out in this determination.  Again  I  conclude
    the interference in the family and private life of the sponsor and  the
    appellant is unnecessary and disproportionate having regard to the best
    interests of the sponsor's two eldest children".  At  [32],  the  judge
    had found that

         "in view of  the  circumstances  of  this  case  the  idea  of  the
         sponsor's two oldest children  should  abandon  their  studies  and
         relocate their school in New Zealand is unjustifiably harsh.  It is
         a totally unnecessary step and not in the  best  interests  of  the
         sponsor's two oldest children".

 3. I note that the appellant continues to live in New Zealand and  has  no
    United Kingdom representative.  The sponsor was served with a notice of
    the hearing before the Upper Tribunal by first class post on  14  March
    2014.  There is nothing on the file to  indicate  that  the  notice  of
    hearing sent to the sponsor failed to reach her, and I  proceeded  with
    the hearing in the  absence  of  the  appellant/any  representative/the
    sponsor.

 4. I find that the judge did, as the grounds assert, wrongly apply EX1  of
    the Immigration Rules.  This is an out of country entry clearance  case
    to which EX1 has no application.  I also find that the judge's disposal
    of the appeal under Article 8 ECHR is inadequate.  He refers at [33] to
    "the existing case law as set out in this determination".  He has cited
    Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach)  [2013]  UKUT  00640
    (IAC) and Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin).  It is not  clear  to  me  how
    either of these or authorities should have led the judge to  allow  the
    appeal under Article 8 outside the Rules .  This was an application for
    entry clearance which had failed (narrowly)  because  of  the  couple's
    inability to meet the financial requirements of the Immigration  Rules.
    As noted above, the judge appears to have been particularly  influenced
    by what he regarded as the "totally unnecessary step" of  the  children
    of the sponsor (the appellant and sponsor are not married so  they  are
    not yet stepchildren) having to abandon their  studies  in  the  United
    Kingdom in order to  relocate  to  schools  in  New  Zealand.   As  Mrs
    Pettersen pointed out, the Entry Clearance Officer did not require  the
    children to undertake that step.  I agree  with  her  submission  that,
    notwithstanding with requirement of decision makers to have  regard  to
    the promotion of family  life  as  well  as  avoiding  disproportionate
    interference with it, the lives of the sponsor and her children in  the
    United Kingdom have not been altered in any way by the Entry  Clearance
    Officer's refusal.  In considering Article 8 ECHR, the judge appears to
    have  had  no  regard  to  the  public  interest   concerned  with  the
    management of immigration control manifested  through  the  Immigration
    Rules which contain legitimate financial requirements for those seeking
    to settle in the United Kingdom.  I find that the  judge's  termination
    of the Article 8 appeal is perfunctory and  inadequately  reasoned.   I
    find that the determination should be set  aside  both  in  respect  of
    Article 8 and the Immigration Rules appeal.

 5. I have remade the decision.  I find that the appellant  cannot  succeed
    under the Immigration Rules.  I repeat  my  observation  above  of  the
    interference which has been caused in the existing family lives of  the
    appellant, sponsor and her children is  negligible  whilst  the  public
    interest concerned with excluding those  individuals  from  the  United
    Kingdom cannot satisfy the Immigration Rules is a strong one.  Whilst I
    am sure that this family would wish to be living together, I cannot see
    that the circumstances  are  especially  compelling  or  unusual.   The
    proper course of action  for  this  appellant  is  to  make  a  further
    application for entry clearance as and when he  is  able  to  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.

DECISION

 6. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on
    14 January 2014 is set aside.  I have remade the decision.  This appeal
    in respect of the Immigration  Rules  is  dismissed.   This  appeal  is
    dismissed on human rights grounds (Article 8 ECHR).






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

