
                                    [pic]
IAC-fH-nl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Oa/04140/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 2 February 2017                        |On 7 February 2017               |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - MANILA

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                GEORGE BERZA
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. P. Singh, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. C. Dias, Dias Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Entry Clearance Officer against  the  decision
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Robinson, promulgated on 27 June 2016,  in
    which he allowed the appeal of Mr. Berza against  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer's decision to refuse to grant leave to enter as a partner under
    Appendix FM of the immigration rules.

 2. For the purposes of this  decision  I  refer  to  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer  as  the  Respondent,  and  to  Mr.  Berza  as  the  Appellant,
    reflecting their positions as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.



 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:

    "I am satisfied that it is arguable that  the  Judge  materially  erred
    regarding the admission of the IELTS certificate."

 4. The Sponsor attended  the  hearing.   I  heard  submissions  from  both
    representatives following which I  announced  that  I  found  that  the
    decision involved the making of a material error of law,  and  my  full
    reasons would follow.

Error of Law Decision

 5. The first matter which the judge considered  was  the  refusal  of  the
    application under paragraph 320(7A).  He concluded in paragraph 14 that
    the decision to refuse the application under  paragraph  320(7A)  could
    not be upheld.  There has been no challenge  to  this  finding  by  the
    Respondent and, as I confirmed at the hearing, this finding stands.

 6. The judge then went on to find that the  Appellant  had  satisfied  the
    English language requirements of the immigration rules  with  reference
    to an IELTS certificate which post-dated the decision.

 7. The judge referred in paragraphs 16 to 18 to the  legislation  covering
    the admission of evidence provided after  the  date  of  decision.   In
    paragraph 19 he states:

    "In my judgement the new evidence in the form of the IELTS  certificate
    is admissible if it is relevant  to  the  substance  of  the  decision.
    Clearly it has an important bearing on the English language requirement
    and its contents show that the appellant can now meet the requirement."

 8. In the grounds of appeal the Respondent  submitted  that  this  was  an
    error of law, as there was a saving provision in  the  Immigration  Act
    2014 (Commencement No. 3, Transitional and Saving  Provisions)  Order
    2014 which preserved the provisions of section 85A(2)  in  relation  to
    the Appellant's application.

 9. I have considered this commencement order.  In part  2,  article  9  it
    states:

    "Notwithstanding the commencement of the relevant provisions, the saved
    provisions continue to have effect, and the relevant provisions do  not
    have effect, other than so far as they relate to the  persons  set  out
    respectively in articles  10  and  11,  unless  article  11(2)  or  (3)
    applies."

10. The Appellant is not covered by articles 10 and 11, which do not  cover
    entry clearance applications as a partner under Appendix FM.

11. The "saved provisions" includes Part 5 of the 2002 Act, which  includes
    section 85A.  This provides  that  "in  relation  to  an  appeal  under
    section 82(1) against an immigration decision of a  kind  specified  in
    section  82(2)(b)  or  (c)  the  Tribunal   may   consider   only   the
    circumstances appertaining at the time of the  decision".   Refusal  of
    entry clearance is an immigration decision for the purposes of  section
    82(2)(b).

12.  I  find  that  the  saved  provisions  applied  to   the   Appellant's
    application.  I find that the judge was  therefore  wrong  to  consider
    that the certificate was admissible.  At the date of the decision,  the
    Appellant did not have an IELTS  certificate.   His  achieving  of  the
    IELTS qualification was not a circumstance appertaining at the date  of
    the decision.

13. In the alternative, the judge could have given  reasons  for  why  this
    certificate shed light on circumstances appertaining at the date of the
    decision.  He failed to do so.  He found that the contents  "show  that
    the appellant can now meet the requirement".  He does not find that the
    Appellant had  sufficient  language  skills  as  at  the  date  of  the
    decision.  He finds that he meets the requirement "now".

14. It  was  not  disputed  that  the  Appellant  did  not  have  an  IELTS
    certificate at the date of the decision.   The  certificate  post-dated
    the decision.  It did not appertain to circumstances at the time of the
    decision.  The Appellant had no means of showing that his circumstances
    as at the date of the decision were such that he met  the  requirements
    of the immigration rules.  It was not  submitted  before  me  that  the
    IELTS certificate was capable of showing circumstances obtaining at the
    date of the decision.  Rather it was submitted in paragraph 11  of  the
    skeleton argument that, were I to find that there was a material  error
    of law in the judge's admission of the certificate, the  appeal  should
    be dismissed, with the  section  320(7A)  finding  preserved,  and  the
    Appellant should make a fresh application.



Notice of Decision

15. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involves  the  making  of  a
    material error of law and I set the  decision  aside  subject  to  [16]
    below.

16. I do not set aside the decision insofar  as  it  relates  to  paragraph
    320(7A).  The finding in paragraph 14 that the application  should  not
    have been refused under paragraph 320(7A) is preserved.

17. I remake the decision  dismissing  the  Appellant's  appeal  under  the
    immigration rules as the Appellant failed to provide evidence  to  show
    that he met the English language requirements as at  the  date  of  the
    decision.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date 6 February 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                                  Date 6 February 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

