
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
OA/04804/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |       Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 27 April 2017                      |       On 9 May 2017                  |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW

                                   Between

                              mrs cecilia asare
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ACCRA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Siaw instructed by KPP Oplex
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Background

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana born on  10  September  1976.   She
    sought admission to the United Kingdom as  the  spouse  of  a  European
    Economic Area national exercising treaty rights in the United  Kingdom.
    On 12 January 2015 the respondent refused the appellant's  application.
    The reasons for that refusal were that the respondent  considered  that
    the appellant was party to a marriage of convenience and therefore  was
    not satisfied that the appellant met all the requirements of Regulation
    12 of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

 2.  The  appellant  appealed  against  that  decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 3. In a decision promulgated on 25 July 2016 First-tier Tribunal  Judge  R
    Callender Smith dismissed the appellant's appeal.  The judge found that
    on the  balance  of  probabilities  the  appellant's  marriage  to  the
    sponsor, Mr Philip Nomafo, a Swedish national living and working in the
    UK, was not a genuine and subsisting marriage and that the intention of
    the parties was for the appellant to gain the benefit of the fact of  a
    marriage to an EEA national so that she could make  an  application  to
    enter the UK.  The judge was also satisfied that the  appellant  was  a
    party to a marriage of convenience  and  was  not  therefore  a  family
    member of an EEA national in accordance with Regulation 7  of  the  EEA
    Regulations.

 4. On 19 October 2018 the  appellant  applied  for  permission  to  appeal
    against  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision.   The  application  for
    permission to  appeal  was  received  nearly  three  months  after  the
    Tribunal's decision was promulgated.  First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Kelly
    extended time for lodging the application  for  permission  to  appeal.
    The grounds of appeal assert that the First-tier Tribunal Judge applied
    an  incorrect  test  and  therefore  arrived  at  the  wrong  decision.
    Reference is made to paragraph 22 of the First-tier  Tribunal  decision
    where the judge sets out that it is for the appellant to discharge  the
    burden of proof and the standard of proof to be applied is the  balance
    of probabilities.  It is submitted that the burden of proof is  on  the
    respondent as per the case of Rosa v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 14  ('Rosa').
    The grounds assert that the respondent did not submit any  evidence  to
    discharge the burden of proof.  The  grounds  also  asserted  that  the
    judge had erred in the record of the oral evidence of the appellant.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly  on
    10 February 2017 only in respect to the ground of appeal that the judge
    erred in applying the incorrect burden of proof.  The  claim  that  the
    Tribunal had not accurately recorded the oral testimony was refused.

The Appeal before the Upper Tribunal

 6. Mr Siaw submitted that the questions asked by the Respondent  were  all
    concerned with the subsistency of the appellant's relationship with the
    sponsor.  He referred to several of the questions asked  by  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer and submitted  that  they  were  all  concerned  with
    assessing the genuineness of the ongoing  relationship.   He  submitted
    that in the case of Rosa it was made clear, at paragraph 40,  that  the
    focus in relation to  a  marriage  of  convenience  should  be  on  the
    intention of the parties at the time  the  marriage  was  entered  into
    whereas the question as to whether a marriage is  subsisting  looks  to
    whether the relationship is a continuing one:

 7. He submitted that the question asked at the hearing before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal regarding the sponsor's Swedish passport had not been put
    to the appellant at the time of the application  or  in  the  interview
    with the Respondent.  Neither the appellant nor the  sponsor  had  been
    asked the question as to what their intention was at the time that they
    entered into the marriage.

 8. Mr Siaw submitted that the First-tier Tribunal  had  erred  in  law  by
    referring to the burden of proof being on the appellant.   He  referred
    to the  cases  of  Rosa  and  Papajorgji  (EEA  spouse  -  marriage  of
    convenience)  Greece  [2012]  UKUT  00384  (IAC)  ('Papajorgji').    He
    submitted that it is made clear by the case of Rosa that the burden  is
    on the Home Office  to  prove  that  the  marriage  is  a  marriage  of
    convenience and that merely  by  showing  reasonable  suspicion  cannot
    discharge the burden.  There was  no  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge to discharge the burden of proof on the Home Office that
    this was a marriage of convenience.  He submitted that there  was  only
    one question regarding the European passport from which the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge arrived at the conclusion that this was  a  marriage  of
    convenience.

 9. Ms Isherwood submitted that there was no material error of law  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision. The Respondent was entitled  to  assess
    and test the evidence in this case.  The appellant was  interviewed  by
    the Respondent in order to assess the genuineness of the  relationship.
    Providing that there is sufficient evidence to satisfy  the  evidential
    burden then the burden reverts to the appellant.   She  submitted  that
    the appellant has failed to discharge the evidential burden as she  has
    not satisfactorily responded  to  the  points  raised  in  the  refusal
    letter.  There was no further evidence to satisfy the  judge  that  the
    Respondent's concerns were addressed.  She conceded that  paragraph  22
    of the First-tier Tribunal's decision is incorrect but asserted that it
    is not material.  The First-tier  Tribunal  at  paragraphs  24  and  25
    considered the relevant case law of Rosa  and  Papajorgji.   The  judge
    considered all the evidence, at paragraphs 5 to 8, and  considered  all
    of the documentary evidence as set out in paragraph 12 of the decision.
     She submitted that there was no material  error  of  law  despite  the
    incorrect reference in paragraph 22.

10. In reply Mr Siaw submitted that at paragraphs 40  and  41  of  Rosa  it
    makes  it  clear  that   questions   regarding   the   subsistence   of
    relationship, in this case the questions about money being  transferred
    and about communication are all evidence of subsistence which, as  held
    in Rosa, are not relevant to the question of marriage  of  convenience.
    They are concerned with whether or not a relationship  is  genuine  and
    subsisting.

Discussion

11. The First-tier Tribunal refers at the  beginning  of  the  decision  to
    Regulation 12 of the EEA Regulations.  Whilst it is  correct  that  the
    appellant  must  satisfy  a  judge  on  appeal  that  she   meets   the
    requirements of Regulation 12 and therefore  the  burden  is  upon  the
    appellant to prove the case, in this case the issue was whether or  not
    the marriage between the appellant and the sponsor was  a  marriage  of
    convenience.  It was not disputed that the marriage itself was a  valid
    marriage.  Therefore the burden of proof lies on  the  respondent.   In
    Rosa at paragraph 29 the Court of Appeal having  considered  in  detail
    the legal test summarised and  explained  the  test  in  the  following
    manner:

         "29. ...The result that I think the Tribunal must have intended  is
             achieved if the legal burden of proof lies on the Secretary of
             State throughout but  the  evidential  burden  can  shift,  as
             explained in Papajorgji.  In my judgment, that is the  correct
             analysis."

12. The First-tier Tribunal clearly erred in law at paragraph 22 in stating
    that it is for the appellant to discharge the burden of proof.

13. There are two distinct aspects to the appellant's  grounds  of  appeal.
    The first is that the focus was incorrectly on whether the marriage was
    genuine and subsisting rather than if it was a marriage of  convenience
    and, secondly, whether or not the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  having
    incorrectly considered that it was for the appellant to  discharge  the
    burden of proof, his approach to the evaluation  of  the  evidence  was
    infected by that error.

14. Dealing with the first matter the judge set out the  details  given  in
    the refusal letter including the answers given by the appellant in  her
    interview.  At paragraph 12  the  judge  sets  out  that  he  has  read
    carefully the information that was before the respondent, the  material
    in the appellant's bundle and heard oral  evidence  from  the  sponsor.
    The judge sets out in paragraphs 14 to  21  details  of  the  sponsor's
    evidence both from his written witness statement  and  oral  testimony.
    The judge then set out from paragraph 23 his findings and reasons.   At
    paragraph 23 the judge stated:

         "23. The main issue in this Appeal is whether, from the start,  the
             marriage was in effect genuine and subsisting.  The transcript
             of the interview of the Appellant is not particularly  helpful
             one way or another in determining that."

15. It is clear that the judge in this paragraph is incorrectly considering
    that the issue is whether the marriage is genuine and subsisting.   The
    correct issue to be decided in this  appeal  was  whether  or  not  the
    marriage was one of convenience.   However,  the  judge  then,  in  the
    immediately subsequent paragraph, refers directly to the correct issue.
     At paragraphs 24 and 25 the judge set out:

         "24. As the Appellant's legal  representative  reminds  me  in  his
             skeleton argument, the key paragraph of the  case  of  Rosa  v
             SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 14 states that the 'focus in relation  to
             a marriage should be on the intention of the  parties  at  the
             time the marriage was entered into'.

         25.  He also reminds me of the case of  Papajorgji  (EEA  Spouse  -
             marriage of convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT 00384  (IAC).   In
             essence that case states that it is wrong for  Respondents  to
             make assertions  that  an  individual's  marriage  is  one  of
             convenience without providing basis of proof for doing so."

16. It can be seen from these paragraphs that the judge was aware that  the
    issue was whether, at the time of entering into the  marriage,  it  was
    one of convenience. That is evident from the following paragraphs.

         "26. The Sponsor's evidence is that, before or at the time  of  his
             marriage to the Appellant in Ghana, she asked him specifically
             whether he had a European passport.

         27.  I find this is a good  indication  that  she  was  seeking  to
             establish, from the start, more  about  her  potential  rights
             married to an EEA national than she was interested  in  simply
             marrying the Sponsor because he was a fellow Ghanaian.

         28.  I note that they met and married within a very short space  of
             time, so short a space of time that there appears to have been
             something rather more methodical than instant  love  at  first
             sight to their marriage.

         29.  The Respondent was entitled, from the start,  to  regard  that
             kind of meeting leading to a marriage with suspicion.

         30.  The short space  of  time  between  the  parties  meeting  and
             marrying is sufficient  prima  facie  evidence  to  raise  the
             enquiry and the Respondent is entitled to do this even in  the
             face of the two cases quoted above in paragraph 23.

         31.  These are not two individuals who had met before and there  is
             a significant enquiry by the Appellant of  the  Sponsor  about
             whether he had a European passport in effect, in  addition  to
             his Ghanaian passport, which he tells me he used to enter  and
             leave Ghana."

17. This  evidence  is  relevant  to  establishing  the  intention  of  the
    appellant at the time she entered into the  marriage.  The  judge  then
    return to consideration of the genuine and  subsisting  nature  of  the
    relationship:

         "32. I find, on the balance of probabilities, that this was  not  a
             genuine and subsisting marriage but that the intention of  the
             parties was for the Appellant to gain the benefit of the  fact
             of a marriage to an EEA national so that  she  could,  as  she
             did, then make an application to join the Sponsor in the UK.

         33.  I accept that the Sponsor has been sending  her  a  documented
             amount of around �300 but I do  not  find  that  probative  of
             whether there is a genuine relationship that was or  continues
             here.

         34.  I, like the Respondent, am not satisfied that, on the evidence
             submitted with the application, on the responses in  interview
             and  on  the  balance  of  probabilities,  that  there  was  a
             continuing and meaningful relationship  with  the  Appellant's
             Sponsor in respect of this marriage."

18. Although the judge can be seen in the preceding paragraphs  to  confuse
    the two issues the evidence was relevant to evaluation of whether  this
    was  a  marriage  of  convenience.  The  judge,  having  evaluated  the
    evidence, made a specific finding on this in paragraph 35:

         "35. I, also, am satisfied that the Appellant  was  a  party  to  a
             marriage of convenience  and  was  not,  therefore,  a  family
             member of an EEA national in accordance with Regulation  7  of
             the EEA Regulations."

19. I acknowledge that the Tribunal's language and  the  structure  of  the
    decision is not particularly precise.  At paragraphs 40 and 41 of  Rosa
    the Court of Appeal set out:

         "40. Mr Southey submitted that the tribunal misdirected  itself  by
             focusing on the question whether the marriage was 'genuine and
             subsisting'. That terminology can be seen to run  through  the
             determination: it appears, for example, in the  last  sentence
             of paragraph 3 ('I was satisfied that it was for the Appellant
             to show ... that the marriage was genuine and subsisting'), in
             the first sentence of paragraph 26 ('I am not satisfied on the
             evidence ... that  they  are  now  or  ever  have  been  in  a
             subsisting relationship of husband and wife') and in paragraph
             29 ('I am not satisfied that the Appellant is in a  subsisting
             relationship with her husband ...'). But  it  relates  to  the
             different issue that arises in applications by non-EEA spouses
             for leave to remain under the Immigration  Rules.  It  has  no
             place in relation to the issue of marriage of  convenience  on
             an application under regulation 17  of  the  EEA  Regulations,
             where the  relevant  question  is  whether  the  marriage  was
             'concluded ... with the sole aim of circumventing the rules on
             entry and residence of third-country nationals  and  obtaining
             for the third-country national a residence permit or authority
             to reside in a Member State' (see paragraph 10 above)."

         41.  ...It may be useful to contrast a marriage of convenience with
             a genuine marriage  (indeed,  Underhill  LJ  treated  them  as
             antonyms at paragraph 6 of his  judgment  in  Agho),  but  the
             focus in relation to a marriage of convenience  should  be  on
             the intention of the parties at  the  time  the  marriage  was
             entered into, whereas  the  question  whether  a  marriage  is
             'subsisting'.  ...The tribunal was  correct  to  look  at  the
             evidence concerning the relationship between the appellant and
             her husband after the marriage itself (both before, during and
             after the husband's period of imprisonment),  since  that  was
             capable of casting light on the intention of  the  parties  at
             the time of the marriage."

20. In considering the judge's approach and the evidence  overall  in  this
    case I am satisfied that  he  he  did  consider,  in  addition  to  the
    question of the genuine and subsisting nature of the relationship,  the
    correct question  as  to  whether  or  not  the  marriage  was  one  of
    convenience.  As held in Rosa it is correct for a Tribunal to  look  at
    the evidence concerning the ongoing relationship between the  appellant
    and the sponsor because that is the evidence that is capable of casting
    light on the intention of the parties at the time of the marriage.   As
    the judge noted the appellant and the sponsor met and married within  a
    very short space of time.  The appellant asked the sponsor  whether  he
    had a European passport before or at the time of his  marriage  to  the
    appellant.  Those are matters that do cast light on  the  intention  of
    the parties at the time of the marriage.  The other evidence  that  the
    judge took into consideration about the level  of  knowledge  that  the
    appellant  had  of  the  sponsor,  whether  there  was  any   financial
    contribution and the level  of  communication  between  them  are  also
    capable of casting light on the intention of the parties at the time of
    the marriage.  I therefore do not consider that the  judge  erred  when
    considering evidence that went to  whether  or  not  the  marriage  was
    genuine and subsisting.  There was a clear finding in paragraph 35 that
    the appellant was party to a marriage of convenience.

21. With regard to the incorrect burden the judge did refer to the case  of
    Papajorgji and set out that it  is  wrong  for  a  Respondent  to  make
    assertions without providing a basis of proof for doing so.  The  judge
    considered that there was a sufficient  basis  for  the  Respondent  to
    investigate further.  At paragraph 31 the judge clearly considers  that
    there had been a significant enquiry by the appellant  with  regard  to
    the sponsor's passport.  That coupled with the  very  short  period  of
    time between the parties meeting and marrying  was  sufficient  in  the
    judge's view to shift the evidential burden of proof.

22. Although the First-tier Tribunal was in  error  in  proceeding  on  the
    basis that it was  for  the  appellant  to  show,  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities, that the marriage was not a marriage of convenience I do
    not accept Mr Siaw's submission that there was  no  evidence  from  the
    Respondent to discharge the legal burden, which of course remained with
    the Respondent throughout, to demonstrate that this was a  marriage  of
    convenience.  The judge  evaluated  the  evidence  including  the  oral
    testimony of the sponsor and made an emphatic finding, in paragraph 35,
    that he was satisfied that the appellant was a party to a  marriage  of
    convenience. That language does not suggest that the  judge  considered
    that the appellant had not proved that the  marriage  was  not  one  of
    convenience. It reflects the test that it was  for  the  respondent  to
    satisfy the judge. The finding of the judge reflects correctly that the
    test was that he had to be satisfied that the appellant was a party  to
    a marriage  of  convenience.  That  is  the  burden  that  was  on  the
    respondent and is correctly reflected in the finding by the judge. This
    indicates that  the  outcome  of  this  appeal  did  not  turn  on  the
    Tribunal's incorrect record as to the  burden  of  proof.   I  consider
    therefore that this error was not material.

Notice of Decision

23. The First-tier Tribunal's decision did not contain a material error  of
    law.  The appellant's appeal is dismissed.

24. No anonymity direction is made.





Signed   P M Ramshaw                             Date 8 May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw





