
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/04767/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 July 2015                      |On 8 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                Silin Ramadan
                        (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       Entry Clearance Officer - paris
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss R Pickering, instructed by Parker Rhodes
                    Hickmotts, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwncyz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, who was born on 22 July 1993, is  a  citizen  of  Syria.
    She appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Kelly)  against  the
    decision of the  respondent  dated  19  November  2013  to  refuse  her
    application for entry clearance to  the  United  Kingdom  in  order  to
    settle with her mother (Anifa  Alo  -  hereafter  referred  to  as  the
    sponsor).  The First-tier Tribunal dismissed her appeal in  a  decision
    promulgated on 17 December  2014.   The  appellant  now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. At the appeal hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal  Miss  Pickering
    [13]  accepted  that  the  appellant  could  not  meet  the   financial
    requirements of HC 395.  The appeal before the First-tier Tribunal  had
    proceeded on Article 8 ECHR grounds only.

 3. There are three grounds of appeal.  Ground One asserts that  the  judge
    failed to have proper regard to the best interests of  the  appellant's
    two younger sisters who are living in the United Kingdom together  with
    a half brother.  The judge should have considered the best interests of
    the United Kingdom-based sisters under the  principles  of  Beoku-Betts
    [2009] UKHL 303469. There had been no proper regard  to  the  "thoughts
    and feelings of the sisters of the appellant" (Grounds [18]).

 4. I do not find this ground has any merit.  The judge made  it  clear  at
    [17], whilst he was "bound to be  selected  in  my  references  to  the
    evidence when explaining the reasons for my decision ... I nevertheless
    wish to emphasise that I considered all the evidence in  the  round  in
    arriving at my conclusions".  That evidence included  written  evidence
    in the form of letters both from the  children  and  from  the  sponsor
    which gave details of the extent  to  which  the  United  Kingdom-based
    children missed the appellant and wished to have her living with  them.
    Judge Kelly did not need to refer to that evidence specifically  but  I
    am satisfied that he has considered it in reaching his decision.  There
    was some evidence of the child B attempting self-harm but there was  no
    expert report or other evidence to indicate that the children living in
    the United Kingdom would suffer harm if they continued to be  separated
    from the appellant.  I have to  say  that  the  evidence  of  the  kind
    submitted expresses little more than the understandable wishes  of  the
    children to be reunited with their sister.  I am satisfied  that  Judge
    Kelly has not ignored or attached inappropriate weight to this evidence
    as alleged.

 5. Ground Two  asserts  that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  the  facts
    "culturally" (sic)  and  failed  to  consider  that  the  appellant  is
    unmarried and that in her culture she would be expected to live  within
    the family home.  Judge Kelly [22] found that the:

         "... appellant's separation from her family was occasioned by force
         of circumstance ... It was bound to have heightened the appellant's
         level of maturity  and  to  have  accelerated  her  moving  towards
         independent adult life.  I appreciate the  sponsor  would  wish  to
         observe the norms of her cultural background by  having  her  adult
         daughter live  with  her  until  such  time  as  she  had  married.
         However, it is  also  an  inevitable  consequence  of  flight  from
         persecution that the cultural ties of the country of origin (Syria)
         are weakened over time whilst those of  the  host  country  (France
         [where the appellant lives] and the  United  Kingdom  respectively)
         are commensurately strengthened."

    I can identify no problem  whatever  with  that  finding.   It  emerged
    naturally from the  evidence  before  the  judge  and  the  appellant's
    grounds amount to little more than a disagreement with it.  Once again,
    there was no expert evidence to assist the judge.

 6. Ground Three asserts that the judge  speculated  in  reaching  findings
    which were not supported by the evidence.   The  judge  considered  the
    evidence of a psychiatrist who treated  the  appellant  in  France  but
    again I can find no error in the findings of the  judge  at  [22]  from
    which  I  have  quoted  above.   The  medical  evidence  regarding  the
    appellant did not compel a different outcome from that reached by Judge
    Kelly  who  noted  that,  despite  her  problems,  the  appellant   had
    "befriended an Egyptian national and  was  now  studying  dentistry  in
    France".

 7. In the circumstances, this appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

 8. This appeal is dismissed.

 9. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 2 September 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

