
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/04968/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal       |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 11th March 2016                            |On 13th April 2016           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                             mrs mamamuda happy
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Bhachu of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh  born  on  10  November  1990.
    She appeals against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  (the  FtT)
    to dismiss her appeal both under the European Economic Area Regulations
    2006 (2006 Regulations) and on human rights grounds.

2.   Upper Tribunal  Judge  Lindsley  gave  her  permission  to  appeal  the
    decision of the FtT because he was satisfied that the grounds disclosed
    arguable errors of law.  Specifically:

      1) It was arguable that the appellant had not used deception  of  such
         character as fell within the guidance issued on the point in  cases
         such as Shen (proving dishonesty) [2014] UKUT 00236.  The Secretary
         of State bore the  burden  of  proving  such  an  allegation.   The
         appellant  had  produced   evidence   from   an   agent   who   had
         responsibility for completing the application  on  the  appellant's
         behalf.  The Immigration Judge noted that in paragraph  19  of  his
         decision that the evidence had only been received on the day of the
         hearing when the issue of deception had been raised in the  refusal
         letter many months previously.  Judge Lindsley considered it to  be
         at least arguable that the Immigration Judge should have given  the
         respondent an opportunity  to  apply  for  an  adjournment  if  she
         objected to the evidence of the agent on the grounds  that  it  was
         procedurally unfair.  However, it was noted that the respondent had
         not done so.  It was arguably wrong of the Immigration Judge not to
         attach due  weight  to  that  evidence  as  a  consequence  of  his
         lateness.

      2) Secondly, Judge Lindsley criticised the Immigration Judge  for  not
         considering the leading authority of Goudey which was  relevant  to
         establishing  whether  there   was   a   genuine   and   subsisting
         relationship between the appellant and the sponsor.  This was to be
         decided at the date  of  the  decision.   Thirdly,  whilst  it  was
         accepted that the appellant did not meet the  requirements  of  the
         Immigration Rules, and particularly Appendix FM of those Rules,  it
         was nevertheless arguable that the other errors identified by Judge
         Lindsley impacted that on the assessment under  Article  8  of  the
         ECHR.  It was noted, in particular, that the appellant's failure to
         satisfy the requirements of the Rules related to the absence of  an
         appropriate English language test certificate (see paragraph 20  of
         the decision).

3.   Judge Lindsley considered that the parties should be ready  to  proceed
    immediately with the remaking of the decision if an error of  law  were
    found.  To that end the appellant was to serve any  evidence  on  which
    she relied to the effect that the  relationship  between  she  and  her
    husband was genuine and subsisting at the  date  of  the  decision  (27
    February 2014).  Judge  Lindsley  also  directed  that  Paul  Evans,  a
    community psychiatric nurse and care coordinator at Dudley and  Walsall
    Mental Health Partnership NHS Trust, should  be  asked  to  clarify  in
    writing whether he witnessed telephone calls between the appellant  and
    the sponsor at or around the time of the decision,  whether  he  viewed
    the marriage  as  genuine  and  subsisting  and  whether  it  would  be
    reasonable from a medical perspective to expect the  sponsor  with  the
    appellant in Bangladesh.

Background

4.   The appellant planned to arrive in the  UK  on  20  February  2014  and
    reside with the sponsor Ansar Uddin, who was born on 31  December  1980
    and is a British citizen living in [the] West Midlands, UK.

5.   On 27 February 2014 the application for entry clearance  as  a  partner
    under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules was  refused  by  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer (ECO).  The  ECO  considered  the  application  under
    paragraph EC-P.1.1 of Appendix FM but decided that the application  had
    not been truthfully completed.  It stated that the  appellant  had  not
    been refused a visa for any country including the UK  in  the  previous
    ten years.  However, the ECO noted  that  the  appellant  had  made  an
    application at the Dhaka entry  post  to  join  his  mother  which  was
    refused on 29 August 2006.  A copy of that refusal is attached  to  the
    ECO's  decision.   It  is  noteworthy  that  that  refusal  also  draws
    attention to a failure to disclose his previous immigration history  in
    relation to a previous application for a visa, a change to his date  of
    birth and  a  submission  of  a  different  passport  to  the  previous
    application.  Additionally, the respondent in the 2006 application  had
    not been satisfied as  to  the  documents  evidencing  the  appellant's
    finances.   Accordingly,  the  respondent  considered  it  correct   to
    consider the earlier refusal notwithstanding that it was more than  ten
    years from  the  date  of  his  present  application.   It  caused  the
    respondent  to  question  the  credibility  and  reliability   of   the
    statements made by the appellant in support of this  application.   The
    application was therefore refused under the above paragraph of Appendix
    FM.  That paragraph dealt with suitability requirements.

6.   The ECO also refused the application under ECP.-P.1.1(d) of Section  E-
    ECP (eligibility for entry clearance as  partner).   This  was  on  the
    basis that there was nothing to suggest  that  the  appellant  and  his
    sponsor had enjoyed regular contact with each other.  The appellant had
    submitted handwritten letters but these were described by the ECO as "a
    self-serving".  There was no evidence in his view that any of them were
    posted and  no  evidence  of  any  recent  communications  between  the
    appellant and the sponsor.  Accordingly, the sponsor was not  satisfied
    as to the subsisting nature of the  relationship.   The  appellant  had
    claimed to marry the  sponsor  in  March  2010  but  the  ECO  was  not
    satisfied that the relationship was genuine and subsisting and that the
    parties intended to live together  permanently  within  EC-P.1.1(d)  of
    Appendix FM.

7.   Finally, the ECO was not satisfied that the appellant met  the  English
    language  requirements  of  Appendix  FM  (E-ECP.4.2).    Specifically,
    paragraph GEN1.6 requires an English language test  within  the  Common
    European  Framework  with  a  provider  approved  by  the  UKBA.    The
    respondent had not satisfied the academic qualifications required.   He
    had submitted an ESOL entry level  certificate  in  both  speaking  and
    listening to English from the City and  Guilds  but  the  ECO  was  not
    satisfied the documents submitted showed that  the  appellant  had  the
    necessary efficiency in  speaking  and  listening  into  English.   The
    documents submitted did not reliably demonstrate that he had the stated
    qualification.

8.   The appellant's representative completed an appeal form (IAFT-2)  dated
    1 April 2014.  This stimulated a review by the Entry Clearance  Manager
    (ECM).

9.   The ECM pointed out that the appellant was issued with a  free  re-test
    in his English language but appeared not to  have  taken  advantage  of
    that.  Accordingly, the ECO had been justified in refusing based on his
    English language ability.  Unfortunately, the ECM was not given a  full
    set of grounds of appeal.  This appears to be  because  representatives
    invariably follow the  practice  of  not  including  their  grounds  in
    relevant form as is required.  Nevertheless, I have seen an email dated
    18 December 2013.  The ECM went on to consider the case on the  merits.
    He was satisfied that the decision was proportionate  to  a  legitimate
    aim (maintaining effective immigration control) and  that  no  evidence
    had been supplied from the appellant or sponsor that they would not  be
    able to live in  Bangladesh  where  the  sponsor  had  been  born.   It
    appeared that the appellant had chosen to enter  an  arranged  marriage
    with the sponsor and  the  respondent's  decision  did  not  result  in
    unjustifiably harsh consequences  for  the  appellant  or  her  family.
    There were no exceptional reasons why the family had an inherent  right
    to decide where they wished to form their private or family  life.   It
    was open in all the circumstances for the sponsor to go to  Bangladesh.
    The ECM's decision is dated 20 October 2014.

The Appeal Proceedings

10.  At the  appeal  the  appellant  was  represented  by  Counsel  and  the
    respondent by  a  Presenting  Officer.   The  Immigration  Judge  heard
    evidence from the sponsor, who claimed that  he  needed  24  hour-a-day
    care.  He claimed in evidence that due to his  "mental  state"  he  was
    unable to return to Bangladesh.  Nevertheless, he calls his wife "three
    or four times a week" and had documentary evidence from an organisation
    called "Tango". However, the Immigration Judge observed,  in  paragraph
    10 of his decision, that the  "call  records"  only  indicated  contact
    between the sponsor and the appellant after the date of  decision.   It
    seems  that  the  only  communication  between  the  two  has  been  by
    telephone.  Apparently the sponsor would write letters but would  throw
    them away so that they never got  to  the  appellant.   Only  two  were
    produced in the bundle of documents before the Immigration Judge.   The
    sponsor had not sent money in the  recent  past  at  the  date  of  the
    hearing (7 January 2015).  The sponsor gave evidence that  with  regard
    to the "original application" this had been filled in by an  agent  who
    had made a mistake answering  the  question  (at  question  26  of  the
    application) "have you been refused entry to the UK  in  the  last  ten
    years?"  "No".  This, the sponsor accepted was  untrue.   However,  the
    error was only identified when the sponsor contacted the  solicitor  to
    try and correct it.

11.  The appellant then called the sponsor's niece to  give  evidence.   She
    adopted her witness statement but added that in addition to the contact
    described by the sponsor the appellant and sponsor spoke via  telephone
    and Skype.  She describes the separation between husband  and  wife  as
    being negative.

12.  It was pointed out in cross-examination that  no  birthday  cards  have
    been produced, as one would expect to see  between  husband  and  wife.
    The sponsor was said to have suffered from mental health problems since
    around 2008.

13.  The Immigration Judge determined that  the  error  on  the  application
    form had indeed been deliberate.  That the Immigration  Judge  did  not
    accept  the  explanation  by  the  sponsor  that  the  agent  had  been
    responsible for this error even though a  fax  was  placed  before  the
    Immigration Judge dated 15 December 2014 timed 11.05  (i.e.  after  the
    official start time on the day of the hearing).  The Immigration  Judge
    appreciated the incidence of the burden of proof in  alleged  deception
    cases (i.e. it was on the respondent) but the explanation offered by or
    on behalf of the appellant was unsatisfactory.  The failure to  explain
    the appellant's previous immigration history did  not  meet  the  basic
    level of plausibility.  The respondent had  discharged  the  burden  of
    proof in this case.

14.  Next the Immigration Judge considered Appendix FM and  specifically  E-
    ECP.4.2 of that Appendix.  In terms of the  required  English  language
    test certificate, the appellant had been offered an opportunity to take
    a free re-test but she had not taken advantage of this.   The  ECO  had
    been justified in drawing adverse inferences from this failure.

15.  It was not accepted that the relationship was  genuine  and  subsisting
    and the "Tango records", produced to support  the  claim  that  such  a
    relationship existed, post-dated the decision.  The respondent had  not
    been able to give helpful evidence herself and  the  Immigration  Judge
    felt justified in drawing adverse inferences from the lack of  concrete
    evidence of contact between the appellant and the sponsor in  the  form
    of  telephone  bills,  telephone  cards,   letters,   birthday   cards,
    anniversary cards etc.

16.  The Immigration Judge also dealt with the sponsor's ill-health,  noting
    that he was capable of flying to Pakistan (should this be  Bangladesh?)
    and taking part in the wedding ceremony.  There has been no attempt  by
    the appellant to come to  the  UK  in  the  four  years  between  their
    marriage and the application being made.  There was no evidence of  any
    money transferring between the two  parties  to  the  relationship  and
    noted that the medical evidence from Mr Evans (referred to  above)  did
    not refer to a subsisting marriage between the parties but  noted  that
    "any positive, loving relationship in Mr Uddin's life does increase the
    potential for longer term stability but this distant  relationship  has
    not embedded the normal  development  of  marriage".   The  Immigration
    Judge was of the view that the evidence obtained was unreliable  and  a
    significant motive behind the application was for the appellant to come
    to the UK to act as the sponsor's "carer".

17.  Accordingly, the Immigration Judge dismissed the appeal both under  the
    Immigration Rules and on human rights.  He found there was  no  genuine
    and subsisting relationship considered that Article 8  fell  with  this
    decision.

The Hearing

18.  At the hearing I heard submissions by both representatives.

19.  Ms Bhachu sought to maintain that the  decision  was  contrary  to  the
    Immigration Rules and the ECHR.

20.  The respondent submitted that I should look at the facts  at  the  date
    of the decision.  The respondent relied on the case of AS (Somalia) and
    said that the appellant could not raise the issues which had  not  been
    dealt  with  in  the  grounds  of  appeal.   The  grounds   of   appeal
    specifically state that the marriage was genuine and  subsisting,  that
    the Immigration Judge's assessment of it had been contrary to case  law
    and that the deception issue had not been fully explained.

21.  Ms Bhachu then submitted there were compelling and exceptional  reasons
    for deciding the case outside the Immigration Rules.  In any event, she
    said, Appendix FM was satisfied.  The Immigration  Judge  had  accepted
    that the parties were married (paragraph 21 of  his  decision).   There
    was evidence of contact and the case did not fall within the  principle
    enunciated by DR (Morocco) [2005] UKAIT 00038.  Following the  case  of
    Goudey  no  particular  quality  of  evidence  was  required  and   the
    corroboration had come from the sponsor's niece.  Sufficient weight had
    been attached to the statements by witnesses and by the sponsor himself
    that he and his wife enjoyed a good relationship.

22.  Ms Bhachu then dealt with the suitability requirements.  The agent  had
    produced a witness statement, albeit on the  day  of  the  hearing,  to
    confirm his error.  It was consistent with the evidence.  This evidence
    was not properly considered by the Immigration Judge.

23.  It was also questionable whether the  Immigration  Judge  had  properly
    considered Article 8.  The sponsor's ill-health was an exceptional  and
    compelling reason why the sponsor could not continue his  private  life
    or family life with the appellant in Bangladesh.

24.  The respondent said by reply that the appellant's  representatives  had
    not engaged with the issue about the date of decision being crucial and
    there  was  a  glaring  inconsistency  on  the  application  for  entry
    clearance.  Mr Wilding confessed not to understand the logic  of  Judge
    Lindsley's grant of permission but it was incumbent upon the  appellant
    to prove her case.  There has been earlier applications which  had  not
    been referred to on the present application and deception  was  plainly
    made out.  There was high threshold  to  surmount  before  establishing
    that the respondent would unlawfully  interfere  with  the  appellant's
    private or family life but in any  event  family  life  could  continue
    abroad.  There was nothing exceptional or compelling about this case.

25.  I allowed Ms Bhachu a last word.  She said that the  burden  rested  on
    the respondent to show that adverse credibility findings should  follow
    from the falsely completed application  form.   Post-decision  evidence
    was "highly material in this case" and it ought to lead the Tribunal to
    a different decision than that reached by the Immigration Judge.

26.  At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision as to whether  or  not
    there was a material error of law.

Conclusions

27.  The first point to make is that where an  appeal  is  made  against  an
    immigration decision consisting of a refusal of entry clearance then by
    virtue of Section 82(2)(b) and Section  85A  (2)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (found  in  Phelan  and  Gillespie  8th
    Edition (not the 9th Edition) at pages 300-303) the Tribunal  may  only
    consider evidence of the circumstances appertaining to the time of  the
    decision.  "Tribunal" is defined by Section 81 of that Act as the First-
    tier Tribunal.  Accordingly,  the  Immigration  Judge  was  correct  to
    dismiss post-decision evidence.

28.  The Immigration Judge was also correct to dismiss  the  appeal  on  the
    grounds that  the  appellant  failed  to  meet  the  suitability  entry
    clearance  requirements  of  Section   S-SEC,   EC.-P.1.1(c)   of   the
    Immigration Rules (Appendix FM).  The appellant appears to have made an
    application to join his mother in the UK which was refused on 29 August
    2006.  It is noteworthy that not only did the appellant not  truthfully
    complete the application he made 23  December  2013  by  answering  the
    question about previous applications in the  negative  when  it  should
    have been answered in the positive, but there had also been an  earlier
    refusal on a similar basis.  It appears that the appellant applied  for
    a visit visa in August 2000 but was refused.  In that  application  the
    appellant falsely stated his date of birth was 11 April  1989  when  in
    fact his claimed date of birth is 10 November 1990.  This,  apparently,
    resulted in a refusal of both that application and  an  application  by
    the appellant's mother, which also contained inaccurate  or  untruthful
    information.  The decision in 2006 was also refused.

29.  The Immigration Judge was entitled to treat this as  a  serious  matter
    and the explanation given that the appellant had relied on an agent was
    rightly rejected by the Immigration Judge.  The evidence from the agent
    consisted of a letter faxed to the Tribunal  after  the  start  of  the
    hearing on the day of the hearing.  The appellant had had  many  months
    to  prepare  his  case  and,  with  respect  to  Judge  Lindsley,   the
    Immigration Judge was entitled to reject that  evidence.   It  was  not
    necessarily in accordance with the overriding objective of trying cases
    justly and proportionally to invite the  respondent  to  apply  for  an
    adjournment.  The assertion(s) by Mr Islam in that  fax  that  that  he
    "wrongly (answered) question number 26 ... (by) answer(ing) no  instead
    yes" would be difficult for the respondent to counter in any event.  In
    my view the Immigration Judge was  entitled  to  attach  little  or  no
    weight to this evidence.

30.  It is said that the sponsor's poor state of mental health  is  said  to
    make this case an  exceptional  and  compelling  one  which  should  be
    considered  outside  the  Immigration  Rules.   However,  the  evidence
    consists of a letter from a psychiatric nurse, which makes  no  comment
    on the state of healthcare in Bangladesh.  Furthermore, the sponsor has
    lived on his own since his marriage to the appellant in 2010, a  period
    of four years at the date of the decision.  His long term prognosis was
    described as "good" by Mr Evans, a psychiatric nurse,  as  long  as  he
    continued with his "recovery plan".  Mr Evans could not comment on "the
    potential benefits of having his wife with him".  This evidence  hardly
    suggested an exceptional case at all and the Immigration  Judge  in  my
    view was entitled to reject it.  The Immigration Judge fully considered
    Article 8 in the context of the Immigration Rules as, in the  light  of
    recent authorities, he was required to do.  However,  he  rejected  the
    evidence from the appellant and Mr Evans  about  the  sponsor's  mental
    health problems considering that they  were  self-serving  and  that  a
    significant motive behind the sponsor's evidence was his desire to have
    a carer.  The sponsor had not clearly formed a  family  life  with  the
    appellant given the Immigration Judge's clear findings that  there  was
    no genuine and subsisting relationship between the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor.  Even if there were such a relationship,  as  the  Immigration
    Judge also indicated, this could continue in Bangladesh.  There were in
    truth no exceptional  or  compelling  reasons  in  this  case  and  the
    Immigration Judge was right to reject this part of the appellant's case
    also.

31.  At the heart of the  Immigration  Judge's  decision  was  a  clear  and
    sustainable finding that the  appellant  had  not  established  to  the
    required civil standard concrete evidence of contact  between  him  and
    the sponsor.  I take on board the low quality of evidence demanded, but
    the matter had been carefully considered by the ECO at the correct date
    (the date of decision).  The absence of telephone cards, birthday cards
    and such like was telling particularly in the context of someone  found
    by the Immigration Judge to be in need of  health  care.   Accordingly,
    the decision that the appellant was not in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with the sponsor was one that was open to him in  all  the
    circumstances.

32.  Therefore,  having  carefully  considered  the  arguments  advanced  on
    behalf of the appellant I am satisfied that the findings were  open  to
    the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal on the  evidence  he  heard.   The
    judge applied the correct burden and standard of proof at the  date  of
    the decision and reached a conclusion which was open to him.

Notice of Decision

The appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction or fee award was made by the First-tier Tribunal  and
those decisions stand.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

