
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  OA/04923/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 21 August 2015                    |On 07 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                 MASTER VCA
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Parkin, counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Thew (hereinafter referred to  as  the  FTTJ)  dismissing  an  appeal
       against a decision to refuse the appellant leave to enter the  United
       Kingdom as a child of a person present and settled here.

Background

    2. The appellant's application, made on 3 February 2014 under paragraphs
       297(i)(e) and (f) of the Immigration Rules,  indicated  that  he  had
       never known his father and that he had been living for 4 years with a
       Mr Conteh, his mother's friend. Mr Conteh was due to move  away;  the
       appellant had lost touch with his maternal grandmother aged 70 and if
       his application was refused he would be living alone in Sierra  Leone
       in the most exceptional circumstances. It was said that  the  sponsor
       was solely responsible for his upbringing. There had been an earlier,
       unsuccessful, application made for settlement on 22 October 2009.

    3. On 27 February 2014,  the  ECO  refused  the  said  application  with
       reference to paragraphs 297(i)(a), 297(i)(e) and (f)  of  the  Rules.
       The ECO did not accept that the appellant was related as  claimed  to
       the sponsor as it was said that his birth certificate was  issued  12
       years after his  birth.  The  ECO  was  also  dissatisfied  with  the
       evidence of contact between the appellant and sponsor. It  was  noted
       that a chat message between the appellant and sponsor made  reference
       to the appellant's "dad," whose whereabouts were said to be  unknown.
       Owing to this discrepancy, the ECO was not satisfied that the sponsor
       had sole responsibility for the appellant's upbringing. The ECO  also
       considered that the appellant had a grandmother and  aunt  in  Sierra
       Leone, as well as his father who could be responsible  for  his  care
       and  therefore  was  not  satisfied  that  there  were  serious   and
       compelling family or other considerations.

    4. The appellant appealed and in his grounds it was explained  that  the
       birth certificate was a certified copy  of  an  original  certificate
       issued soon after his birth. The reference to "dad" was said to be  a
       reference to the appellant's guardian, Mr Conteh. It was argued  that
       the sponsor was solely responsible for  the  appellant's  upbringing;
       that his aunt moved away in 2009; that his father's whereabouts since
       2000 were "unknown" and that his grandmother did not live in Freetown
       and was an elderly dependant herself.

    5. An Entry Clearance Manager (ECM)  reviewed  the  decision  to  refuse
       entry on 18 June 2014, however the decision  was  maintained  on  all
       grounds. The ECM noted that DNA test results had  been  submitted  as
       evidence of the appellant's relationship to the sponsor,  however  it
       was said than no evidence had been provided  from  the  practitioners
       who took the samples in either country to demonstrate the identity of
       those tested. With regard to the reference to "dad" in  the  message,
       the ECM accepted this "may explain  this  discrepancy"  but  remained
       dissatisfied that the whereabouts of the appellant's father  and  his
       role in his upbringing had been  adequately  explained.  Furthermore,
       the appellant had not provided any further evidence of contact, which
       would help to establish sole responsibility. It  was  said  that  the
       decision had taken into account  the  obligations  to  the  appellant
       under the ECHR.

    6. At the hearing before the FTTJ on 18 February 2015, the sponsor and a
       witness, Ms Thomas, gave evidence. The FTTJ rejected the DNA evidence
       but was prepared to  accept  that  the  appellant  and  sponsor  were
       related as claimed. The FTTJ attached no weight to  the  evidence  of
       the witness, owing to  inconsistencies  in  her  evidence.  The  FTTJ
       rejected the  claim  of  sole  responsibility  and  found  the  ECO's
       decision to be proportionate. In deciding the Article  8  claim,  the
       FTTJ considered that any family life could continue  as  it  had  and
       there was no evidence before the FTTJ to suggest that the sponsor and
       her  daughter  could  not  relocate  to  Sierra  Leone  to  join  the
       appellant.

Error of law

    7. The grounds of application argue that the FTTJ  materially  erred  in
       failing to have regard to the evidence before her, which supported  a
       finding that the sponsor was solely responsible for the appellant. It
       was also said that the FTTJ failed  to  consider  Article  8  in  its
       totality.

    8. Designated FTTJ Nicholson granted permission on the  basis  that  the
       FTTJ did not take  into  consideration  the  best  interests  of  the
       sponsor's British daughter in deciding  that  it  was  reasonable  to
       expect her to live in Sierra Leone. Permission was not refused on the
       remaining grounds, however FTTJ considered that "many lack merit."

    9. The respondent sent a response to the grant of permission, which  was
       received on 26 June 2015. The respondent opposed the appeal,  stating
       that it was open to the FTTJ to find that the sponsor never had  sole
       responsibility for the appellant given her very young age (12) at the
       time of his birth. In relation to the  one  ground  isolated  in  the
       grant of permission, the respondent was of the view that there was no
       evidence before the FTTJ that the sponsor and her daughter could  not
       relocate to Sierra Leone and in any event this was an alternative  to
       the finding that family life could continue as it had since 2002.

   10. On 15 July 2015, the Tribunal received a small  bundle  of  documents
       from the appellant, which included an  argument  that  the  FTTJ  had
       considered the wrong provisions of paragraph 297  of  the  Rules,  in
       that  the  appellant's  father  "is  dead"  and  therefore  paragraph
       297(i)(d) applied. There was no further reliance placed on  paragraph
       297 (i)(e) of  the  Rules.  In  addition  it  was  claimed  that  the
       gentleman said to be caring for the appellant, Mr Conteh, had died on
       15 May 2015. The circumstances of Mr Conteh's death were said  to  be
       that he was involved in a motorcycle accident after leaving his house
       in anger after an argument with his  wife  over  the  appellant.  The
       appellant  was  said  to  have  left  Mr  Conteh's  house  to   stay,
       temporarily, elsewhere.

   11. At the hearing before me, Mr Parkin rightly declined to rely upon the
       post-decision evidence relating to Mr Conteh.  In  addition,  he  was
       unable to point me to any part of the evidence or FTTJ's decision  in
       which the claim had been made that the appellant's  father  died,  as
       opposed to his whereabouts being unknown. Instead, Mr  Parkin  placed
       his emphasis on the reasonableness of the  FTTJ's  finding  that  the
       sponsor's British daughter, aged 10, could be expected to relocate to
       Sierra Leone. He invited me to find that no tribunal could have  come
       to that conclusion regarding a British child or  alternatively,  that
       the best interests of the child were not  properly  considered.  With
       regard to whether there was family life  between  the  appellant  and
       sponsor, Mr Parkin argued that the relationship between the appellant
       and sponsor subsisted  notwithstanding  the  years  apart.  This  was
       evidenced by a previous unsuccessful application for the  appellant's
       entry in 2009.

   12. Mr Duffy had nothing to add in respect of  the  new  claim  that  the
       appellant's father was dead.  Otherwise he stressed  that  the  Rules
       were not met and there was an absence  of  compelling  circumstances,
       which could lead to the appeal being allowed outside the Rules.  With
       regard to the FTTJ's findings in relation to the sponsor's  daughter,
       Mr Duffy argued that there was no evidence before the FTTJ to support
       a finding that it would be unreasonable to expect  her  to  accompany
       the sponsor to Sierra Leone.

   13. Mr Parkin had little to say in response, but  argued  that  the  FTTJ
       misdirected herself, notwithstanding  the  absence  of  any  evidence
       before her in relation to the sponsor's daughter.

   14. The skeleton argument forwarded by the appellant's solicitors for the
       hearing before me, placed reliance  on  paragraph  297(i)(d)  of  the
       Rules and claimed that the appellant's father was deceased. There was
       no reference to this claim or argument in the visa  application,  the
       representations accompanying that application, which were written  by
       the current solicitors, the grounds of appeal or any of the  evidence
       or submissions placed before the FTTJ.

   15. The appellant's case has always been that  his  father's  whereabouts
       were unknown, since the year 2000. Mr Parkin rightly had very  little
       to say about this late change to the basis of the appeal.  Mr  Parkin
       also had no criticisms of the findings of the FTTJ on the  issues  of
       sole responsibility or the lack of any serious and compelling  family
       or other considerations for making the  exclusion  of  the  appellant
       undesirable.

   16. In view of the fact that the appellant was unable to demonstrate that
       he met the requirements of the Rules, it was necessary for compelling
       reasons to be shown to justify  a  positive  conclusion  outside  the
       Rules. Nonetheless, in the absence of any argument  to  that  effect,
       the FTTJ applied the principles in Razgar and proceeded on the  basis
       that  there  was  family  life  between  the  appellant  and  sponsor
       notwithstanding the fact that she left Sierra Leone  without  him  in
       the year 2002 and had not visited him since 2011.

   17. In considering proportionality,  the  FTTJ  gave  sound  reasons  for
       finding that it was open to the appellant  and  sponsor  to  continue
       their family life as it had been over the preceding twelve years  or,
       alternatively, there being no evidence otherwise, the sponsor and her
       daughter could relocate to Sierra Leone "if she wished to do so."

   18. While the FTTJ did not set out the best interests  of  the  sponsor's
       daughter, there was no evidence or arguments before her, which  could
       advance a case that it was  or  was  not  in  her  best  interest  to
       relocate to  Sierra  Leone.  It  was  only  in  the  application  for
       permission that any evidence regarding the sponsor's daughter was put
       forward. I should add that additional and recent evidence relating to
       the father of that child was also sent to this tribunal  on  15  July
       2015. However, none of that information was before the FTTJ.

   19. It is not automatically the case that it would not  be  in  the  best
       interests of a British child aged 9 (as she was at the  time  of  the
       decision) to live in the country of her mother's birth. In  addition,
       it was not open to the FTTJ to speculate about any  reasons  why  the
       best interests of the sponsor's daughter would be for her  to  remain
       in the United Kingdom. In any event this  was  not  the  FTTJ's  main
       finding in relation to Article 8 and her findings made it clear  that
       this was an option open to the sponsor if she wished to do so. It  is
       clear that the FTTJ was  adopting  a  belt  and  braces  approach  in
       considering the option of  family  life  being  continued  in  Sierra
       Leone.

   20. Given that the FTTJ's finding regarding the lack compelling family or
       other considerations was  not  challenged  and  the  absence  of  any
       argument regarding compelling considerations at  the  hearing  before
       me, I find that  it  could  not  be  said  that  the  FTTJ  erred  in
       concluding that the decision to refuse the appellant leave  to  enter
       the United Kingdom was proportionate.

   21. The FTTJ made no material error of law and her decision is upheld.

   22. No anonymity direction was made by the FTTJ. In view of the fact that
       the appellant was a minor at the time of the decision, I consider  it
       appropriate to make the following anonymity direction:

       "Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 (SI 2008/269) I  make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
       Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings
       or any form of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
       identify the original appellant. This direction applies  to,  amongst
       others, all parties. Any failure to comply with this direction  could
       give rise to contempt of court proceedings. "

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

The FTTJ's decision is upheld.


Signed   Date: 30 August 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

