
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/04297/2013
                                                               OA/04299/2013
                                                               OA/04301/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 28th May 2014                                |On 4th June 2014           |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER

                                   Between

                  miss Bedhane Jarso dida (First appellant)
                    mr dida jarso dida (second appellant)
                 miss safiya halake bariso (third appellant)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Singh
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. The Appellants born on 20th June 1997, 15th April 1999 and 1st February
    1996 respectively are all citizens of  Ethiopia.   The  Appellants  are
    represented by Mr Singh.  The Respondent was represented by Mr McVeety,
    a Home Office Presenting Officer.



Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellants had all made application for entry clearance to  the  UK
    as the children of Mr Fayo and Mrs Bariso who  were  married  and  were
    refugees.   That  application  made  under  paragraph   352D   of   the
    Immigration  Rules  was  refused  by  the  Respondent.    Further   the
    Respondent had refused the applications under paragraph 320(7A) of  the
    Immigration Rules on the basis  that  the  Appellants  had  used  false
    documents i.e. their birth certificates were forgeries.

 3. The Appellants had appealed that decision and their appeal was heard by
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Thorne sitting at  Manchester  on  3rd
    December 2013.  He had dismissed their appeal.

 4. The Appellants made application for permission to appeal that  decision
    and the Grounds of Appeal form documents on file.

 5. Permission to appeal was refused by Upper Tribunal Judge Deans on  20th
    January 2014.  Further permission was sought and permission  to  appeal
    was granted on 26th March 2014 and directions were issued in respect of
    the consideration of  this  case.   This  matter  comes  before  me  in
    accordance with those directions.

Submissions on Behalf of the Appellants

 6. Mr Singh submitted in summary that paragraph  320  of  the  Immigration
    Rules did not apply to paragraph 352D contained within part 11  of  the
    Immigration Rules and it was an error of law therefore for the judge to
    have refused this  case  under  paragraph  320(7A).   Secondly  it  was
    submitted that it was wrong of the judge to have refused the case under
    the terms of paragraph 352D(ii) of the Immigration Rules.

Submissions on Behalf of the Respondent

 7. Mr McVeety had some uncertainty with regards to  the  first  submission
    but submitted that the judge had made no error of law in terms  of  his
    findings under paragraph 352D(ii).

 8. At the conclusion I reserved my decision to consider these matters.   I
    now provide that decision with my reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 9. The judge had carefully considered the  terms  of  paragraph  A320  and
    paragraph 320 of the Immigration Rules and concluded that because there
    was no specific exemption contained therein paragraph  320  applied  to
    paragraph 352D of the Immigration Rules.

10. Paragraph 320 is contained in part 9 of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    heading for part 9 states "General grounds for  the  refusal  of  entry
    clearance, leave to enter, leave to remain, variation of leave to enter
    or remain and curtailment of leave in the UK".  That heading  therefore
    gives a wide and unfettered basis for the general  grounds  of  refusal
    contained within part 9 unless subsequently narrowed.  That heading was
    inserted on 12th August 2010.

11. Under that heading is now inserted paragraph A320.  That paragraph  was
    inserted on 9th July 2012 at the same time as the  significant  changes
    to the Immigration Rules were made.   Paragraph  A320  in  broad  terms
    removes  the  application  of  paragraph  320  to  family/private  life
    applications made  under  Appendix  FM  and  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  It would appear the purpose of paragraph A320 is to
    exclude general grounds of refusal from those  specific  parts  of  the
    Immigration Rules so  that  family/private  life  applications  can  be
    considered on a standalone basis and as a complete  code  within  those
    parts of the Immigration Rules.

12. Therefore neither the General heading inserted in August 2010  nor  the
    new introductory paragraph A320 inserted in July 2012 restrict, on  the
    face of it, the application of paragraph 320 to paragraph 352D  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

13. Paragraph 320 itself, which is  of  much  longer  standing  within  the
    Immigration Rules than those matters  referred  to  above,  states  "In
    addition to the grounds for refusal of  entry  clearance  or  leave  to
    enter set out in parts 2 to 8 of these Rules and subject  to  paragraph
    321 below, the following grounds for the refusal of entry clearance  or
    leave to enter apply".  Mr Singh interprets that to mean paragraph  320
    can only apply to parts 2 to 8 of the Immigration Rules.   Whilst  that
    is one possible interpretation of that  heading  it  is  not  the  only
    interpretation.  It  could  perhaps  more  readily  be  interpreted  as
    meaning that, additional to specific grounds of refusal within specific
    Rules contained within parts 2 to  8  there  are  generally  applicable
    overarching grounds of refusal  contained  within  paragraph  320  that
    apply to all Immigration  Rules  unless  specifically  excluded.   That
    interpretation is also consistent with the heading inserted  in  August
    2010 referred to above.

14. I have been provided with no  authority  on  this  matter  and  I  note
    neither was the First-tier Judge.

15. Unfortunately as with much legislation in this jurisdiction it  is  not
    written in a simple and clear style.  There is  also  the  disadvantage
    that because of the plethora of legislative  amendments  there  is  the
    prospect   of   certain   matters   being   overlooked   resulting   in
    incompatibility.

16. Looking beyond parts 2 to 8 of the Immigration Rules, part 10 is a very
    short section dealing with registration with the police, part 11  deals
    with asylum and  applications  and  procedures  following  from  asylum
    claims, part 12 deals with procedure and rights of appeal  and  finally
    part 13 deals with deportation.

17. It is not the general experience in this jurisdiction that in terms  of
    applications for asylum refusal  of  such  applications  is  made  with
    reference to paragraph 320(7A) or indeed other aspects of paragraph 320
    of the Immigration  Rules.   Indeed  if  paragraph  320  was  routinely
    applied to asylum applications there would be a significant  change  in
    the manner in  which  such  cases  were  examined.   Further  to  apply
    paragraph 320 to asylum claims  would  potentially  breach  the  United
    Kingdom's obligations under the Geneva Convention.  In my experience  I
    have not come across any asylum case where it has been  refused  wholly
    or in part by reference to paragraph  320  of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    Therefore in terms  of  practise  it  would  seem  most  unlikely  that
    paragraph 320(7A) applies to asylum claims which are  contained  within
    part 11 of the Immigration Rules.  Paragraph 352D,  is  also  contained
    within part 11 of the Immigration Rules and forms  part  of  the  Rules
    dealing with asylum claims.

18. I have concluded therefore, that whilst the general heading of part  9,
    paragraph A320 and the heading for paragraph 320 itself do  not  appear
    to  restrict  themselves  merely  to  parts  2  to  8,  to  extend  the
    application of paragraph 320 to asylum provisions contained within part
    11  would  be  potentially  incompatible  with  the  United   Kingdom's
    international obligations and something that by experience and practise
    indicates is not done.  In the absence of case  law  provided  on  this
    matter I have therefore sought to read the  Rules  in  a  way  that  is
    compatible with practise and practical application.   It  is  in  those
    circumstances  that  I  find  paragraph  320(7A)  does  not  apply   to
    applications under paragraph 352D of the Immigration Rules.

19. Paragraph 352D itself contains certain requirements to be met before  a
    person is granted entry clearance.  The  burden  of  proof  is  on  the
    Appellant  and  the  standard  of  proof  in  such  a  case  under  the
    Immigration Rules is a balance  of  probability.   The  requirement  of
    paragraph 352D(ii) is the Appellant is under the age of 18.  The  judge
    had examined all the  documentary  and  oral  evidence  presented.   He
    concluded at paragraph  14  that  the  birth  certificates  were  crude
    forgeries, Tippex being used  to  change  significantly  the  dates  of
    birth.  He was entitled to conclude they were  forgeries.   Indeed  the
    Appellants' representative accepted that they were false documents.  In
    terms of the passports the Sponsor  father  himself  in  oral  evidence
    accepted that  the  dates  of  birth  on  the  birth  certificates  and
    passports did not match and further he said that  the  dates  of  birth
    contained within two of the Appellants' passports were in  fact  wrong.
    It was also the case that different dates of birth appeared on the Visa
    Application Forms.

20. In those circumstances the judge was  entitled  to  conclude  that  the
    Appellants had not demonstrated that on balance they were below the age
    of 18 at the date of application.

21. I conclude therefore that whilst the legislation is not entirely  clear
    and as written may point in  one  particular  direction,  reading  that
    legislation in a pragmatic manner and for the reasons provided above  I
    find that paragraph 320(7A) does not apply to part 11 (asylum)  of  the
    Immigration Rules  and  therefore  does  not  apply  in  this  case  to
    paragraph 352D.  To that extent the judge made an error of law.  It  is
    unnecessary for me to remake the decision firstly  because  my  finding
    does  not  require  an  examination   of   evidence   but   simply   an
    interpretation of the legislation as given above.  However, no error of
    law was made by the judge in his finding that the  Appellants  did  not
    meet the specific requirements of paragraph 352D(ii) of the Immigration
    Rules.



Decision

22. An error of law was made by the First-tier  Tribunal  in  finding  that
    paragraph 320(7A) of the Immigration Rules applied to this case and  to
    that extent I set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    conclude that such paragraph does not apply in this  case.   However  I
    uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal in concluding  that  the
    Appellants failed to meet the requirements of paragraph 352D(ii) of the
    Immigration Rules and find no error of law was made by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in that respect.

    No anonymity order is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever

