

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/04309/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 29th July 2013                           |On : 30th July 2013          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge McKee


                                   Between

                        babatunde akinkunmi bamidele

                                                                  Respondent
                                     and

                       Entry Clearance Officer, Lagos

                                                                   Appellant


Representation:

For the Respondent:    Lady G. Tetteh, instructed by Hedva Immigration
Advice UK
For the Appellant:     Miss Alice Holmes of the Specialist Appeals Team


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   Mr Bamidele, who is the respondent before the Upper Tribunal, has  been
    trying for a number of years to gain admission to the United Kingdom as
    the husband of Olubukola Oyewole ('the sponsor'), a British citizen  of
    Nigerian origin.  The couple now have two children,  British  citizens,
    aged 6 and 3 years old respectively at the date of the  hearing  before
    the First-tier Tribunal on 22nd May 2013, but some 16 months younger at
    the date of decision - a fact which lies at the heart  of  the  current
    appeal.

2.   After two previous refusals, Mr Bamidele was  refused  entry  clearance
    again on 6th January 2012, and his appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    was dismissed by Judge P.J.M. Hollingworth  after  a  hearing  on  30th
    November 2012.  An appeal to the Upper Tribunal succeeded in  part,  in
    that it was remitted to the First-tier Tribunal on  Article  8  grounds
    only, for reasons set out by Upper Tribunal Judge King in a 'Decision &
    Directions' dated 8th April 2013.  Judge Stokes allowed the  appeal  on
    this basis, and this time it was the Entry Clearance Officer who sought
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

3.   Judge Brunnen granted permission, although  only  one  of  the  grounds
    struck him as amounting to more than disagreement  with  Judge  Stokes'
    conclusions, and the matter thus came before me,  initially  to  decide
    whether Judge Stokes had made a material error of  law,  requiring  her
    determination to be set aside.  Very  sensibly,  Miss  Holmes  did  not
    adopt the grounds which had failed to impress Judge Brunnen.   But  she
    did advance the argument that, in weighing the factors on Mr Bamidele's
    side of the Article 8 balance, Judge Stokes had taken account of  post-
    decision matters which were not among "the  circumstances  appertaining
    at the time of the decision", and which were  therefore  excluded  from
    consideration by section 85A(2) of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.

4.   These forbidden factors were the development of the two children  since
    the date of decision in January 2012, and the nursing course which  the
    sponsor wished to complete in the  UK.   Judge  Stokes  numbered  these
    factors among the reasons why she did not think it reasonable to expect
    the sponsor and the children to relocate to Nigeria in order  to  enjoy
    family life with their husband/ father.  In response,  Lady  G.  Tetteh
    argued that there was no real difference in the circumstances obtaining
    at the date of decision and at the date  of  hearing,  as  far  as  the
    children's development and the sponsor's studies were  concerned.   The
    children had been born in the UK and were simply continuing their lives
    in the country of their birth, while it so happened that  the  date  of
    decision fell during an interlude in  the  sponsor's  nursing  studies,
    which she had been carrying on before the  date  of  decision  and  had
    resumed after that date.

Findings

5.   As explained by Ouseley J in DR (Morocco)* [2005]  UKIAT  38,  evidence
    of  what  happened  after  the  refusal  of  entry  clearance  is   not
    inadmissible if it sheds light on the circumstances  obtaining  at  the
    date of that refusal.  It might be said that  what  the  children  have
    been doing since January 2012  (going  to  primary  school  or  nursery
    school)  formed  part  of  their  circumstances  at  that  time,   such
    educational progression being an almost inevitable consequence of being
    a child in England.  But if it was an error of law to take  account  of
    this progression, it was certainly not a material error.  Judge  Stokes
    regarded the fact that the children "are British citizens and were born
    and have lived all their lives here"  as  "of  particular  importance."
    She cited  ZH  (Tanzania)  for  this  proposition,  and  was  perfectly
    entitled to reach  the  conclusion  that  the  best  interests  of  the
    children would be served by being brought up  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    Although the judge did not cite Zambrano, it is  clearly  of  relevance
    that the children are also citizens of the European Union, and entitled
    to be brought up in the territory of the Union.

6.   It cannot be maintained that the judge gave disproportionate weight  to
    the best interests of the children in this case.   That  the  sponsor's
    nursing studies would be resumed was perhaps not something which  could
    be numbered among the circumstances obtaining at the date of  decision,
    but it is not something  which  seriously  detracts  from  the  overall
    soundness of the First-tier determination.  It  is,  in  my  respectful
    view, a good determination, which takes account of the relevant factors
    in performing the Article  8  balancing  exercise  and  gives  adequate
    reasons for coming down  on  one  side  rather  than  the  other.   The
    question of proportionality was a matter for assessment by  the  judge.
    Her conclusion was neither irrational nor in any other way defective in
    public law terms.




     DECISION

      The  Entry  Clearance  Officer's  appeal   is   dismissed,   and   the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal therefore stands.


Richard McKee
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                              29th July 2013



