
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-dh-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/04772/2015
                                                               OA/04968/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8th December 2016                 |On 4th January 2017                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                   AC & HC
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                         The Entry Clearance Officer
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Ahmed, Counsel instructed on their behalf
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The first and second Appellants are citizens of the Philippines and are
    sisters.

 2. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants
    are granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings  shall  directly
    or indirectly identify them  or  any  member  of  their  family.   This
    direction applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure
    to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
    proceedings.

 3. The Appellants, with permission appeal the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Macdonald) who, in a determination promulgated on  21st
    July 2016 dismissed their appeals against the  decision  of  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer to refuse entry clearance  for  them  to  join  their
    mother and Sponsor in the United Kingdom.

 4. The history is set out  within  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.   On  30th  December  2014  both  Appellants   made   similar
    applications to enter the United Kingdom as the minor children  of  the
    Sponsor, their mother who is settled  in  the  United  Kingdom.   Those
    applications were refused by the Entry Clearance Officer in notices  of
    decision dated 11th February 2015.  The Entry Clearance Officer applied
    paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules for leave to  enter  the  United
    Kingdom.

 5.   The reasons given for refusing their respective applications  are  in
    the same format for  each  of  the  applicants.   The  reasons  can  be
    summarised as follows.  The Entry Clearance Officer was  not  satisfied
    in relation to both Appellants that their mother, the Sponsor, had  had
    sole responsibility for their upbringing.  At the date of the  decision
    the first Appellant was 17 years and  10  months  old  and  the  second
    Appellant was 15 years and 10  months  old.   It  was  noted  that  the
    Sponsor had  left  the  Philippines  in  2004  to  work  abroad  before
    travelling to the UK in 2006 and that since that time she had  remained
    permanently overseas.  The Entry Clearance Officer went on to  consider
    the telephone interview with the maternal grandmother who it was stated
    was their legal guardian.  The Entry  Clearance  Officer  recorded  the
    grandmother's evidence confirming that the children had lived with  her
    for their entire life and whilst it was acknowledged that  the  Sponsor
    was stated to have lived in the  same  house  until  the  time  of  her
    departure, the Entry Clearance  Officer  considered  that  it  was  the
    grandmother who had been the most consistent caregiver  throughout  the
    applicant's lives.   Based  on  the  information  provided,  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer did accept that their father had played  no  part  in
    their lives since 2003.  The Entry Clearance Officer made reference  to
    the mother sponsoring their elder brother to join her in the UK in 2011
    shortly before  his  18th  birthday.   It  was  acknowledged  that  the
    application  was  refused  initially  but   that   the   decision   was
    successfully appealed.  It was considered pertinent that  their  mother
    chose not to sponsor either of the two applicants to join her  at  that
    time which could be considered unusual for someone who states  to  have
    sole  responsibility  for  the  applicant's  upbringing.    The   Entry
    Clearance Officer went on to consider the contents of the interview and
    was satisfied that she had attended parent/teacher meetings and was the
    main point of contact for school for emergencies or otherwise.  She was
    said to be in good health and he  was  satisfied  that  there  were  no
    significant dependence on their mother and no compelling reason for the
    current care arrangements not to be maintained.   The  Entry  Clearance
    Officer accepted that their mother provided them with financial support
    and acknowledged evidence of remittances in 2010 and throughout 2012 to
    2014.  Whilst it was accepted that she had visited the Philippines, the
    immigration stamps in the passport only showed evidence  of  travel  in
    2008, 2009, and 2011.  The Entry Clearance  Officer,  when  considering
    the evidence did not find that the applicants had provided evidence  to
    show that their mother had played any role  in  the  key  decisions  in
    their lives, including education and healthcare.

 6. The Entry Clearance Officer also did not find  that  the  accommodation
    that was available was adequate for four people.  The  Entry  Clearance
    Officer also  was  not  satisfied  that  there  were  any  serious  and
    compelling family or other considerations which  made  their  exclusion
    from the UK undesirable.  Thus the applications were refused.

 7.  The Appellants sought to appeal those decisions and the  appeals  came
    before the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Macdonald).  In  a  determination
    promulgated on 21st July 2016  and  after  hearing  evidence  from  the
    Sponsor, he reached the conclusion on the evidence before him that  the
    Sponsor did not have sole responsibility for either applicant and  that
    that lay with their grandmother who had  been  their  consistent  carer
    since they were aged 5 and 7.  The judge considered the evidence before
    him including letters from the school, the judge considered  the  level
    of visits and the type of contact that there had been and also  medical
    evidence provided in relation to the grandmother.  The judge found that
    despite the claimed health conditions and the  inability  to  care  for
    both applicants, that the Sponsor had not returned to  the  Philippines
    to  make  any  other  arrangements  and  that  when   interviewed   the
    grandmother had said that she was in good  health.   Thus  he  was  not
    satisfied that they could meet paragraph 297(e).

 8. The judge went on to consider  whether  they  could  satisfy  paragraph
    297(f) on the basis that there were serious and  compelling  family  or
    other  considerations  which  made  the  exclusion  of  the  Appellants
    undesirable.  At paragraphs 93 to 98 the judge was not able to identify
    any serious and compelling family or  other  considerations.   In  this
    context he took into account the assertion made  that  the  Appellants'
    grandmother would be unable to care for them but found that  there  had
    been no details provided in this regard.  He  took  into  account  that
    both Appellants were teenagers, were attending school  and  were  still
    being cared for by their grandmother and no explanation of why the care
    provided by her was inadequate had been advanced during the appeal.  He
    found both children were in  good  health  and  considered  their  best
    interests in the light  of  their  age  and  circumstances;  the  first
    Appellant being 17 years and 10 months at the date of decision  and  15
    years and 10 months for the second Appellant.  He noted and  took  into
    account that they had always lived in the Philippines, they last  lived
    with their mother in 2004 and had seen her sporadically since then  and
    they had been educated there.  Whilst he  found  the  general  starting
    point is that children are better off living with a parent but in  this
    case when balanced against all the  factual  considerations,  he  found
    that they could not satisfy paragraph 297(f).

 9. The Appellant sought permission to appeal the decision  and  permission
    was granted on 17th November 2016.  Thus the  appeal  came  before  the
    Upper Tribunal to consider whether or not the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge had made an error on a point of law.

10. I had the advantage of hearing submissions from  each  of  the  parties
    which I will consider when setting out my conclusions on the issues.

Ground 1

11. Mr Ahmed submitted that the judge erred in  law  when  considering  the
    issue of sole responsibility and  that  he  should  have  assessed  the
    evidence before him in  accordance  with  the  guidance  given  in  the
    decision of the Tribunal in TD (297(i)(e): "sole responsibility") Yemen
    [2006] UKAIT 00049.  He invited the Tribunal to  consider  the  extract
    from that decision as set  out  in  the  grounds  at  paragraph  6  and
    submitted that in this case the judge had failed to take account of sub-
    paragraph (iii) which reads as follows:-

         "'Responsibility' for a child's upbringing  may  be  undertaken  by
         individuals other than a child's parents and may be shared  between
         different individuals: which may particularly arise where the child
         remains in its own country whilst the only parent involved  in  its
         life travels to and lives in the UK."

12. In this respect he submitted that the evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was that the applicants' grandmother provided  the  day-to-day
    care of the  children  but  that  their  mother  retained  the  overall
    responsibility and that the judge had failed to take this into account,
    that this was a situation envisaged in TD (Yemen) and that  the  parent
    can have sole responsibility whilst they may  be  separated  over  many
    years.  In this case, he submitted that if the judge had  followed  the
    criteria at (iii) he would not have placed such emphasis on  the  facts
    that they had been separated for such a long period and  that  she  had
    not visited them.

13. He further submitted that  there  was  evidence  before  the  judge  of
    potential change in circumstances due to the grandmother's  ill  health
    and that TD (Yemen) took into account sudden changes of responsibility.
     He submitted that the grandmother who had cared for the  children  was
    now no longer able to do that.

14. I have considered with care the  submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant both in the written grounds and the oral submissions made  by
    Mr Ahmed.  Whilst the judge did not expressly refer to the decision  of
    TD (Yemen) in his determination, it is plain, as  Mr  Melvin  submitted
    that when reading  the  determination  he  firmly  had  in  mind  those
    principles when considering the issue of sole responsibility as set out
    at paragraph 82 and the findings that he went on to make at  paragraphs
    82 to  91.   In  the  determination  he  made  the  following  relevant
    findings; that the Appellants' mother had left her country of origin in
    2004 when  the  Appellants  were  aged  7  and  5  years  respectively.
    Thereafter they had been brought up by their maternal grandmother on  a
    day-to-day basis and had  attended  school  and  at  the  date  of  the
    applications they were 17 years 10 months and 15 years and  10  months.
    The judge accepted that the Appellants' mother had made remittances  to
    the Philippines for their financial  support.   Whilst  the  judge  had
    found that the Appellants' grandmother was the one providing the day-to-
    day care, he did not fall into the error as submitted by  Mr  Ahmed  by
    failing to take into account sub-paragraph (iii) in TD  (Yemen).   That
    makes it clear that responsibility for  a  child's  upbringing  may  be
    undertaken by individuals other than a child's parents and  indeed  may
    be shared between different individuals.  However that has to  be  read
    in conjunction with paragraphs (vi), (vii),  (viii)  and  (ix).   Those
    paragraphs read as follows:-

         "(vi)    However the issue of sole responsibility  is  not  just  a
              matter between the parents.  So even if  there  is  only  one
              parent involved in the child's upbringing,  that  parent  may
              not have sole responsibility.

         (vii)     In  the  circumstances  likely   to   arise,   day-to-day
              responsibility (or decision making) for the  child's  welfare
              may necessarily be shared with others (such as  relatives  or
              friends) because of the geographical separation  between  the
              parent and child.

         (viii)   That, however, does not prevent  the  parent  having  sole
              responsibility within the meaning of the Rules.

         (ix)  The  test  is,  not  whether  anyone  else   has   day-to-day
              responsibility, but whether the parent has continuing control
              and direction of the child's upbringing including making  all
              the  important  decisions  in  the  child's  life.   If  not,
              responsibility is shared and so not 'sole'."

15. The test the judge therefore had to apply was not whether someone  else
    had  the  day-to-day  responsibility  (that  is  in   this   case   the
    grandmother) but  whether  the  parent  (the  Sponsor)  had  continuing
    control and direction of the children's upbringing and making  all  the
    important decisions in their lives.  However the  judge  found  on  the
    evidence that the applicants' grandmother had not only been the one who
    had taken day-to-day responsibility for the applicants' needs but  also
    was the one who had had the control and  direction  of  the  children's
    lives and had made all the important decisions.  At paragraph  [87]  he
    made  reference  to  the  very  significant  gaps   in   the   Facebook
    communications.  The judge found on the evidence that the  Sponsor  had
    had little involvement with the school.  He found  that  there  was  no
    evidence that the Sponsor had involved  herself  with  the  Appellants'
    teachers or that she had been  involved  in  mentoring  them  or  being
    directly involved in  either  applicant's  or  Appellant's  educational
    needs.  The judge found it  significant  that  the  second  Appellant's
    teacher, who had provided a letter about her, had made no reference  to
    the Sponsor (paragraph 88).

16. Whilst the judge had taken into account that the Sponsor has  not  seen
    them since 2011 (five years) and  had  rejected  her  reasons  for  not
    visiting at [89], I am satisfied that the judge did not  consider  that
    in isolation from the relevant paragraphs in TD (Yemen) and  that  this
    was a factor which he weighed in the balance but for  the  reasons  set
    out at paragraphs 86 to 89, the applicants had  not  demonstrated  that
    the  Sponsor  had  had  continuing  control  and  direction  for  their
    upbringing and that this had lay with the grandmother.

17. Those were findings that were wholly open to the judge to make  on  the
    evidence and it has therefore not been demonstrated that the judge made
    any error of law in his approach to the issue of sole responsibility as
    the grounds have asserted.

18. The grounds also submit that the judge failed to take into account  the
    potential change of circumstances based on  the  grandmother's  health.
    The judge was required to consider the circumstances as at the date  of
    the  decision  and  the  evidence  that  had  been  provided  with  the
    application.  The evidence as set out at  [57]  in  which  the  Sponsor
    stated  that  she  had  produced  no  updating   evidence   about   the
    grandmother's medical condition because she had said that she was  much
    the same and was "keeping going".  The judge's findings are at [91] and
    he took into account the Sponsor's evidence that  the  grandmother  was
    not well.  The written evidence before him made reference to her having
    had a stroke in 2012, two years before the applications were  made  and
    there was no updating evidence before the judge  (see  57).   What  the
    judge did have was an interview record which had taken place  with  the
    grandmother and the Entry Clearance Officer on 10th  February  2015  in
    which she was expressly asked about her health and she  said  that  she
    was in good health.  In those circumstances it was open to the judge to
    find that in conjunction with the lack of updating medical evidence, or
    evidence that went to the circumstances at the date  of  decision,  the
    grandmother's own evidence that she was in good health and the  finding
    made at [91] that despite any previous illness,  the  Sponsor  had  not
    returned to the Philippines or seen  her  mother  since  that  illness.
    Those matters when taken together did not  demonstrate  any  change  of
    circumstances, potential or otherwise.  Thus the judge was entitled  to
    find that notwithstanding her illness in 2012 that she had continued to
    be solely responsible for the children not only  for  their  day-to-day
    care but that she had been the one making the  important  decisions  in
    the applicants' lives.

19. The second ground relied on  is  that  the  judge  failed  to  properly
    consider paragraph 297(i)(f) and whether there were  any  "serious  and
    compelling or other considerations which make exclusion of the children
    undesirable".

20. Mr Ahmed submits that  in  this  context  there  was  evidence  of  the
    grandmother having been unwell and having had dizziness  and  a  stroke
    and that this was sufficient for the  Appellants  to  fall  within  the
    "serious and compelling" circumstances.  The grounds cite the  decision
    of Mundeba (Section 55 and paragraph 297(i)(f)) [2013] UKUT 00088 (IAC)
    at paragraph 36.  The grounds also make reference to paragraph 38 which
    reads as follows:-

         "As a starting point the best interests of the  child  are  usually
         best served by being with both or at least one of the parents."

21. In this context it  is  submitted  in  the  written  grounds  that  the
    circumstances relating  to  the  parents  and  that  the  physical  and
    emotional factors may be taken into account.  It is submitted that  the
    applicants' relationship with their father had  broken  down  and  that
    their mother was the only one who was willing  and  able  to  care  for
    them.  It also makes reference to the applicants' brother  having  been
    granted entry clearance and sole responsibility and that he should  not
    be separated from the applicants.

22. The judge gave consideration to whether the  applicants  could  satisfy
    paragraph 297(i)(f) and did so by citing and taking  into  account  the
    decision of Mundeba which is set out at [78].  The  decision  sets  out
    that whilst the Section 55 duty applies only to children within the UK,
    the IDIs invite Entry Clearance Officers to consider the guidance  when
    making their decisions.  The family considerations  require  evaluation
    of  the  child's  welfare,  including  emotional   needs   and   "other
    considerations" come into play where  there  are  other  aspects  of  a
    child's life which are "serious and compelling" for  example  where  an
    applicant is living in an unacceptable social and economic environment.
     The decision makes it plain  that  "the  focus  needs  to  be  on  the
    circumstances of the child in the light  of  his  or  her  age,  social
    background and developmental history and will  involve  enquiry  as  to
    whether, there is evidence of neglect or abuse, there are  unmet  needs
    that should be catered for, that there are stable arrangements for  the
    child's physical care.  The assessment involves a consideration  as  to
    whether the combination of circumstances are sufficiently  serious  and
    compelling to require admission.

23. The judge also made reference to other  case  law  dealing  with  these
    issues.

24. I am satisfied that the judge did apply the guidance and the principles
    of the case of Mundeba to the factual circumstances  that  were  before
    him.  At [93] he stated that he could  not  identify  any  serious  and
    compelling family or other considerations.  He took  into  account  the
    point now relied on by Mr Ahmed namely the  grandmother's  ill  health,
    but in the light of the findings made on the evidence, it was  open  to
    him to find that there had been no details provided of any inability on
    her part to provide care for either applicant (see  [93]).   The  judge
    also took into account the circumstances of  the  applicants  including
    their age, social background and developmental history  and  took  into
    account that at the time of the applications they were  teenagers  aged
    17 and 15, were attending school and were  being  cared  for  by  their
    grandmother and there had been  no  explanation  as  to  why  the  care
    provided was inadequate.  He took into account that the  children  were
    in good health.   He  also  considered  at  [96]  the  children's  best
    interests in the light of their age and took into account that they had
    always lived in the Philippines and had last lived with their mother in
    2004 and that she had only seen the sporadically since then.   He  took
    into account that they had been educated in the country of nationality.

25. Whilst the grounds set out paragraph 38 of Mundeba, that  the  starting
    point is that the best interests are usually served by being with  both
    or at least one of their parents, the grounds do not go on to cite  the
    next line which states as follows:-

         "Continuity of residence is another factor, change in the place  of
         residence where a child has grown up for a number  of  years  where
         socially aware is important."

    Thus the Tribunal expressly contemplated the possibility that there may
    well be situations where the best  interests  of  the  child  are  best
    served by remaining where they are, with  other  family  members.   The
    judge considered this against the background that they  had  not  lived
    with their mother for twelve years and that they have spent  all  their
    formative years with their grandmother in their country of nationality.
     Thus the judge had made adequate findings for reaching the  conclusion
    on the evidence that they could not meet the test set out in  paragraph
    297(i)(f).  In his submissions, Mr Ahmed did  not  identify  any  other
    serious or compelling circumstances that the judge  did  not  consider.
    He did however raise the issue  of  the  Appellants'  brother  who  was
    granted entry clearance some years before  the  applicants  made  their
    applications.  He submitted that the  judge  was  aware  of  the  elder
    sibling being granted entry clearance (see paragraph 15) and that there
    had been no issue as to sole responsibility for him and that the  judge
    had not considered this.

26. When asked  if  the  Sponsor  provided  any  evidence  in  this  regard
    including the determination either with the application or  before  the
    judge or when the grounds were settled, he was not sure.  However after
    taking instructions, the determination had not been placed  before  the
    judge nor had it been made available at any time thereafter,  including
    for the purposes of this application.

27. An error of law is required to be established and whilst  it  is  right
    the judge was aware that the applicants' brother had been granted entry
    clearance, their case was not being advanced on  the  basis  that  they
    were in the same position or that their applications should be  treated
    analogously.  As Mr Melvin submits that application made on  behalf  of
    their sibling was made in 2010, there was a considerable  gap  of  five
    years,  the  applicants  were  of  a  different  gender  and  different
    circumstances may have applied  as  between  the  siblings.   In  those
    circumstances it could not be said that the judge was in error  in  not
    considering that as a compelling circumstance as the factual basis  has
    not been established in any way.  There  was  no  evidence  before  the
    judge in relation to  the  applicants'  sibling.   There  is  still  no
    evidence before this Tribunal to support any argument advanced in  this
    way.  Consequently the judge's  conclusions  upon  paragraph  297(i)(f)
    were open to him and he  gave  adequate  and  sustainable  reasons  for
    reaching the findings of fact that he did  on  the  evidence  that  was
    before him.

28. Whilst the judge did not go on to consider Article 8, Mr Ahmed conceded
    that if the judge's  findings  on  sole  responsibility  and  paragraph
    297(i)(f) were properly open to the judge to make on the evidence, then
    the applicants could not realistically establish a case  on  Article  8
    grounds.  I agree.   The  judge,  in  the  earlier  paragraphs  of  the
    determination had dealt with whether there were any circumstances which
    could be equally relevant under any Article 8 analysis such as  whether
    there were any "compelling circumstances" which included  consideration
    of the best interests of both applicants in the light of their age  and
    their circumstances.  Consequently in the light of those findings  made
    as set out and referred to in the previous paragraphs, it has not  been
    established that the judge could have reached any  other  outcome  when
    considering the same facts on Article 8.  Consequently the grounds  are
    not made out and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not demonstrate the  making  of
an error on a point of law and  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
shall stand.  The appeals are dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

