
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/04391/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On the 16th September 2015           |On the 5th October 2015               |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before:

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY


                                  Between:

                         MR MOHAMED HUSSEIN IBRAHIM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K  Stott  (Solicitor  at  Messrs  Pickup  &  Scott
Solicitors)
For  the  Respondent:     Miss  Brocklesby-Weller  (Home  Office  Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is the Respondent's the Entry Clearance Officer  appeal  against
       the decision of First-Tier Tribunal Judge O'Hagan promulgated on 11th
       March 2015, in which she allowed the Appellant's appeal  against  the
       Respondent's decision to refuse the Appellant entry clearance on  the
       basis of Article 8 outside of the Immigration Rules. However, for the
       purpose of clarity, the parties will be referred to  throughout  this
       decision as they were referred to at the First-Tier Tribunal hearing,
       such that Mr Ibrahim is referred to as the Appellant  and  the  Entry
       Clearance Officer is referred to as the Respondent.

Background

    2. The Appellant is a national of Somalia who was born on  the  5th  May
       1997. The Appellant had applied for entry  clearance  to  the  United
       Kingdom in order to join his brother, the  sponsor  Mr  Omar  Hussein
       Ibrahim. The Respondent had refused the application  by  means  of  a
       Notice of Decision dated the 25th February 2014 under paragraph  319X
       of the Immigration Rules HC395 as amended. The Respondent  had  found
       that  there  was  insufficient  evidence  to  satisfy  her  that  the
       Appellant was related  to  the  sponsor  as  claimed  and  inadequate
       evidence had been  presented  to  support  the  contention  that  the
       Appellant was a refugee in Uganda. It  was  further  found  that  the
       Appellant had not provided adequate evidence of his own identity  and
       that there was inadequate evidence as to the sponsor's income in  the
       United Kingdom. The claim  was  also  rejected  not  only  under  the
       Immigration Rules but also under Article 8 of the ECHR, on the  basis
       that  the  decision  made  was  proportionate  to  the  interest   of
       maintaining an effective immigration control.

    3. That decision was  the  subject  of  the  appeal  to  the  First-Tier
       Tribunal, which was dealt with by First-Tier Tribunal  Judge  O'Hagan
       on the 9th February 2015. Judge O'Hagan found that  DNA  testing  had
       proved that the Appellant and sponsor were siblings  as  claimed  and
       that the issue of fraternity had effectively fallen away. The  First-
       Tier Tribunal Judge accepted on the balance of probabilities that the
       Appellant was born on the date stated namely the 5th May  1997,  such
       as he would have been 16 years old as at the  date  of  the  original
       decision. She also accepted and found as a fact  that  the  Appellant
       was part of the sponsor's pre-fight family and that the Appellant was
       genuinely a refugee in Uganda. However, at [27] of the decision,  the
       First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  found  that  the  requirements  of   the
       Immigration Rules could not be met as at the date of the decision, in
       that the Appellant could not satisfy the  financial  requirements  of
       the Rules as at the date of the decision.

    4. The Judge however, went on to consider  the  case  on  the  basis  of
       Article 8 outside of the Immigration Rules  and  stated  that  having
       followed MM (Lebanon) and considered that the rules do not constitute
       a complete code, she should then consider the 5 steps in Razgar [28].
       The Judge went on to find that the decision made was disproportionate
       to the legitimate public aim  sought  to  be  achieved  at  [33]  and
       allowed the appeal on Article 8 grounds outside  of  the  Immigration
       Rules.

    5. The Respondent sought to appeal that decision and in the  grounds  of
       appeal it is argued that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  misdirected
       herself in law and that although the Judge had properly noted at [32]
       that Article  8  does  not  exist  to  provide  a  remedy  for  every
       misfortune or vicissitude of life and that it was also not simply  an
       exercise in sympathy, it is argued that the Judge did in fact conduct
       a "freewheeling" Article 8 assessment under the ECHR, liberated  from
       the maintenance requirements which were considered important  to  the
       public interest by Parliament having been incorporated within Section
       117 B(3) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  It  is
       argued that the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to take  account  of
       the sponsor's inability to meet the financial  requirements  and  the
       inability  of  the  Appellant  to  be  financially   dependent   when
       considering the proportionality issue under Article 8 outside of  the
       Immigration Rules.

    6. Permission to appeal was granted by First-Tier Tribunal  Judge  White
       on the 6th  May  2015,  on  the  basis  that  it  was  arguable  that
       addressing Article 8 outside of the Rules the  Judge  had  failed  to
       address  adequately  the  requirement  of  compelling   circumstances
       outside  of  the  Rules  and  that  in  considering  the   issue   of
       proportionality the Judge had given inadequate consideration  to  the
       public interest, the Appellant's living conditions and the ability of
       the sponsor to visit, contact and support the Appellant.

    7. In his rule 24 response, the Appellant, through his solicitors  in  a
       letter dated the 28th May 2015, seeks to argue  that  the  First-Tier
       Tribunal Judge did not direct himself  inappropriately  and  even  if
       there was an error of law it was not material. It is argued that  the
       Judge had correctly stated at [29] that the Rules do not constitute a
       complete code and therefore his considering the Article 8  claim  and
       the 5 steps in Razgar and that the Judge at [29] had found  that  the
       Appellant and sponsor had family life together in Somalia before  the
       family was torn asunder by the Civil War and that there was something
       that went beyond  the  usual  ties  of  love  and  affection  between
       siblings such as to constitute family life. It  is  argued  that  the
       Judge had found at [33] that each was the only family member left  to
       the other and that these  were  compelling  factors  that  served  to
       outweigh the public interest in maintaining immigration  control  and
       that the Judge therefore did adequately address  the  requirement  of
       compelling circumstances outside  of  the  Rules  and  give  adequate
       consideration to the public interest.

Submissions

    8. Miss Brocklesby-Weller on  behalf  of  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
       relied upon her Grounds of appeal. She  argued  that  the  Judge  had
       adopted a misguided approach when dealing with the issue  of  Article
       8. She argued that although the Judge had stated that the Rules  were
       not a complete code,  he  then  had  not  gone  on  to  identify  any
       compelling  circumstances  such  as  to   justify   considering   the
       Appellant's  appeal  on  the  basis  of  Article  8  outside  of  the
       Immigration Rules. She argued  that  there  is  no  consideration  of
       Article 8 through the lens of the  Rules.  It  was  argued  that  the
       sponsor did not even meet the income  support  threshold,  let  alone
       being financially independent, so  that  he  would  not  be  able  to
       maintain the Appellant.

    9. Miss Brocklesby-Weller  argued  that  although  the  Judge  had  made
       reference in passing to Section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014  which
       had introduced Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
       2002 containing Sections 117A to D, he had gone no  further  and  had
       not actually set out when dealing with the  balancing  exercise,  how
       the factors in Section 117B applied to the case or how they should be
       taken into  account  when  considering  the  balancing  exercise  and
       proportionality. She argued that when the Judge at [33]  was  dealing
       proportionality, he  had  not  even  mentioned  that  the  Appellant,
       whether on his own or with the aid of his sponsor did  not  meet  the
       financial  requirements  of  the  Rules  and  was   not   financially
       independent for the purpose of Section 117B. She  argued  that  there
       had to actually be a consideration of the  Section  117B  factors  in
       substance, not simply in form. She asked me to set aside the decision
       of First-Tier Tribunal Judge O'Hagan and to remake  the  decision  on
       the evidence that I had, dismissing the Appellant's appeal on the  on
       Article 8 grounds.

   10. Mr Scott on behalf of Mr Ibrahim handed up a copy of the case of Dube
       (Sections 117A-117D) [2015] UKUT 00090 (IAC). He relied upon his Rule
       24 response. Mr Scott argued that the Judge had not made any material
       error of law and had taken account of the public interest and that it
       had been recognised within his decision that the  Appellant  did  not
       meet the financial requirements of the  Rules.  He  argued  that  the
       Judge had set out at [33] what the compelling circumstances  were  in
       the case that rendered the  decision  disproportionate,  despite  the
       fact that  the  Appellant  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
       Immigration Rules. He argued that the Judge properly set out at  [28]
       that the Rules do not constitute a complete  code  and  that  he  was
       entitled to go on to consider Article 8. He asked me to  dismiss  the
       appeal.

My Findings on Error of Law and Materiality

   11. The Respondent's argument that the First-Tier Tribunal  Judge  should
       have considered what were the compelling or exceptional circumstances
       in the case before going on to consider the  question  of  Article  8
       outside  of  the  Immigration  Rules  is  misconceived.  This   would
       effectively introduce the intermediary test that  was  criticised  by
       Aikens LJ, given the lead judgement of the Court  of  Appeal  in  the
       case of MM (Lebanon) and Others v Secretary of State [2014] EWCA  Civ
       985. Aikens LJ at [129] referred to Sales J in the case  of  Nagre  v
       Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA 720 (Admin) as
       having said that "if a particular person is outside of the Rules then
       he has to demonstrate, as a primary to consideration outside  of  the
       Rules, that he has an arguable case that there may  be  good  grounds
       for granting Leave to Remain outside of the Rules".  However,  Aikens
       LJ went on to state "I cannot  see  much  utility  in  imposing  this
       further, intermediary, test. If  the  applicant  cannot  satisfy  the
       Rule, then there either is or there is not a further Article 8 claim.
       That will have to be determined by the relevant decision-maker".

   12. In the case of Singh & Khalid v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
       Department [2015] EWCA Civ 74, Lord  Justice  Underhill,  giving  the
       lead judgement of the Court of Appeal at [64] stated that "I  am  not
       sure that I would myself would have read  Sales  J  as  intending  to
       impose any such intermediary requirement, though I agree with  Aikens
       LJ that if he was it represents an unnecessary refinement.  But  what
       matters is that there is nothing in Aikens LJ's comment  which  casts
       doubt on Sales J's basic point that there is no  need  to  conduct  a
       full separate examination of Article 8 outside of the Rules where, in
       the circumstances of a particular case,  all  the  issues  have  been
       addressed in the consideration under the Rules".

   13. Although the Court of Appeal in the case of Secretary  of  State  for
       the Home Department v SS (Congo) and  Others  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387,
       found that there would have to be compelling circumstances  before  a
       claim outside of the rules under Article 8  could  succeed  where  an
       Appellant did not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules, the
       Court of Appeal was not seeking to impose  an  intermediary  test  in
       that regard, but was simply indicating that there would  have  to  be
       compelling circumstances before the decision reached was found to  be
       disproportionate.

   14. In such circumstances I do not find that  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge
       O'Hagan should be criticised in the circumstances of  this  case  for
       having gone on to consider  Article  8  outside  of  the  Immigration
       Rules, as clearly in a Leave to Enter case under  paragraph  319X  of
       the Immigration Rules, the Rules are not as  he  correctly  stated  a
       complete code and indeed, the Judge did properly set out at [33] what
       he described as being the "compelling factors that serve to  outweigh
       the public interest in maintaining immigration control".

   15. However, I  do  find  that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  O'Hagan  has
       materially erred in his assessment of  the  public  interest  element
       when considering the proportionality issue. Sections 117A-117D of the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 which were brought  into
       force on the 28th July 2014. The sections were added to the 2002  Act
       by Section 19 of  the  Immigration  Act  2014.  The  Part  5A  public
       interest considerations set out and contained within Sections  117A-D
       apply to all cases where a Court or Tribunal is required to determine
       whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-

        a) breaches a person's right to respect for private and family life
           under Article 8, and

        b) as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human
           Rights Act 1998.

   16. Pursuant to section 117A (2):

       "117 A (2) In considering the public interest question, the Court  or
       Tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

           (a) in all cases, to the considerations listed  in  Section  117
           B..."

   17. Section 117B reads that:

       "section 117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in
       all cases

       (1) The maintenance of  effective  immigration  controls  is  in  the
       public interest.

       (2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the  interests
       of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom,  that  persons  who
       seek to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  are  able  to  speak
       English, because persons who can speak English-

           (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

           (b) are better able to integrate into society.

       (3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the  interests
       of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom,  that  persons  who
       seek  to  enter  or  remain  in  United   Kingdom   are   financially
       independent, because such persons-

           (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

           (b) are better able to integrate into society.

       (4) Little weight should be given to-

           (a) a private life, or

           (b) the relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

       that is established by a person at a time when the person is  in  the
       United Kingdom unlawfully.

       (5) Little weight should be given to a private  life  established  by
       person at a time when the person's Immigration status is precarious.

       (6) in case person who is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the  public
       interest does not require the person's removal where-

           (a)  the  person  has  a   genuine   and   subsisting   parental
           relationship with a qualifying child, and

           (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave  the
           United Kingdom".

       The applicable subparagraphs in the present appeal are  Section  117B
       (1)-(3).

   18. First-Tier Tribunal Judge  O'Hagan  at  [31]  has  stated  that  "the
       importance of an weight  to  be  given  to  immigration  control  has
       recently  been  underscored  by  Parliament  itself  in  Section   19
       Immigration Act 2014  which  introduces  Part  5A  of  the  2002  Act
       containing Sections 117A to  D".  However,  the  First-Tier  Tribunal
       Judge  had  in  fact  failed  to  specifically  set  out  within  his
       consideration of proportionality at [33], the relevant factors  under
       Section 117B, and has failed to set out for example that it is in the
       public interest and in particular in the interests  of  the  economic
       well-being in the United Kingdom that persons who seek to  enter  are
       able to speak English in order that they are  less  of  a  burden  on
       taxpayers and are better able  to  integrate  into  society  and  are
       financially independent, because such persons are  not  a  burden  on
       taxpayers and are better able to integrate into society.  It  is  not
       simply a case that these factors relate to the importance  of  weight
       to be given to immigration control, although  clearly  under  Section
       117B (1) the maintenance of an effective immigration  control  is  in
       the public interest. Although the Judge makes reference to the weight
       to be given to immigration control, he has made no reference  to  the
       interests of  the  economic  well-being  of  the  United  Kingdom  in
       considering the public interest question as  to  whether  or  not  an
       interference with the Appellant's right to  respect  for  his  family
       life is justified under Article 8 (2).

   19. Further, no consideration had been given in the balancing exercise as
       to whether or not the Appellant is able to speak English  or  to  the
       question as to whether or not  the  Appellant  would  be  financially
       independent. Although I bear in mind that the  Judge  had  previously
       found that the Appellant did not meet the financial  requirements  of
       the Immigration Rules for the purpose  of  paragraph  319X,  clearly,
       these issues do need to be specifically  dealt  with  and  considered
       when considering the proportionality issue.

   20. As was stated by the Upper Tribunal in the  case  of  Dube  (Sections
       117A-117D) [2015] UKUT 00090 (IAC), Judges are  required  statutorily
       to take into account the enumerated considerations and they  are  not
       an � la carte menu of considerations. In that case it was found  that
       it was not an error in law to fail to refer to  Sections  117A-  117D
       considerations if the Judge had  applied  the  test  he  or  she  was
       supposed to apply according to its terms and that  what  mattered  is
       substance, not form. However the substantive consideration is what is
       wholly missing in First-Tier Tribunal Judge  O'Hagan's  consideration
       of the proportionality issue. Although making reference  in  form  to
       Section 117A-117D, and the maintenance of  an  effective  immigration
       control, he has failed to go on to  consider  in  substance  Sections
       117B (2) and (3), in regard to the public interest and the  interests
       of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom in terms of both the
       Appellant's ability to speak English  and  the  question  as  to  his
       financial independence. These do have to be placed into the balancing
       exercise when considering whether or not the decision to  refuse  the
       Appellant Entry Clearance was proportionate. The Judge's  failure  in
       this regard does amount to a material error of law. I  therefore  set
       aside the decision of First-Tier Tribunal Judge O'Hagan in respect of
       his consideration as to whether  or  not  the  decision  reached  was
       disproportionate such as to give  rise  to  a  breach  of  Article  8
       outside of the Immigration Rules.

   21. Although it was suggested by Miss Brocklesby-Weller on behalf of  the
       Respondent that I could simply remake the decision, in  my  judgement
       the material error of law made by First-Tier Tribunal  Judge  O'Hagan
       in considering the proportionality issue goes  to  the  core  of  his
       assessment of that issue.  In  my  judgement,  in  the  interests  of
       justice,  the  whole  of  the  proportionality  issue  needs  to   be
       reconsidered, taking full account of  the  factors  counting  on  the
       Respondent's side, having regard, in particular, to those factors set
       out between  Section  117A-D.  I  do  not  have  evidence  before  me
       regarding the Appellant's ability in English or direct evidence as to
       the extent to which he would be financially independent,  other  than
       knowing the sponsor's level of income was  insufficient.  Given  that
       the entirety of the proportionality exercise needs to be  redone,  it
       is appropriate to remit the case back to the First-Tier Tribunal  for
       a rehearing on this issue. The Respondent's appeal is allowed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Hagan  did  contain  a  material
error  of  law  and  is  set  aside  in  respect  of   her   assessment   of
proportionality for the purposes of Article 8  outside  of  the  Immigration
Rules. The matter is remitted back to the First-Tier Tribunal  to  be  heard
by any Judge other than First-Tier Tribunal Judge O'Hagan.

The First-Tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to  Rule  13  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (First-Tier Tribunal) (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)
Rules 2014 and no application for an anonymity order was made before me.  No
such order is made.


Signed      Dated 17th September 2015

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty
