
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Numbers:
OA/04069/2015

                                                    OA/04070/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 21 September 2017                      |On 11 October 2017                |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

                     AMUN ABDI IBRAHIM (FIRST appellant)
                    IKRAM ABDI IBRAHIM (SECOND appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - PRETORIA
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr D Ball of Counsel instructed by Hersi & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of Somalia.  Amun Abdi Ibrahim was born  on
    18 May 2000 and Ikram Abdi Ibrahim was  born  on  3  March  1999.   The
    appellants are sisters.  The appellants applied for entry clearance  to
    settle in the United Kingdom under paragraph  297  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The appellants' application was supported by their sister  Ubah
    Abdi Ibrahim.  She lives in the UK and is now a British  citizen.   The
    Entry Clearance Officer refused  the  appellants'  applications  on  26
    January 2015.

The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 2. The  appellants  appealed  against  that  decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. Following a hearing on 24 October  2016  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Beg dismissed the appellants' appeals.  The judge  did  not  find
    the sponsor to be a credible witness and found that the appellants  did
    not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

 3. The appellants applied for permission to appeal against the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision.  On 2 June 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge  Brunnen
    refused to grant permission to appeal.  The  appellants  renewed  their
    application for permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  and  on  7
    August  2017  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Finch  granted   the   appellants
    permission to appeal.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal

 4. The grounds of appeal that were submitted in support of the application
    for permission to appeal are lengthy, wide ranging,  in  several  parts
    irrelevant and also in parts do not appear to bear any  resemblance  to
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal.  At the start of  the  hearing  Mr
    Ball submitted amended grounds of appeal together with  an  application
    to amend the grounds of appeal.  Set out  in  the  amended  grounds  of
    appeal is a succinct summary of the grounds  relied  on.   Rather  than
    pick through and try to  find  relevant  grounds  of  appeal  from  the
    lengthy document I referred to earlier, I will refer to the commendably
    succinct grounds of appeal  supplied  by  Mr  Ball.   There  are  three
    grounds of appeal set out  in  the  amended  grounds  (that  relate  to
    grounds submitted in support  of  the  application  for  permission  to
    appeal) together with a fourth ground that was  not  contained  in  the
    application. I permitted the appellants' to amend the grounds of appeal
    add the fourth ground of appeal.

 5. The first  ground  of  appeal  asserts  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision is flawed because the Tribunal required documentary  evidence.
    Such requirement  for  documentary  evidence  is  unreasonable  in  the
    context of the situation in Somalia.

 6. The second ground of appeal asserts that the decision is flawed because
    the rejection of credibility failed to give weight to the  cogency  and
    consistency of the appellants' and sponsor's evidence.  It is  asserted
    that it was inconsistent to expect the sponsor to send someone to trace
    her mother or uncle or to discount that the mother may have disappeared
    when travelling to find her brother.

 7. The third ground asserts that the decision is flawed because the  judge
    failed to consider Article 8 at all and failed  to  consider  the  best
    interests of the child as an aspect of Article 8 and failed to properly
    recognise that the burden  of  establishing  that  an  interference  is
    proportionate rests on the Entry Clearance Officer.

 8. The new ground of appeal is  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in
    failing  to  make  key  findings  of  fact  relating  to  the   primary
    constituents of Immigration Rule 297(i)(f)  as  to  whether  there  are
    serious and  compelling  family  or  other  considerations  which  make
    exclusion undesirable.  It is asserted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge failed to make findings about:

      a) whether the girls are living in Ethiopia unlawfully with precarious
         immigration status;

      b) whether they are living in insecure  and  unsanitary  accommodation
         with no running water or heating;

      c) whether they were arrested;

      d) whether they are vulnerable to sexual abuse;

      e) whether they have a male protector;

      f) what their emotional needs are as required  by  Mundeba  (s.55  and
         para 297(i)(f)) [2013] UKUT 00088 (IAC).

 9. Mr Ball amplified the grounds of appeal.  He asserted  that  the  judge
    properly referred to the case of Mundeba  but  the  judge  should  have
    carried out a proper assessment as set out in paragraph 37  which  says
    that  Section  55  should  be  a  point  of  consideration  under   the
    Immigration Rules.  He referred to the case of  T  (s.55  BCIA  2009  -
    entry clearance) Jamaica [2011] UKUT  00483(IAC),  an  Entry  Clearance
    Officer is only required to look at the spirit of Section 55,  however,
    no consideration has been given by the Entry Clearance Officer  or  the
    judge.

10. Mr Ball submitted that the judge failed to deal  with  the  fundamental
    issues.  He submitted that the judge has not rejected the  entirety  of
    the sponsor or the appellants' accounts.  The judge must  consider  the
    current position of the children.    In relation to adverse credibility
    findings he submitted that  the  judge  failed  to  take  into  account
    relevant  factors  and  took  into  account  irrelevant  factors.    At
    paragraph 7 the judge took irrelevant factors into account when finding
    that there was no documentary evidence.  He submitted this was too high
    a hurdle given the situation in Somalia.  In paragraph 8  he  submitted
    there was nothing inherently implausible about the mother  not  knowing
    what contact details would be available as she was only going  for  two
    days.  At paragraph 9 the judge states there is no  evidence  that  the
    sponsor has sought to find somebody to trace  the  appellants'  mother.
    He submitted that in Somalia there is hardly likely to be an  abundance
    of private detectives to look for the uncle.  At paragraph 10 the judge
    found that there was no corroborative evidence but failed to take fully
    into consideration that Somalia is a failed state as is established  in
    the Home Office guidance.  The judge acted inappropriately  in  seeking
    documents where none exists.  With regard to paragraph 11 he  submitted
    that the arrangement for the cousin to look after  the  appellants  was
    for a couple of days.  The cousin could not be expected to  take  on  a
    lifelong  responsibility  and  there  is  nothing  implausible  in  the
    appellants' mother's cousin going to Saudi  Arabia  with  her  husband.
    With regard to paragraph 14 there were no findings whatever  about  the
    situation of the children.  There was no consideration of Article 8.

11. Mr Tufan submitted that in Mundeba it is stated that in entry clearance
    cases Section 55 is applicable in spirit.   Section  55  considerations
    still come into play.  There  is  nothing  in  this  case  to  consider
    because the judge makes a conclusion that the children are looked after
    by family, a conclusion he arrived at after making negative credibility
    findings.  He submitted the only way that the appellant can succeed  is
    if the judge's findings are irrational.  The  lack  of  evidence  is  a
    matter the judge was entitled to take  into  consideration.   Mr  Tufan
    submitted that only the circumstances pertaining at  the  date  of  the
    decision can be taken into consideration.  He referred to the  case  of
    AS (Somalia) in the House of Lords, in entry clearance cases under  the
    old Rules any Article 8 considerations were those that were relevant at
    the date of the decision in entry clearance cases.  He  submitted  that
    the appellants were not in Ethiopia at that  time,  that  the  evidence
    with regard to the arrest is not relevant as it postdated the decision.

12. In reply Mr Ball said that subsequent evidence  can  shed  light  on  a
    situation at the date of the  decision.   He  submitted  that  all  the
    matters can be taken into  account  including  why  the  children  were
    arrested, where the children were living because this  all  underscores
    the lives they were living in January 2016.  The appellants were living
    in Ethiopia at the date of the application.

Discussion

13. I will consider grounds 1 and 2 together. The first ground of appeal is
    that the Tribunal  required  documentary  evidence  and  that  that  is
    unreasonable in the context of the situation  in  Somalia.  The  second
    ground is that the rejection of credibility failed to  give  weight  to
    consistency of the appellants' and sponsor's evidence.  It is  asserted
    that it was inconsistent to expect the sponsor to send someone to trace
    her  mother  or  uncle  or  to  discount  that  the  mother  may   have
    disappeared. The weight to be given to evidence is  a  matter  for  the
    judge. Whilst inconsistencies might lead to  doubts  about  credibility
    and are likely to be set out by a judge, there  is  no  requirement  to
    draw attention to consistency. It is not evident  that  the  judge  has
    failed to have regard to the consistency in the accounts when assessing
    the evidence overall. I accept that  the  judge  was  speculating  when
    considering that the sponsor had not considered hiring someone to  look
    for her mother. I also accept that the judge appears  to  have  weighed
    the lack of corroborative documentary evidence from Somalia against the
    sponsor and appellants in circumstances where such  evidence  would  be
    unlikely to be available. However, this was not  the  only  documentary
    evidence that was considered to be lacking by the judge. In  this  case
    there was a distinct lack of  any  documentary  evidence  whether  from
    Somalia, Ethiopia  or  the  UK  with  regard  to  the  appellants'  and
    sponsor's accounts. The judge set out:

         "7.  ... The sponsor gave evidence that the appellants  lived  with
             their mother before she left them.  She said that their father
             left about ten years ago to live in the Middle East.   I  find
             that there is no documentary  evidence  that  the  appellants'
             father left  the  family  and  settled  in  the  Middle  East,
             possibly in Kuwait.  Despite the sponsor's evidence  that  she
             contacted friends in Kuwait who  did  not  have  her  father's
             telephone number or contact details, there is  no  documentary
             evidence from them that the sponsor contacted them looking for
             her father.

         8.   ... At paragraph 7 she states that the appellants were left in
             the care of her mother's cousin, Fadumo  Mohamed.   I  do  not
             find it credible that if the appellants' mother left  them  to
             go and see her injured brother  in  September  2014  that  she
             would not have left telephone numbers for them to contact her.
              I find that she  would  have  left  her  brother's  telephone
             number and the number of the neighbours who contacted  her  to
             let her know that her  brother  had  been  injured.   Yet  the
             sponsor in her evidence claimed that  she  did  not  have  any
             telephone number for  her  uncle  or  indeed  anyone  else  in
             Beledwayne.

         9.   Moreover the sponsor claimed that she has not been able to  go
             to Beledwayne to look for her mother or to find  her  maternal
             uncle because it is too dangerous to go there.   I  take  into
             account the objective evidence in the appellants'  bundle  and
             the skeleton argument submitted on the appellants'  behalf  by
             Miss Jaber.  I find that whilst there  are  parts  of  Somalia
             that are indeed dangerous, there is no evidence before me that
             the sponsor considered hiring someone to go to  Beledwayne  to
             look for her mother and maternal uncle. Yet  the  sponsor  was
             able to spend considerable funds in travelling out to see  the
             appellants on at least three occasions.  She said that she saw
             them once in Burao and twice in  Addis  Ababa.   I  find  that
             there is no documentary  evidence  at  all  that  the  sponsor
             contacted a number of people to try to find the whereabouts of
             her mother.

         10.  In cross-examination the sponsor said that she also  contacted
             the police in 2005 about her mother's disappearance.  She said
             the police do not provide documents and therefore she has been
             unable to provide corroborative evidence.   I  find  that  the
             sponsor did not give any detailed evidence about which  police
             station she contacted or the name of the police  officer  that
             she spoke to or indeed the month in which  she  contacted  the
             police.  She claimed that she made a telephone call  from  the
             United Kingdom using a telephone calling card.  On  a  balance
             of probabilities,  I  do  not  find  the  sponsor  a  credible
             witness.  I find that there is no corroborative evidence  that
             the appellants' mother has disappeared and  that  the  sponsor
             has contacted the police or anyone  else  about  her  mother's
             disappearance.

         11.  The sponsor gave evidence  that  the  appellants  were  looked
             after by  her  mother's  cousin  Fadumo  Mohamed.   In  cross-
             examination she said that her  aunt  left  to  live  in  Saudi
             Arabia in June 2015.  She was forced to go there to  join  her
             husband.  I do not find it credible that if Miss  Mohamed  was
             asked by the appellants' mother to  take  care  of  her  minor
             daughters in her absence, that she would just abandon them  to
             go and live in Saudi Arabia.  The  sponsor  gave  no  credible
             explanation other than that her husband forced her  to  go  to
             Saudi Arabia as the  basis  for  why  she  would  abandon  the
             appellants to live on their own.  Moreover  I  find  that  the
             sponsor  did  not  travel  to  Somalia  to  ensure  that   the
             appellants were living safely and had someone  to  watch  over
             them when their aunt allegedly left in June 2015.  The sponsor
             gave evidence that she did not travel to  Somalia  until  July
             2016 and that was after she received a telephone call  from  a
             neighbour in Addis Ababa to say that the appellants  had  been
             arrested in Ethiopia.

14. The judge had the benefit of seeing and hearing the sponsor first  hand
    when assessing the evidence. It is  clear  that  the  judge  found  the
    sponsor's evidence to lack detail  with  regard  to  contact  with  the
    police, a matter that is not concerned with  corroborative  documentary
    evidence. There was a lack of detail in many regards as  found  by  the
    judge.  The  judge  did  not  accept  the  explanation  regarding   the
    appellants' aunt abandoning them. The lack of detail coupled  with  the
    lack of corroborating evidence from any source were  all  matters  that
    the judge  was  entitled  to  take  into  account  when  assessing  the
    credibility of the evidence. The judge found:

         13.  In considering the evidence in the round and on a  balance  of
             probabilities, I do not find the sponsor a  credible  witness.
             I find that there is no credible evidence before me  that  the
             appellants' mother disappeared after she  went  to  visit  her
             brother who was shot in September 2014.  I find that there  is
             no credible evidence before me that the  sponsor  contacted  a
             number of individuals looking for  her  mother  including  the
             police in Burao.  I find that there is no documentary evidence
             from the appellants'  mother's  cousin  who  allegedly  looked
             after the appellants after she left them in her  care.   There
             is no corroborative evidence that the  sponsor  contacted  her
             father in Kuwait to let him know that the appellants were left
             on their  own  in  Addis  Ababa  and  that  their  mother  had
             disappeared.

         14.  I find that the appellants continue to live either in  Somalia
             or Addis Ababa  supported  by  family  members  and  supported
             financially by the sponsor in the United Kingdom.  In  respect
             of the second ground of refusal under paragraph 320(3) of  the
             Immigration Rules; the appellants failed to  provide  a  valid
             national passport or other document to  establish  nationality
             and identity, Miss Jaber in her skeleton argument at paragraph
             35 onwards states that the  appellants  were  able  to  obtain
             birth certificates from the Somali Embassy in Addis Ababa  but
             these were  not  available  to  the  Entry  Clearance  Manager
             reviewing the decision in respect of  Amun's  application.   I
             find that the birth certificates were  not  before  the  Entry
             Clearance Officer.  They were  issued  many  years  after  the
             appellants were born and there is no credible evidence  before
             me  about  what  documents  were  produced  for  those   birth
             certificates to be issued.  In  conclusion  I  find  that  the
             appellants do not meet the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
             Rules".

15. Although the judge may have erred  in  considering  that  corroborative
    evidence could have been obtained from Somalia, and whilst a  different
    judge may have reached a different conclusion, on the totality  of  the
    evidence before the judge and the account given by the sponsor and  the
    evidence of the appellants the conclusions reached were ones which were
    open to him. Any error was not therefore material.

16. Given the judge's finding that the appellants are supported  by  family
    members in Somalia or Addis Ababa there was no need for  the  judge  to
    consider Article 8.

17. As the  judge  had  rejected  the  credibility  of  the  sponsor's  and
    appellants' accounts of living alone without family support  the  judge
    did not need to make findings regarding the factors in Immigration Rule
    297(i)(f).

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed. The decision of the Entry Clearance Officer stands

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   P M Ramshaw                             Date 11 October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw
