
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/04120/2014
                                                               OA/04121/2014
                                                             & OA/04122/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 November 2015                  |On 18 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Aysun Kahraman
                                EBRU KAHRAMAN
                               ERKAN KAHRAMAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss L Kullar, Solicitor from SH & Co, Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I see no need for, and do not make,  any  order  restricting  reporting
    about this case.

 2. This is an appeal brought by the Secretary of State against a  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal allowing  the  appeal  of  the  respondents,
    hereinafter "the claimants" against a  decision  of  the  Secretary  of
    State acting for the Entry  Clearance  Officer  to  refuse  them  entry
    clearance to the United Kingdom.

 3. The  relevant  decision  was  made  on  18  February  2014.  It  was  a
    reconsideration of an earlier decision as  a  result  of  a  successful
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal and an  order  of  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Plimmer (as she then was).  The reason for  allowing  the  "first
    appeal" is that the Secretary of State had  not  followed  a  published
    policy.  Whilst it may well that Deputy Judge Plimmer did not  consider
    the details of that policy (that was not her job), it might  have  been
    thought that she would not  have  a  found  a  material  error  in  the
    decision if the policy did not seem to be helpful to the claimants.

 4. Be that as it may, the Secretary of State said in her grounds that  the
    Entry Clearance Officer did not have to apply the policy in a way  that
    was helpful to the claimants and refused the applications.

 5. The claimants appealed to  the  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  It  was
    persuaded that a policy did apply and that the  plain  meaning  of  the
    policy was that the appeals ought to be allowed.

 6. I see no need to explain in any detail the  terms  of  the  policy  for
    reasons that I explained below. The essential point is that it  was  to
    do with the special status given to citizens of Turkey because they are
    in an analogous position to EEA  nationals.   Mr  Mills  was  concerned
    about the way the grounds were drawn although they are drawn by a  very
    experienced Senior Presenting Officer.  It emerged that they were drawn
    in accordance  with  instructions  but  Mr  Mills's  own  research  had
    satisfied him that at the material time, and probably now, there was  a
    published policy on the Secretary  of  State's  website  which  is  the
    public policy that the Tribunal said ought to have  been  followed  and
    ought to have led to the appeals being allowed.

 7. It may very well be that the published policy did not  encapsulate  the
    Secretary of State's intention. Nevertheless she said what she said and
    it is not an error of law on the part of the First-tier Tribunal to say
    that the Secretary of State's policy should have been applied and  that
    the appeals should have been allowed. It may very well be the case that
    any other disposal would have been wrong.  Mr Mills  was  not  able  to
    advance the arguments relied upon in the grounds.

 8.  I  am,  and  the  claimants  should  be,  grateful  to  him  for   his
    professionalism in making  the  position  clear  so  that  it  was  not
    necessary to call upon Miss Kullar.

 9. In the circumstances I dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal  against
    the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

Decision

10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge in each case shall stand.



I direct that in each case entry clearance in accordance with the
applications is given promptly.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 17 December 2015               |

