
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number: OA/04404/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 5 July 2016                  |On 8 July 2016                  |
|Prepared on 5 July 2016         |                                |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    A. A.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER ISLAMABAD
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Brakaj, Solicitor, Iris Law
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who was removed from  the
           UK on 19 June  2013  after  his  appeal  rights  were  exhausted
           against  the  decision  to  remove  him  by  reference  to  s10,
           following the refusal of his asylum claim.
        2. Following the Appellant's removal both his  mother  and  brother
           were successful  in  asylum  appeals  to  the  Tribunal  against
           removal decisions made in relation to them, following a decision
           of Designated Judge Zucker of 26 November 2013. I am  told  that
           the Respondent did not seek to challenge  that  decision  before
           the Upper Tribunal, and I am told that their  claims  to  asylum
           essentially mirrored that pursued by the Appellant.
        3. Although the Appellant did not make  an  application  for  entry
           clearance based upon Appendix FM, or pay the fees due  for  such
           an application, he did lodge an application for entry  clearance
           which was treated by the  Respondent  as  an  application  under
           paragraph 352D of the Immigration Rules.  That  application  was
           refused on 30 January 2015.
        4. The Appellant duly appealed against the decision to  refuse  his
           application. His appeal was heard by Judge  Manchester,  and  it
           was allowed on Article 8 grounds in a decision promulgated on 28
           October 2015.
        5. The Respondent's application to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for
           permission to appeal was granted by First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge
           Parkes on 29 April 2016.
        6. Thus the matter comes before me.


           The decision under appeal
        7. It is not in dispute before me that Judge  Manchester  correctly
           dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules. It is accepted
           before  me  that  the  Appellant  could  not  meet  either   the
           requirements of paragraph 352D, or, Appendix FM.
        8. The context in which Judge Manchester approached the  Article  8
           appeal was on the one hand the  undisputed  family  relationship
           between the Appellant, his  mother,  and  brother,  and  on  the
           other, their success in their asylum appeals before the Tribunal
           after his own removal from the UK  despite  the  fact  that  all
           three  had  offered  to  the  Respondent  essentially  the  same
           explanation as to why they believed themselves to be at risk  of
           harm in Pakistan. As his decision makes clear, Judge  Manchester
           had at the forefront of his thinking both the decision  made  in
           relation to the Appellant's appeal, and  the  decision  made  in
           relation to his mother and brother's separate appeal.
        9. There is therefore, as Mr Diwnycz now accepts, quite  simply  no
           merit in the first ground which asserts that the Judge failed to
           take the decision made in relation to the Appellant's own appeal
           as his starting point when considering the evidence before  him.
           It is plain that this is precisely what the Judge did  do.  That
           decision was not a "trump card", although the draftsman  of  the
           grounds appears to seek to elevate it to such a status.
       10. Equally, the Judge did not fall into the  trap  of  refusing  to
           look at the Appellant's relationship with his mother and brother
           as part of  the  Appellant's  "private  life"  at  the  date  of
           decision He did not treat those relationships as "family  life",
           and he bore in mind that the only reason the Appellant had  been
           in Pakistan for the last two years and unable  to  pursue  first
           hand those relationships was the inconsistent approach that  had
           been taken to the Appellant on the one hand, and his mother  and
           brother on the other.
       11. Before me Mr Diwnycz very fairly  accepted  that  this  was  the
           case, and in consequence that there was in reality no  substance
           to either of the grounds. Accordingly the  grounds  disclose  no
           arguable error of law in the Judge's decision,  and  it  follows
           that, despite the terms in which  the  grant  of  permission  to
           appeal was framed, this is a challenge that must be dismissed.
       12. That being the case Ms Brakaj raised the issue of costs  at  the
           conclusion of the hearing. Whilst I am content  to  confirm  the
           fee award made by the First Tier Tribunal, I  am  not  satisfied
           that at this stage the Upper Tribunal can,  or  should,  do  any
           more. No written application for costs has been made pursuant to
           Rule 10(5), and no schedule of the Appellant's  costs  has  been
           prepared  which  would  permit  a  summary  assessment   to   be
           undertaken. Although it would appear that Ms Brakaj  may  advise
           the Appellant to pursue an application based upon the  assertion
           that the Respondent had acted unreasonably in seeking permission
           to appeal and in then pursuing the appeal to the Upper Tribunal,
           the matter is not straightforward because there was after all  a
           grant of permission to appeal that was made in the  Respondent's
           favour. I decline therefore to make any order pursuant  to  Rule
           10(5).


   DECISION


      The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated  on
      28 October 2015 did not involve the making of an error of law  in  the
      decision to dismiss the appeal that requires that decision to  be  set
      aside and remade. The decision to dismiss the  appeal  is  accordingly
      confirmed, as is the fee award made by the First Tier Tribunal.


Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
      Unless and until the Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
        granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
        indirectly  identify  him.  This  direction  applies  both  to  the
        Appellant and to  the  Respondent.  Failure  to  comply  with  this
        direction could lead to proceedings being brought for  contempt  of
        court.




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated  5 July 2016
