
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-VP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/04454/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision sent to parties on   |
|On 17 January 2017                            |On 7 February 2017            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                     Entry Clearance Officer, new delhi

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            mohammed HUMAYUN KHAN
                          (no anonymity order made)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr M B Hussain, instructed by Zahra & Co, solicitors



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The  Entry  Clearance  Officer  appeals  with  permission  against  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal,  allowing  the  claimant's  appeal
    against a decision to refuse him entry clearance to  join  his  British
    citizen wife as her spouse, pursuant to paragraph 276ADE  and  Appendix
    FM of the Immigration Rules HC395 (as amended).

 2. The claimant is a Bangladeshi citizen.  It is now accepted on behalf of
    the Entry Clearance Officer that his marriage to his British spouse  is
    genuine and subsisting, and that the parties intend to live together as
    man and wife in the United Kingdom, if permitted to do so.   The  Entry
    Clearance Officer's reliance on paragraphs E-ECP.2.6 and E-ECP.2.10  of
    Appendix FM therefore falls away.

 3. The claimant has never  made  any  application  for  anonymity  and  is
    indifferent to the issue.  Mr Hussain confirmed that there was no  need
    to maintain the anonymity direction, and I vacate it.

 4. The basis of  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's  refusal  was  that  the
    claimant had failed to disclose a naturalisation application previously
    made on his behalf while he was  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  Entry
    Clearance Officer relies on paragraph 320(11) in  the  general  grounds
    for refusal and paragraph S-EC 2.2(b) of Appendix FM.

 5. The Entry Clearance Officer did  not  arrange  representation  for  the
    First-tier Tribunal hearing.

Background

 6. The claimant's immigration history is set out at  paragraph  6  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal decision.  He  entered  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    working holidaymaker in March 2009, which expired in March  2011.   The
    claimant did not embark, and overstayed until August 2013.  During that
    period, the claimant applied  for  naturalisation,  through  a  lawyer,
    relying on a Bangladeshi passport which it now appears was  an  obvious
    forgery.  That application failed.

 7. The applicant then made a series of further applications.  In  December
    2013 he made a settlement application in which he did not disclose  the
    previous nationality application and which was refused on the basis  of
    inadequate documents, with  no  mention  of  failure  to  disclose  the
    naturalisation application. The other points which underlay  the  ECO's
    refusal, the genuineness of the marriage and whether paragraph  320(11)
    applied to him, were resolved by the First-tier Tribunal  and  are  not
    now disputed.

 8. On 14 August 2014, the claimant made a further  settlement  application
    which was refused, again on the basis of inadequate documents.

 9. On 21 December 2014, the claimant applied again.  The  Entry  Clearance
    Officer refused again, on 3 February  2015,  treating  the  failure  to
    disclose the naturalisation  application  as  engaging  paragraph  S-EC
    2.2(b) of Appendix FM and paragraph 320(11) of the Rules.   He  refused
    the settlement application on that basis.  An Entry  Clearance  Manager
    review took place on 15 May 2015, maintaining the decision to refuse.

First-tier Tribunal decision

10. The claimant's evidence, accepted by the First-tier Tribunal, was  that
    he was aware that he had made an unsuccessful application  for  British
    nationality, having overstayed his working holiday leave to remain by a
    period of two years.  He was not aware of the fraudulent  circumstances
    surrounding it, nor that he should disclose it in  an  entry  clearance
    application for settlement.

11. The claimant's account of his  involvement  in  this  fraud,  from  his
    statement, is as follows:

          "I used the services of a lawyer to apply for British nationality.
          At the time I had not met my wife. I was illegally staying in this
         country and desperate to regularise my status.  The lawyer  that  I
         went to see said that he could obtain British nationality  for  me.
         He will do all that was required to be done I just had to pay  him.
         I am sorry that I did so but I went along with him and he submitted
         the application for me.  I know only now from the ECO's refusal the
         details of what the lawyer did".

12. The claimant said in his statement that he had since learned  that  the
    lawyer who acted for him submitted the  naturalisation  application  on
    the basis of a passport to which the  claimant  was  not  entitled  and
    which contained two forged immigration stamps, altered personal details
    and  issuance  details,  and  in  which  there  had  been  photographic
    substitution.

13. The judge considered that the  applicant  was  not  a  person  to  whom
    paragraph 320(11) applied.  Paragraph  320(11)  is  not  a  ground  for
    mandatory refusal, but one on which entry clearance or leave  to  enter
    the United Kingdom should normally be refused.  It  applies  where  the
    Secretary of State or Entry Clearance Officer  is  satisfied  that  the
    applicant has previously contrived in a significant  way  to  frustrate
    the intentions of the Rules, including by overstaying,  but  it  has  a
    second component:

         "320(11)  where  the  applicant  has  previously  contrived  in   a
         significant way to frustrate the intentions of  the  Rules  by  (i)
         overstaying ... and there are other aggravating circumstances  such
         as   absconding,   not   meeting   temporary    admission/reporting
         restrictions or bail  conditions,  using  an  assumed  identity  or
         multiple  identities,  switching  nationality,   making   frivolous
         applications, or not complying with the re-documentation  process."
                                             [Emphasis added]

    Paragraph 320(11) is not pursued before  me  on  behalf  of  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer, and is not relied upon in  the  grounds  of  appeal.
    The only allegation which is pursued is that of the failure to disclose
    the nationality application on the form.

14. The First-tier Judge directed himself at [24]  that  paragraph  320(11)
    and  S-EC.2.2  were  effectively  co-terminous,  such   that   judicial
    authority and guidance on paragraph 320(11) could  be  read  across  to
    paragraph S-EC.2.2. At [27], reliant on that conflation, the  reasoning
    given for allowing the appeal was as follows:

         "27. For these reasons whilst the [claimant] overstayed in  the  UK
         for two years I  am  unable  to  find  that  the  [Entry  Clearance
         Officer]  has  demonstrated  that  there  are  'other   aggravating
         circumstances'  such  that  the  refusal  of  the  application   by
         reference  to  paragraph  320(11)  is  in   accordance   with   the
         Immigration Rules.  I also find for  the  above  reasons  that  the
         decision is in breach of paragraph S-EC2.2(b)".

15. The Judge allowed the appeal because he  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    applicant  had  been  aware  of  the  fraud   in   his   naturalisation
    application. At [26] he said this:

         "26.     I am unable to  find  that  the  [claimant's]  attempt  to
         obtain British nationality is one to which he should have  referred
         in his application form.  He would have had no  reason  to  do  so,
         given his evidence that he did not  know,  until  he  received  the
         [Entry Clearance Officer's] notice of decision, what the lawyer had
         done.  This  evidence  is  consistent  with  the  [Entry  Clearance
         Officer] having failed  to  identify  this  issue  in  his  earlier
         decision made on 14 August 2014.  That decision is  silent  on  the
         issue, notwithstanding the agreed position that the application for
         British nationality had been made while the [claimant] was  in  the
         United Kingdom, i.e. prior to  his  voluntary  departure  from  the
         United Kingdom in August 2013.  No explanation has  been  given  by
         the [Entry Clearance Officer] for raising the  issue  only  in  the
         decision made in February 2015.

         27.      For these reasons, whilst the [claimant] overstayed in the
         United Kingdom for 2 years, I am unable to  find  that  the  [Entry
         Clearance  Officer]  has  demonstrated  that   there   are   'other
         aggravating  circumstances',  such  that   the   refusal   of   the
         application by reference to paragraph 320(11) is in accordance with
         the Immigration Rules.  I also find, for the  above  reasons,  that
         the decision is in breach of paragraph S-EC.2.2(b)."

16. The Judge found that the parties  were  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship, that no other adverse points had been raised on behalf of
    the Entry Clearance Officer, and allowed the appeal.   He  acknowledged
    that there was no application for  anonymity,  but  made  an  anonymity
    direction of his own motion.

Permission to appeal

17. The Entry Clearance Officer appealed to the Upper Tribunal.  He  argued
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge's finding that the applicant did not
    know  of  the  actions  of  his  lawyer  in  relation  to  the  British
    nationality application was insufficiently reasoned.   He  argued  that
    the naturalisation application should have been disclosed  at  question
    25 of the Visa Application Form.

18. The Entry Clearance Officer also disputed the finding, at [19]  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal decision, that  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  had
    provided no evidence to support the assertion that  the  claimant  knew
    that he had made a fraudulent application for British nationality.   In
    the second half of that paragraph, the Judge noted  that  the  claimant
    himself accepted that the application had been made, and  did  not  now
    dispute  that  the  document  supporting  it  was   fraudulent,   while
    maintaining that he was not aware of that at the time.

19. Permission  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Saffer,  who
    considered it arguable that the Judge materially erred in allowing  the
    appeal 'in that the finding that the  [claimant]  was  unaware  of  the
    material non-disclosure of previous fraud in relation to an immigration
    application may be unreasonable'.

20. It does not appear that when granting permission,  the  Judge  reminded
    himself  that  the   Entry   Clearance   Officer   had   not   arranged
    representation before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  nor  of  the  narrow
    grounds on which a finding of fact may be interfered with by the  Upper
    Tribunal on appeal (see R (Iran) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982 at [90] in the judgment of Lord  Justice
    Brooke).  In brief, an appellate Tribunal  may  only  treat  a  factual
    finding  as  an  error  of  law  where  it  is   perverse,   Wednesbury
    unreasonable, contrary  to  the  evidence,  or  unintelligible  to  the
    reviewing Judge. If that high standard is not  met,  findings  of  fact
    must stand.

21. That was the basis on which the appeal came before me for an  error  of
    law decision.

Upper Tribunal hearing

22. At the hearing, I asked Mr Bramble to  identify  the  question  on  the
    application form which had been completed incorrectly.  The grounds  of
    appeal said it was question 25.  That contains the answer  to  question
    24.  The question and answer on the claimant's form at [24]-[25] was as
    follows:


|24.  |Have you been issued any visa for the|Yes                    |
|     |United Kingdom, United Kingdom       |                       |
|     |overseas territories, or Commonwealth|                       |
|     |country in the last 10 years?        |                       |
|25.  |Type of visa issued                  |WORKING HOLIDAY        |
|     |Date of issue                        |8 MARCH 2009           |
|     |Date of expiry                       |8 MARCH 2011           |
|     |Issuing authority                    |BHC DHAKA              |


23. It is not clear  how  that  answer  is  to  be  considered  inaccurate.
    Plainly, question 25 was not the right question as it has no  relevance
    to naturalisation.  Mr Bramble was unable to identify any  question  on
    the application form relating to previous naturalisation  applications,
    or previous fraudulent applications.

24. After further discussion, Mr Hussain suggested that the  question  upon
    which the Entry Clearance Officer sought to rely might be question  28:
    "Have you made an application to the Home Office for leave to remain in
    the United Kingdom in the last 10 years", but again,  leave  to  remain
    and naturalisation are different from each other.  It is not clear that
    this is the right question, either. At question  30-31,  the  applicant
    made full disclosure  of  all  visa  refusals.  At  question  33-34  he
    disclosed his voluntary departure in August 2013. No other question  in
    the application form requires the disclosure of previous naturalisation
    applications, or fraudulent applications.

25. Mr Hussain submitted that given the lack of clarity on  the  form,  and
    the claimant's Article 8 private and family life rights in relation  to
    his spouse, the exclusion of the claimant from the  United  Kingdom  on
    such slender grounds was not proportionate.  There was no  evidence  in
    the Entry Clearance  Officer's  decision  that  he  had  exercised  his
    discretion in the exercise of the power in S-EC.2.2 and the  Judge  had
    been entitled to allow the appeal on that basis.

Discussion

26. I am not minded to interfere with the finding of fact that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal made in relation to  the  applicant's  knowledge  of  the
    fraud in  the  naturalisation  application.   If  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer does not arrange representation before the First-tier Tribunal,
    and the Judge makes findings of fact based on  the  evidence  which  is
    placed before her by the claimant, it is particularly hard subsequently
    to show that such  a  finding  is  perverse,  Wednesbury  unreasonable,
    contrary to the evidence, or incomprehensible to the  reviewing  Judge,
    as R (Iran) requires.  In this case, at [25], the Judge was entitled to
    find that the Entry Clearance Officer had not discharged the evidential
    burden of showing that the claimant deliberately attempted  to  mislead
    in the naturalisation application, or that he knew that such  had  been
    done on his behalf.

27. I remind myself of the requirements of S-EC.2.1 and S-EC.2.2:

         "S-EC.2.1         The applicant will normally be refused on grounds
         of suitability if any of paragraphs S-EC.2.2 to 2.5 apply.

          S-EC.2.2         Whether or not to the applicant's knowledge -

             (a)  false information, representations or documents have been
             submitted in relation  to  the  application  (including  false
             information submitted to any person to obtain a document  used
             in support of the application).
             (b)  there has been a failure to disclose  material  facts  in
             relation to the application."
                                                            [Emphasis added]

28. The Entry Clearance Officer relies only on  sub-paragraph  S-EC.2.2(b).
    It is not her case that false information, representations or documents
    were submitted in relation to the present application. It is  her  case
    that failure to disclose the naturalisation application is a failure to
    disclose material facts in  relation  to  the  settlement  application,
    which will normally entail refusal, whether or not the applicant  knows
    about it.  However, Mr Bramble was unable to say with any clarity where
    the previous application  should  have  been  disclosed,  on  the  form
    designed by the Secretary of State. It is certainly not at question 25,
    the question relied upon in the grounds of appeal.

29. Even if the omission were made out, paragraph S-EC.2.1 and  2.2(b)  are
    discretionary, not mandatory. Like paragraph 320(11), the  position  is
    not that refusal is mandatory, but that the applicant 'will normally be
    refused'.  As Mr Hussain observed, there is no sign of the exercise  of
    that discretion in the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer  nor  in
    the review by the Entry Clearance Manager.

30. The omission relied upon  for  the  first  time  in  the  January  2015
    decision, and which the Judge found as a fact was not previously  known
    to the claimant, does not relate to the settlement application, but  to
    a previous application.  It is not 'in  relation  to  the  [settlement]
    application', which may well be why it  is  impossible  to  identify  a
    question on the application form which bears on a previous  application
    for naturalisation, rather than leave to remain.

31. It is right that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law in conflating the
    tests in paragraph 320(11), and S-EC.2.1 and  2.2.   Paragraph  320(11)
    requires both intention ('previously contrived in a significant way  to
    frustrate  the  intentions  of  the  Rules')  and  'other   aggravating
    factors'.   Paragraph S-EC.2.2(b) requires the Entry Clearance  Officer
    to demonstrate failure to  disclose  material  facts  relevant  to  the
    application which the claimant was making.

32. I must therefore consider whether to set aside the decision made.  I do
    not consider that to  be  appropriate.   I  bear  in  mind  that  these
    arguments, which should properly  have  been  made  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, are being made for the first time on appeal because the Entry
    Clearance Officer chose not to arrange representation before the First-
    tier Tribunal.  I remind myself that there is no obvious place  on  the
    form to disclose a previous  nationality  application,  which  concerns
    status, not leave to remain, and Mr Bramble's inability to identify the
    right unanswered question.

33. I consider that, having regard to her finding of fact that the claimant
    did not know of the fraud in the  naturalisation  application,  it  was
    open to the First-tier Tribunal Judge to find that S-EC.2.2(b) was  not
    in play, albeit not for the reasons  she  gave.   There  is  no  proper
    reason to interfere with this decision and I decline to do so.

Conclusions

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.


Signed: Judith A J C Gleeson                 Date:        6 February 2017
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

