
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: oa/05685/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10th October 2016                          |On 13th October 2016          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                               UKVS SHEFFIELD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Anu Mercy Akinyanju
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Fasedemi (Sponsor)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against a decision of Judge  O'Garro  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 5th May 2016.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    FTT and I will refer to her as the Claimant.

 3. The Claimant is a female Nigerian  citizen  born  25th  July  1979  who
    applied for entry clearance to enable her to join her spouse  Alexander
    Fasedemi to whom I shall refer as the Sponsor, in the  United  Kingdom.
    The Sponsor is settled in this country.

 4. The application was refused on 21st November 2014.  It was not accepted
    that the requirements of E-ECP.2.6 and 2.10, which are set  out  below,
    were satisfied;

         E-ECP.2.6


         The relationship between the applicant and their  partner  must  be
         genuine and subsisting.


         E-ECP.2.10


         The applicant and partner must intend to live permanently  together
         in the UK.


 5. In addition it was not accepted that the requirements of E-ECP.4.1 were
    satisfied which related  to  the  English  language  requirement.   The
    Secretary of State noted that the Claimant  was  not  exempt  from  the
    English language requirement and was  not  a  national  of  a  majority
    English speaking country.  It was contended that she did  not  hold  an
    academic qualification recognised by UK NARIC to be the  equivalent  to
    the standard of a Bachelors or Masters degree or PhD in the  UK,  which
    was taught in English.  It was noted that the Claimant had produced  an
    IELTS certificate but the Claimant had not obtained the  minimum  score
    of 4.0  in  listening.   Therefore  the  Secretary  of  State  was  not
    satisfied that the Claimant met the English language requirement.

 6. The Secretary of State did not consider that there were any exceptional
    circumstances which would warrant granting leave to  enter  the  United
    Kingdom outside the Immigration rules, by reliance upon  Article  8  of
    the 1950 European Convention on Human Rights (the 1950 Convention).

 7. The Claimant appealed,  containing  that  adequate  evidence  had  been
    submitted to prove a genuine and subsisting relationship, and that  the
    couple intended to  live  together  permanently  in  the  UK.   It  was
    contended that there was evidence of contact by way of  Skype,  e-mails
    and telephone, and the Sponsor had visited the Claimant in Nigeria.

 8. In relation to the English language requirement, it was stated that the
    Claimant is a graduate of Nasarawa State University in Nigeria and that
    she graduated in 2005.  It was stated that the degree  certificate  was
    attached to the appeal, and evidence from  UK  NARIC  was  attached  to
    confirm the standard of English taught on the  degree  course  equalled
    CEFR level C1.

 9. The application was reviewed following lodgement  of  the  appeal,  but
    refusal of entry clearance was maintained.

10. The FTT heard the appeal on 28th April 2016.  Oral evidence  was  given
    by the Sponsor.  The FTT found the Sponsor to be a witness of truth and
    accepted that the Sponsor and Claimant had  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship, and intended to live permanently together in the UK.   It
    was accepted that the couple had married on 23rd August 2014.

11. In relation to the English language requirement, the FTT referred to  a
    letter from UK NARIC and a certificate from that organisation in  which
    it was stated that the Claimant's degree certificate had been seen, and
    UK NARIC was satisfied that  the  Claimant  met  the  English  language
    proficiency requirements of CEFR C1.  The appeal was therefore  allowed
    under the Immigration rules.

12. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  There was no challenge to the findings made that the  couple
    were in a genuine and subsisting  relationship  and  intended  to  live
    permanently with each other.

13. The challenge related to the findings made by the FTT  in  relation  to
    the English language requirement.

14. It was contended that the degree certificate had not been produced with
    the application for entry clearance, nor had it been  produced  to  the
    FTT.  It was submitted that the FTT had not referred to the  evidential
    requirements set out in Appendix FM-SE of the  Immigration  rules,  and
    not explained how the Claimant met the  specific  requirements  of  the
    Immigration rules.

15. Reference was specifically made to paragraph 31 of Appendix  FM-SE  and
    in particular it was contended that the Claimant had failed to  satisfy
    paragraph 31(a)(iii) and (v), the FTT had made a  misdirection  of  law
    and  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons,  for  concluding   that   the
    requirements of the Immigration rules were satisfied.

16. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated Judge Macdonald  in  the
    following terms:

         "The Appellant is a national of Nigeria whose appeal was allowed by
         Judge of the First-tier Tribunal O'Garro in a decision  promulgated
         on 5th May  2016.   The  grounds  of  application  noted  that  the
         Nigerian  academic  qualification  which  was  relied  on  by   the
         Appellant was not produced to the Tribunal.  The judge had not  set
         out the requirements of Appendix FM-SE.  He should  not  have  been
         satisfied that the Appellant had complied with all  of  the  listed
         provisions there.

         While the judge inferred from the documents  before  him  that  the
         Appellant did meet the English language requirement it is  arguable
         that the reasons given were not sufficient-all as set  out  in  the
         grounds.  Permission to appeal is therefore granted."

17. Directions were subsequently  issued  that  there  should  be  an  oral
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal to  ascertain  whether  the  FTT  had
    erred in law such that the decision must be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

18. The Sponsor attended the hearing.  There was no need for an interpreter
    and proceedings were conducted in English.  The Sponsor confirmed  that
    he was content to proceed without legal representation.

19. I explained to  the  Sponsor  the  purpose  of  the  hearing,  in  that
    initially I must decide whether the FTT had erred in law.  The  Sponsor
    confirmed that he had a copy of the FTT decision, and  a  copy  of  the
    application for permission to appeal and the  grant  of  permission  to
    appeal.

20. The Sponsor submitted a witness statement prepared for the hearing.

21. I heard submissions from Mr Whitwell as to error of law.   Mr  Whitwell
    relied upon the grounds, contending that the requirements of  paragraph
    31 of Appendix FM-SE were not satisfied and the FTT had erred in law in
    allowing the appeal under the Immigration rules.

22. In addition Mr Whitwell referred to Appendix FM-SE  D  contending  that
    because  the  degree  certificate  had  not  been  submitted  with  the
    application, it should not have been considered.

23.  Mr  Whitwell  also  referred  to  section  85A  of  the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002,  which  was  in  force  prior  to  the
    implementation of the Immigration Act 2014, contending that the FTT may
    consider only  the  circumstances  appertaining  at  the  time  of  the
    decision to refuse entry clearance, which was 21st November  2014,  and
    because the degree certificate had not been produced at that  time,  it
    should not have been taken into account.

24. At the conclusion of Mr Whitwell's oral submissions,  I  explained  the
    issues to the Sponsor.  I clarified  my  view  that  the  FTT  was  not
    prevented by Appendix FM-SE D from considering the degree  certificate,
    neither did section 85A prevent the FTT  from  considering  the  degree
    certificate, as the circumstances appertaining at the date  of  refusal
    were that the  Appellant  had  a  Bachelors  degree,  even  though  the
    certificate had not been produced.

25. I observed to the Sponsor that the degree certificate did not  in  fact
    appear to confirm, even though it was  written  in  English,  that  the
    course had been taught in English.  Therefore it appeared that the  FTT
    may have erred in finding that  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    rules were satisfied.

26. The Sponsor relied upon his  witness  statement  which  explained  that
    initially he and the Claimant had been unaware that  the  holder  of  a
    Bachelors degree could rely on this to  satisfy  the  English  language
    requirements, which is why the IELTS test had been submitted  with  the
    entry clearance application.  The Sponsor stated that  English  is  the
    first language in Nigeria, and the  degree  course  undertaken  by  the
    Claimant had been taught in English.

27. Having considered representations made by both parties,  I  found  that
    the FTT had erred in law in allowing the appeal under  the  Immigration
    rules.  This was because paragraph 31(a)(v) of Appendix FM-SE  was  not
    satisfied.  I indicated that I would issue a written decision giving my
    reasons.

28. I then indicated that the decision needed to be re-made.   Mr  Whitwell
    submitted that the decision could be re-made based  upon  the  evidence
    that had been provided to the FTT and there was no need for  a  further
    hearing.  The Secretary of State's position  was  that  the  Claimant's
    appeal should be dismissed because of a failure  to  satisfy  paragraph
    31(a)(v) of Appendix FM-SE.

29. I asked the Sponsor if he had any representations to make, in  relation
    to re-making the decision.  The Sponsor again relied upon  his  witness
    statement, repeating that English is the first language in Nigeria, and
    the Claimant's degree course was taught in English.   I  was  asked  to
    allow her appeal.

30. I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

31. The reason for setting aside the FTT decision is  that  the  FTT  erred
    when considering the English language requirement.  I do not accept the
    submissions made by the Secretary of State to the effect that  the  FTT
    was not entitled to consider the degree certificate.   I  do  not  find
    that Appendix FM-SE D applies to the FTT.  Section 85A of the 2002  Act
    does not mean that  a  piece  of  evidence  cannot  be  considered,  if
    submitted after the  date  of  decision,  provided  that  the  evidence
    relates to circumstances appertaining at the date of decision.

32. It is clear that when the entry clearance  application  was  made,  the
    Claimant initially relied upon an IELTS test but she had not passed  an
    element  of  that  test.   Subsequently  she  relied  upon   a   degree
    certificate dated 21st January 2005 issued by Nasarawa State University
    in Nigeria.  Although this certificate was not submitted with the entry
    clearance application, there is reference in the Grounds of  Appeal  to
    it being submitted with the appeal form.

33. It is not clear whether the FTT actually had sight of  a  copy  of  the
    degree certificate.  It is clear, and was accepted by the Sponsor  that
    the original certificate  was  not  before  the  FTT.   The  FTT  makes
    reference in paragraph 25 to considering  a  certificate  from  the  UK
    NARIC and a letter from that organisation  but  does  not  specifically
    state that the degree certificate was considered.

34. The error of the FTT was in finding that the requirements of  paragraph
    31 were satisfied.  For ease of reference I set out below paragraph  31
    of Appendix FM-SE:

         31.  Evidence of an academic qualification recognised by  UK  NARIC
             to be equivalent to the standard of a Bachelor's  or  Master's
             degree or PhD in the UK and was  taught  in  English  must  be
             either:

             (a)   A  certificate  issued  by  the   relevant   institution
                  confirming  the  award  of  the   academic   qualification
                  showing,

                  (i)  the applicant's name;

                  (ii) the title of award;

                  (iii)    the date of award;

                  (iv) the name of the awarding institution; and

                  (v)  that the qualification was taught in English

             or

             (b)  If the applicant is awaiting graduation or no longer  has
                  the certificate and cannot get a  new  one,  the  evidence
                  must be:

                  (i)  an original academic reference from  the  institution
                      awarding the academic qualification that;

                           (1) is on official letter headed paper;

                      (2)  shows the applicant's name;

                      (3)  shows the title of award;

                      (4)  confirms that the qualification  was  taught  in
                      English;

                      (5)  explains when  the  academic  qualification  has
                           been, or will be awarded; and

                      (6)  states either the date that the certificate will
                           be  issued  (if  the  applicant   has   not   yet
                           graduated) or confirms that  the  institution  is
                           unable to re-issue the  original  certificate  of
                           award.

             or

                  (ii) an original academic transcript that;

                      (1)  is on official letter headed paper;

                      (2)  shows the applicant's name;

                      (3)  the name of the academic institution;

                      (4)  the course title;

                      (5)  confirms that the qualification  was  taught  in
                      English; and

                      (6)  provides confirmation of the award.

35. The Claimant relied upon a degree certificate which satisfies paragraph
    31(a)(i)-(iv).  The certificate confirms the Claimant's name, the title
    of the award which is a BSc (Hons) in political science,  the  date  of
    the award which  is  21st  January  2005,  the  name  of  the  awarding
    institution which is Nasarawa State University, but  does  not  satisfy
    (v)  as  there  is  no  confirmation  by  the   university   that   the
    qualification was taught in English.  This confirmation must, in  order
    to satisfy the Immigration  rules,  be  contained  in  the  certificate
    issued  by  the  university.   I  accept  that  UK  NARIC  produced   a
    certificate indicating that the level of English language is considered
    to meet the requirements of CEFR level C1, but that  does  not  satisfy
    the requirements of paragraph 31(a)(v).

36. Unfortunately Nigeria is not one of the countries listed  in  paragraph
    32 of Appendix FM-SE where it would be  assumed  for  the  purposes  of
    paragraph 31 that the qualification was taught in English.

37. The FTT was therefore wrong in law to find that the degree  certificate
    satisfied paragraph 31 of  Appendix  FM-SE  and  for  that  reason  the
    decision was set aside.

38. In re-making the decision, I  find  that  I  must  dismiss  the  appeal
    because the requirement of paragraph 31(a)(v) of Appendix FM-SE is  not
    satisfied.

39. There was no challenge to the FTT finding that E-ECP.2.6 and  2.10  are
    satisfied, and therefore the finding that the relationship between  the
    Claimant and Sponsor is genuine and subsisting, and they intend to live
    permanently in the UK is preserved.

40. However because the English language requirement is not satisfied,  the
    Claimant's appeal can not succeed under the Immigration rules.

41. I decided that it was appropriate to consider  Article  8  outside  the
    Immigration rules.  I accept that  family  life  has  been  established
    between the  Claimant  and  Sponsor.   Applying  the  five  stage  test
    advocated in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27, I find that Article 8  is  engaged,
    and refusal of entry clearance interferes with the family life that has
    been established.  However this interference is in accordance with  the
    law,  because  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  rules  are  not
    satisfied.

42. The issue is  whether  refusal  is  proportionate.   I  set  out  below
    paragraph 51 of SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387;

         51.  "In our judgment, the approach to Article 8 in  the  light  of
             the Rules in Appendix FM-SE should be the same as  in  respect
             of the substantive LTE and LTR Rules in Appendix FM.  In other
             words, the same  general  position  applies,  that  compelling
             circumstances would have to apply to justify a grant of LTE or
             LTR where the evidence Rules are not complied with."

    For clarification, LTE means leave to enter, and  LTR  means  leave  to
    remain.  In  considering  proportionality,  I  take  into  account  the
    factors contained in section 117B of the 2002 Act.  This confirms  that
    the maintenance of effective  immigration  control  is  in  the  public
    interest, and it is in the public interest that a person seeking  leave
    to enter the United Kingdom can speak English.  The  Claimant  has  not
    satisfied the requirements of the Immigration rules in relation to  her
    English ability.

43. I also take into account the comment  made  by  the  Supreme  Court  in
    paragraph 57 of Patel [2013] UKSC 72 to the effect that it is important
    to remember that Article 8 is not a general dispensing power.

44. I do not find it is appropriate to allow this appeal with reference  to
    Article 8, and disregard  the  English  language  requirements  of  the
    Immigration rules.  I find that there is a considerable public interest
    in maintaining effective immigration control,  and  in  being  able  to
    satisfy the requirements of the Immigration rules.

45. In my view the decision of the  Secretary  of  State  to  refuse  entry
    clearance is not disproportionate and does not  breach  Article  8.   I
    find that the weight  to  be  accorded  to  the  need  to  satisfy  the
    Immigration rules outweighs the weight to be accorded to the wishes  of
    the Sponsor and Claimant to be allowed to live together in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The appropriate course of action would be for the Claimant to
    make a  further  application  for  entry  clearance,  and  provide  the
    required information in  order  to  satisfy  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration rules.  There is therefore no breach of Article  8  of  the
    1950 Convention.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FTT contained an error of law and was set aside.

I substitute a fresh decision.

The Claimant's appeal is dismissed under the Immigration rules and on  human
rights grounds.

Anonymity

The FTT made  no  anonymity  direction.   There  has  been  no  request  for
anonymity made to the Upper Tribunal and I see no need to make an  anonymity
order.


Signed                              Date 11th October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.


Signed                              Date 11th October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

