
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/05826/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 11th February 2015                        |On 23rd February 2015         |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                                Altera Begum
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M K Mustafa, Kalam Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Shilliday, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on  22nd  February  1963.
    She appeals against the determination of the First-tier Tribunal  dated
    6th July 2014 dismissing her appeal against the  Respondent's  decision
    to refuse her application for a certificate of entitlement to right  of
    abode dated 23rd January 2013.

2.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Simpson
    on 19th September 2014 on the basis that the Appellant submitted a copy
    of the certificate of nationality obtained from the  National  Archives
    and a DNA report at the appeal before the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Those
    documents together with the evidence of the Appellant's brother  should
    have been determinative of the issue.  However,  the  Judge  considered
    both the certificate and the DNA report to  be  post-decision  evidence
    and ruled them inadmissible despite the fact that they both related  to
    the facts appertaining at the date  of  decision.   The  Judge  clearly
    misdirected himself as to the implications of DR Morocco* [2005]  UKIAT
    00038 and the determination therefore contained an  arguable  error  of
    law.

3.   At the hearing, Mr Shilliday accepted that the Judge had erred  in  law
    in failing  to  consider  the  DNA  evidence  and  the  certificate  of
    nationality obtained from the archives.  He submitted  that  the  issue
    before me was whether the certificate from the  archives  was  genuine.
    There was no evidence to show that it was  not  and  the  original  was
    produced by the Appellant's representatives.

4.   Mr Mustafa submitted that under Section 5 of  the  British  Nationality
    Act 1948 and Section 14 of the Nationality Act 1981 the Appellant was a
    British citizen by descent and so was entitled to a right of abode. The
    Respondent's  decision  to  refuse  the  Appellant's  application   was
    therefore unlawful. Mr Shilliday submitted that the appeal  could  only
    be allowed to the extent that the decision was not in  accordance  with
    the law.

5.   I find that the Judge erred in law at paragraph 12 of the  decision  in
    finding that he could not rely on the DNA evidence or  the  certificate
    of nationality obtained from the archives. There was  no  issue  as  to
    whether these documents were genuine and therefore,  I  find  that  the
    Appellant was a British citizen by descent and entitled to a  right  of
    abode.  Accordingly, the Respondent's decision of 23rd January 2013 was
    not in accordance with the law.

6.   The First-tier Tribunal erred in law in finding  that  the  certificate
    of nationality and DNA  report  were  inadmissible  having  misdirected
    himself following DR Morocco. I set the decision dated  6th  July  2014
    aside and remake it as follows:   The  Respondent's  decision  of  23rd
    January 2013 was not in accordance with the law and I allow the appeal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 20th February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Frances

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  fee  award
of any fee which has been paid or may be payable.



Signed        Date 20th February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
