
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: oa/05357/2014
                                                               oa/05358/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                    |            Decision & Reasons       |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|On 12 August 2015                      |            On 7 December 2015       |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                        Xiuling he (first appellant)
                         Xue Hao (second appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                      Entry Clearance Officer - beijing

                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants Xiuling He and Xue Hao are citizens of China.  The first
    appellant is the mother of the second appellant.  The  first  appellant
    was born on 1 February 1971 and the second appellant on  15  May  1996.
    On 11 March 2014, the appellants were refused entry  clearance  to  the
    United Kingdom as the spouse and child respectively of a person present
    and settled in this country, namely  the  sponsor  Mr  Thai  Xie.   The
    appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge J  D  L  Edwards)
    which, in a decision promulgated on 6 March 2015, dismissed the appeal.
     The appellants now appeal, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Granting permission, Judge Robertson stated:

         The submission in the grounds that the judge failed to give reasons
         for his decision has arguable merit.   The  judge  heard  from  the
         appellant and he found the sponsor's evidence was "confused,  vague
         and rambling and contradictory" and therefore found that  he  could
         not trust his evidence  that  he  was  the  father  of  the  second
         appellant.  No examples were given as to why the  judge  so  found.
         Furthermore, the Cellmark DNA report confirms that the  sponsor  is
         the father (and the name of the father in the  Cellmark  report  is
         the same as that of the sponsor in his  UK  passport).   The  judge
         states that all the report does is "... confirm the minor appellant
         is the son of the parents giving the names they have.  In the  case
         of the sponsor that is wholly unsatisfactory in view of the quality
         of his evidence."  However, Cellmark is a Home Office approved  DNA
         test provider; it is reasonable that Cellmark will have carried out
         the appropriate identity checks prior to obtaining samples for  the
         purposes of carrying out the test.  It is arguable the  judge  gave
         insufficient consideration to the report before rejecting it on the
         basis of the evidence of the sponsor.

 3. The judge found at [20] that Mr Xie gave  "long  rambling  answers"  to
    questions put to him in cross-examination noting that his answers "were
    contradictory."  The judge had not specified what parts of his evidence
    he found to be contradictory.  At [21] the judge noted the sponsor  had
    said that his correct name was Xue Qun.  When he  had  claimed  asylum,
    his name had been recorded as  Xhe  Hui  Xie.   The  sponsor  had  "not
    bothered to change this since."  The judge also recorded [19]  that  Mr
    Xie is a British citizen.

 4. The judge was also critical [25] of the fact that the  Cellmark  report
    which was dated 28 April 2014 had not been submitted to the  respondent
    "at some stage between that date and the date  of  the  hearing  in  an
    attempt to resolve matters without the need for an appeal ...".

 5. The judge concluded [28] that "... it is impossible for me to find that
    Mr Xie who gave evidence to me is the person named as the father in the
    Cellmark report."  The question is whether the judge's findings and the
    reasons he has given for those findings justify such a conclusion.   As
    Judge Robertson noted, Cellmark  carry  out  their  own  procedures  to
    ensure the identity of those individuals from whom samples are obtained
    may be confirmed.  Whilst there may have  been  no  evidence  from  the
    appellant regarding adherence to such procedures, it is  unlikely  that
    the appellant expected the judge to find as he did at  [28].   Further,
    at [27] the judge found that he did not "accept  Mr  Xie's  explanation
    for having at least  two  names  in  China  and  UK."   The  First-tier
    Tribunal should be very careful regarding the transliteration of  names
    from (for example) Mandarin to English; it is highly likely that  there
    will be variations in spelling as a  result  of  such  transliteration.
    Further, Mr Xie told the judge that he had sent  his  passport  to  the
    Home Office to have the spelling error in his name corrected and  there
    was also evidence in  the  form  of  a  letter  from  the  Home  Office
    referring to a "document" submitted by the sponsor.  The judge rejected
    that evidence [27] but only for  the  somewhat  weak  reason  that  the
    letter had  not  referred  to  a  "passport"  but  only  "a  document."
    Furthermore, the judge's characterisation of the sponsor's evidence  as
    "confused, vague, rambling and contradictory" is again not supported by
    specific reference to parts of  either  the  written  evidence  of  the
    sponsor or what he actually said in oral evidence at the hearing.  I am
    also not clear why it should have weighed against  the  appellant  that
    his solicitors had not submitted a Cellmark report  to  the  respondent
    "in an attempt to resolve matters without  the  need  for  an  appeal."
    Having regard to all these matters, I am not satisfied that  the  judge
    has provided adequate reasons for his findings.  I  consider  that  the
    evidence needs to be looked at afresh.  With that in mind, I set  aside
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and remit the  matter  to  that
    Tribunal (not judge J D L Edwards) to remake the decision.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 6 March 2015  is  set
aside.  None of the findings of fact shall stand.  The  appeal  is  remitted
to the First-tier Tribunal for that Tribunal to remake the decision.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 10 November 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

