
 [pic]



The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)            Appeal Number: OA/05021/2015
OA051062015


|                                                                         |
|                                                                         |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Liverpool                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 25th April 2017                        |On 27th June 2017                |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY

                                   Between

                                    L  m
                                    A P M
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

  THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER FOR ZIMBABWE BASED IN PRETORIA, SOUTH AFRICA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Her sponsor, M.
For the Respondent:  Mrs.Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer.







                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction

   1. The appellant is a national of Zimbabwe born in April 2001. He, along
      with his paternal older brother, PM, applied on 21 January 2015 for
      entry clearance. This was in order to join their father M, hereinafter
      referred to as the sponsor for the purposes of settlement. The
      applications were considered under paragraph 352D of the immigration
      rules. This is concerned with applications to join a parent who has
      refugee status. It must be shown that (i) the applicant's parent has
      refugee status;(ii) that the applicant is under 18 and (iii) not
      leading an independent life and(iv) where part of the sponsor's family
      unit when they left.


   2. The entry clearance officer accepted that the sponsor had refugee
      status and was the father of the children. The latter was evidenced by
      DNA testing. The application was refused because the entry clearance
      officer was not satisfied they formed part of the sponsor's family
      when he left. Home Office records show that the sponsor came to the
      United Kingdom in April 2003. At screening he did not refer to PM but
      did mention LM.

   3. It was originally indicated that the sponsor had separated from PM's
      mother, IM, and the child lived with her and that he financially
      supported them. In the grounds of appeal he indicated that he
      separated from the child's mother in 1999 and that initially the child
      stayed with her. They then changed this arrangement to the sponsor
      having custody from Friday through to Monday.

   4. He then began a relationship with Ms A.N and she gave birth to LM. LM
      lived with them until he left in 2003. During this time PM joined them
      for part of the week. He said LM's mother died in December 2005. The
      sponsor said they were cared for by his sister and then subsequently
      his brother. Subsequently neither could care for the children and they
      are in the care of the sponsor's school friend. This is only a
      temporary arrangement.

   5. The respondent accepted the sponsor had been in contact with the
      children since 2010 and sent money for them. However, the entry
      clearance officer questioned the whereabouts of PM's mother and why
      other family could not care for them. Regarding LM, there was no
      confirmation that his mother had died. Furthermore, there was no
      evidence that he was part of the sponsor's family unit when he left.





The First Tier Tribunal

   6. A restricted right of appeal applied. The appeal was heard by
      Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal McClure at Manchester on
      19 July 2016. In a decision promulgated on 2 August 2016 both appeals
      were dismissed.


   7. The judge set out how in considering article 8 the provisions of rule
      352D were relevant as this was the respondent's attempt to comply with
      the U.K.'s article 8 obligations. Reference was also made to the
      section 55 duty in the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.
      The judge pointed out that he also took into account the provisions of
      sections 117 A and B of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act
      2002.


   8. The judge heard from the sponsor. The judge had his original asylum
      interview in which he said he married Ms AN, the mother of LM and they
      lived in the Plumtree area of Zimbabwe. Matters became complicated
      when the sponsor told the judge that AN was not her real name. He said
      her name was CN aka SN.He said both children were born in Plumtree.

   9. The sponsor submitted birth certificates. The certificate in respect
      of LM indicated he was born in Hawange. This is North West from
      Bulawayo, the area originally identified and 270 km distant. The
      certificate indicated the birth was registered in November 2006 and SN
      the informant. That was one of the names the sponsor said the child's
      mother went under. If so, this was not consistent with the claim that
      LM's mother had died in 2005. The sponsor was asked about this and
      said it was his sister who had obtained the birth certificate and
      suggested she had given incorrect information. There were similar
      contradictions in the birth certificate for his elder brother, PM. His
      birth was not registered until December 2009 and in Bulilimanangwe.
      The informant was named as the sponsor. The judge commented that if he
      had returned to Zimbabwe he would have been jeopardising his refugee
      status. The judge commented on the fact that the births had been
      registered in offices considerable distances apart.

  10. Dealing with the appeal of PM the judge referred to the application
      where it was indicated he had been living with his mother from 1998
      through to 2006.Later, as set out above, the account was that he had
      living with the sponsor several days a week. He was not referred to in
      the asylum interview but LM was. The judge was not satisfied that PM
      was part of the sponsor's family when he left Zimbabwe. Consequently,
      the requirements of the rules were not met for him.

  11. With regard to LM, the judge concluded that the birth certificate
      produced in respect of him was not accurate with regard to the
      informant; the place of birth and other details. It also called into
      question the claim that the child's mother was dead. The judge found
      that false facts in the form of the birth certificate had been put
      forward in support of the application for entry clearance. The judge
      was also not satisfied that the truth had been told in respect of his
      mother. The judge referred to the sponsor's claimant she used
      different names and concluded the sponsor had been altering his
      evidence in an attempt to fit in with the documents produced. The
      judge did not find the sponsor to be credible.

  12. The judge did accept at paragraph 50 that LM was a member of the
      sponsor's family when the sponsor left. He also accepted he had not
      formed an independent family unit and was dependent upon his parents.
      The judge commented on the different names given for his mother and
      the absence of documentation to support the claim she was deceased.
      The judge pointed out that if you were still alive this was clearly a
      material consideration. However, under the rules this was not
      determinative as the applicable rule makes no reference to the other
      parent. On this basis LM would meet the requirements of the rules.

  13. The judge then referred to rule 320(7A). This provides as follows:

      Grounds on which entry clearance or leave to enter the United Kingdom
      is to be refused.


          (7A) where false representations have been made or false documents
         or information have been submitted (whether or not material to the
         application, and whether or not to the applicant's knowledge), or
         material facts have not been disclosed, in relation to the
         application or in order to obtain documents from the Secretary of
         State or a third party required in support of the application.

  14. The judge stated and paragraph 47 that for the false representations
      to be material they must be produced dishonestly. The judge
      acknowledged that such dishonesty could not be placed upon the minor
      LM.However; those making the application on his behalf clearly knew it
      had been produced dishonestly.


  15. The judge accepted the sponsor had the ability to support LM but did
      not accept the child's mother was dead or that the child no longer had
      any accommodation. The judge concluded that whilst there was family
      life between LM and the sponsor and the decision prevents that family
      life becoming closer it was proportionate. This was  in the interests
      of immigration control. The judge was clearly influenced by the birth
      certificate produced and the false details found to be presented.




The Upper Tribunal

  16. Permission to appeal in respect of LM was granted on the basis it was
      arguable that there was a material error of law in the decision. This
      was on the basis that irrespective of the use of false documents or
      whether or not his mother was alive, the judge had found he met the
      requirements of rule 252D. The rules are meant to be article 8
      compliant.


  17. At hearing the sponsor attended and was not represented. He confirmed
      there was no further appeal in respect of PM. PM is now an adult but
      that would not make a material difference because he was under 18 at
      the time of application. The sponsor indicated he was there to try and
      obtain the right for his child LM to live with him. He indicated he
      had lost one child, namely the elder appellant. He denied any
      wrongdoing in the application. The presenting officer opposed the
      appeal and relied upon the rule 24 response.

Consideration

  18. The judge's decision reflects a distinction between the cases of PM
      and LM. The distinction is that the judge found as a fact that PM was
      not living as part of the sponsor's household. In support of this was
      the fact that the sponsor had not named him when he claimed
      protection. Furthermore the application it did not indicate he was
      part of his household but suggested the child was his mother. It was
      only later that the suggestion he lived part-time with the sponsor was
      introduced. From the findings PM would not have meet the rules.
      However, in the case of LM the judge did accept that the child lived
      with the sponsor when he left. The judge acknowledged that therefore
      the requirements of 320(7A) were met. This rule is concerned with
      reuniting refugee families and there was no stipulation that the child
      only have one parent. However, the judge indicated he was influenced
      by the false documentation submitted and the misrepresentation that
      the child's mother was deceased.


  19. It can be implied from the grant of leave that meeting the rules could
      have led to a successful outcome on an article 8 basis. However, it
      has to be born in mind that there was a restricted right of appeal.
      The judge was not considering on appeal whether the immigration rules
      were met. Rather, the judge was considering matters on freestanding
      article 8 basis. This is a wider concept. Certainly the ability to
      meet the relevant rule is a consideration. It is not the only
      consideration however. The judge was entitled to consider the
      deception used, albeit not by the appellant personally. The
      credibility of the sponsor was a relevant factor in considering
      whether this was an abuse of application. The judge did not find the
      claim that the child would be homeless or motherless credible.

  20. It is clear this is a carefully prepared decision .The judge
      appreciated the limited right of appeal and carefully examined the
      claims made in respect of both appellants and the evidence produced.
      The judge was entitled to raise paragraph 320(7A) as this is part of
      the control mechanism for immigration. It indicates the wider factors
      taken into account in considering the proportionality of the decision.
      It is my conclusion that no material error of law has been
      demonstrated. Consequently, the decision dismissing the appeal shall
      stand.

Decision.

No material error of law has been demonstrated in the decision of
Designated Immigration Judge McClure. Consequently, that decision which
dismisses the appellant's appeal shall stand.

Deputy Judge Farrelly

26th June 2017

