
 [pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/05098/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 15 April 2016                          |On 28 April 2016                  |
|Prepared 15 April 2016                    |                                  |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                                    m a a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                ECO - NAIROBI
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Muman, Counsel, instructed by P A Todd & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant, a national of Somalia, date of birth [ ] 2007,  appealed
    against the ECO's decision to refuse entry clearance with reference  to
    paragraphs 297(i)(e)(f) and 297(iv)(v) of  the  Immigration  Rules  and
    with reference to Article 8 ECHR.

2.   For reasons given in my decision promulgated about 27 February  2016  I
    concluded  that  the  Original  Tribunal,  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge
    Dickinson, decision of 3 December 2014, could not stand and the  matter
    would have to be remade.

3.   From my decision it is clear as could  be  on  the  evidence  that  the
    judge's adverse  conclusions on credibility and the reliability of  the
    Sponsor's ([AI]) account simply could not stand because not  only  were
    they unreasoned but  also  disclosed  a  lack  of  proper  reasons  for
    rejecting  her  credibility.    It  was  also  clear  that  the   judge
    misunderstood  other  matters  which  tainted  the  assessment  of  the
    evidence concerning the circumstances in which the Appellant, a  child,
    was living in Uganda.

4.   Accordingly, it was clear that on the evidence which  was  unchallenged
    that the Sponsor had sole responsibility for the purposes of  paragraph
    297(i)(e) of the immigration rules, which applied, because the evidence
    provided and produced to me showed that the Sponsor,  his  mother,  had
    complete hands on control having sole responsibility within  the  sense
    contemplated in TD (Yemen: paragraph  397(i)(i):  sole  responsibility)
    Yemen [2006] UKAIT 00049.

5.   The Appellant's Sponsor adduced evidence of the contact  she  maintains
    with the current daily care for the Appellant. The evidence showed  she
    was paying the school fees, paying a regular allowance for his care and
    upkeep and was with three or four times a week she had contact with the
    Appellant by telephone. Her evidence was credible and reliable  of  her
    control of any decisions affecting the Appellant child.

6.    In  addition  the  Appellant  produced  evidence  to  show  the  clear
    termination of contact between the father of  the  Appellant,  who  had
    left him behind in Ethiopia with third parties, confirming that  he  no
    longer wished to have contact with the Appellant.  The evidence being a
    letter  from  the  father  of  the  Appellant  together  with  identity
    documents was not substantively challenged. Thus there was no  evidence
    to suggest there was any sharing of responsibility between the  parents
    of the Appellant in any meaningful way since about 2013.

7.   I was wholly satisfied on the evidence produced to me in remaking  this
    matter the Appellant had discharged the burden of proof upon a  balance
    of probabilities that he met the requirements of paragraph 297(i)(e) of
    the immigration rules; the requirement of sub-paragraph (ii)  that  the
    Appellant was under the age of 18 ; and sub-paragraph (iii) he was  not
    leading an independent life, was unmarried and not a civil partner  and
    had not formed an  independent  family  unit.    I  find  the  evidence
    previously  provided showed that  the  Appellant  could  and  would  be
    accommodated adequately by the Sponsor without recourse to public funds
    in accommodation occupied exclusively  by  him  and  his  mother  (sub-
    paragraph (iv)) and he would  be maintained adequately by  the  Sponsor
    without recourse to public funds( sub-paragraph(v).

8.   In the circumstances therefore Mr  Mills  properly  accepted  that  the
    evidence in relation to maintenance and contact addressed the issues of
    sole responsibility and the requirements of the Rules with reference to
    paragraph 297 had been  established  as  required  upon  a  balance  of
    probabilities at the material time as well  as  subsequently.   In  the
    light of those circumstances no issue arose with reference to Article 8
    of the ECHR.

Notice of Decision

9.    The  Original  Tribunal's  decision  did  not  stand.   The  following
    decision is substituted. The appeal of the Appellant is allowed.

Anonymity Order

10.  An anonymity order was required given the age of the Appellant and  his
    personal circumstances.
Fee Award

11.  No fee award is made because this appeal has essentially  succeeded  on
    a  clarification  of  the  evidence  and  the  production  of   further
    information  which  directly  addressed  the  points  in  issue  raised
    originally by the ECO.

DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 24 April 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey


