
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/05425/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 27 March 2015                     |On 28 April 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                      Entry Clearance Officer, PRETORIA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            SAMYUKEL MATAMBANDAZO
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Matthews, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Jackfama the Respondent's mother (the sponsor)


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW

 1. The Entry Clearance Officer has been granted permission to  appeal  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Majid.  I  shall  refer  to  the
    respondent in these proceedings as the claimant. For reasons  given  in
    his decision following the appeal heard on 8 October  2014,  the  judge
    allowed the claimant's appeal under the Immigration Rules and on  human
    rights grounds against the decision dated 15 January 2013 refusing  him
    entry clearance to the United Kingdom as an  adult  dependent  relative
    under the relevant Immigration Rules including  EC-DR.1.1  of  Appendix
    FM.

 2. The case before the Entry  Clearance  Officer  was  that  the  claimant
    suffers from mental health illness and requires the care of his  mother
    in the United Kingdom. The ECO contended that the claimant's mother had
    not  provided  a  written  undertaking  to  be  responsible   for   his
    maintenance and accommodation (EC-DR.1.1(c) with reference to S-E.2.4).
     Furthermore the evidence indicated the claimant was able to carry  out
    everyday tasks funded by  his  mother.  The  letter  from  Parirenyatwa
    Hospital describing the claimant's medical condition did not  state  an
    inability to manage himself.  There had been a failure to  provide  any
    details of the care arrangements that had been made in the  UK  and  it
    was unclear whether the claimant's mother would be  in  a  position  to
    meet the costs of such care as is required.    She  had  not  submitted
    bank statements in support of the application to show she would be able
    to meet the costs of the respondent's maintenance and care in the UK.

 3. The sponsor appeared before the First-tier Tribunal. She  relied  on  a
    skeleton argument arguing that the  application  had  been  made  under
    paragraph 319V(i)(f) based on her status as a refugee as  well  as  the
    application of Article 8.   In  addition  she  relied  on  a  statement
    explaining the consequences the respondent's diagnosis in December 2011
    with depression and a psychotic disorder.  This observes that  she  had
    referred him for medical help but there was  little  if  anything  that
    doctors could do apart from advice  that  psychiatric  help  should  be
    sought. She refers to the church looking after her  son  who  had  been
    prescribed some medication which was not available in pharmacies.  When
    obtained her son reacted badly to that medication. He could  no  longer
    live without supervision.  She was his sole surviving parent.  Although
    the church was providing him with accommodation they could not continue
    to do so for "a long time".  Reference is made to the poor quality  for
    the  health  delivery  system  in  Zimbabwe.    The   maintenance   and
    accommodation issues are addressed with reference to the proof she  had
    submitted with the application regarding her accommodation, her regular
    employment, thus her regular income taken with a student grant.

 4. The challenge is three fold.  The first asserts that the  judge  failed
    to address the aspects of the Rules the decision had identified as  not
    met.  The second argues the Article 8 analysis was inadequate  and  the
    third arising out for that criticism is a failure to apply s.19 of  the
    Immigration Act 2014 (i.e. part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002).

 5. The sponsor reiterated her concerns about her  son's  welfare  and  her
    responsibility for him.   She explained that she has now qualified as a
    nurse and would be able to care for the respondent.  She also confirmed
    that the bishop is still caring for her son in Zimbabwe.

 6. Mr Matthews had nothing of substance to add to the grounds of challenge
    except to identify there had been a failure in addition by the claimant
    to provide the documents required in Appendix FM-SE at paragraphs 33 to
    37.

 7. I am satisfied that the judge erred as  challenged.  The  determination
    does not identify the rule that he considered benefited  the  claimant.
    It is not clear whether the judge considered  the  case  was  made  out
    under paragraph 391V(i)(f) based on  the  sponsor's  claim  to  refugee
    status. The ability of the respondent to succeed under these provisions
    required him inter alia to demonstrate that he was  "...  living  alone
    outside the  United  Kingdom  in  the  most  exceptional  compassionate
    circumstances ...".  The skeleton argument which appears to  have  been
    prepared by the sponsor's previous representatives refers to an earlier
    application having been unsuccessful because the  claimant  lived  with
    his aunt.  The medical condition arose subsequently and this has led to
    her refusal to live with him.

 8.  The  judge  refers  in  his  decision  to  exceptional   compassionate
    circumstances but it is not clear whether this was in  the  context  of
    the Immigration Rules or on the Article 8 analysis. The overall picture
    painted by the determination is one of a blurring  of  aspects  of  the
    rules that may or may not been relevant and Article  8  issues  without
    any sensible organised structure.

 9. Accordingly I set aside the decision and as I indicated at the  hearing
    it will be remade before me on a later date.

10. It is in the interests of the sponsor to obtain  legal  advice  and  to
    ensure representation on that occasion.  The issues to be addressed  in
    the remaking of the decision include

          i) Identification of the relevant Immigration Rules.

         ii) To identify precisely the  documentation  that  was  submitted
             with the application in the light of the sponsor's  assertions
             that she had sent an undertaking and bank statements with  the
             application.

11. I explained to the sponsor that a remaking of  the  decision  would  be
    confined to a consideration of matters appertaining at the time of  the
    decision  to  refuse,  that  is  to  say  January  2013.  A  change  in
    circumstance as to the claimant or indeed the sponsor might possibly be
    excluded from any reconsideration.  It  is  for  the  sponsor  to  take
    advice whether to continue to  pursue  this  appeal  or  make  a  fresh
    application.

      a) In the light of the absence of a bundle from  the  Entry  Clearance
         Officer I direct that this be obtained by the  Secretary  of  State
         within 28 days and served  on  the  sponsor  and  the  respondent's
         advisors if they are instructed.

      b) The sponsor is directed to promptly notify the Secretary  of  State
         if she does engage representatives.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The appeal is allowed to the extent the decision is set aside  and  the
    matter is remitted to differently constituted First-tier Tribunal.



Signed        Date 27 April 2015
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

