
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/05547/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 23rd April 2015               |On the 14th May 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Mr DONOVAN FULLWOOD
                     (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE/NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss M Vidal, Counsel, Duncan Lewis & Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Mr Fullwood is a citizen of Jamaica with a lengthy and I can safely say
    unimpressive immigration and criminal history.  He was deported from
    the UK so he was illegally in the UK when to be returned at one point
    in breach but has since returned to Jamaica.  Since 1998 he has accrued
    no further convictions and is now a man who has maintained that status
    since then.

 2. This appeal comes about because in 2012 he successfully challenged the
    deportation that had been made some years before.   His appeal on that
    occasion was heard in Field House on the 12th April 2012 by Upper
    Tribunal Judges Warr and Kekic.   For reasons that they gave in a
    lengthy determination promulgated on the 25th April 2012 placing
    reliance not only on the evidence that showed that he had reformed and
    had changed. It was also decided that the Article 8 rights of others,
    principally his wife and son, were such that the deportation order
    could no longer be sustained.  Reliance was placed on several other
    determinations that preceded theirs and they found that the original
    Tribunal which had dismissed his application to revoke had made an
    error of law.  That decision was set aside and the Upper Tribunal
    remade the decision allowing it on Article 8 grounds.

 3. That decision has not been challenged and remains extant. I also noted
    that there is no evidence to show other than the fact that they have
    been separated for now longer and that his son is now older that there
    have been no other material changes of circumstances.

 4. The Appellant applied under Appendix FM  for entry clearance to join
    his wife and son.  It is accepted that he meets all of the requirements
    of Appendix FM except that the Secretary of State followed the Entry
    Clearance Officer and placed reliance on the suitability requirements
    of Appendix FM  and in particular S.EC.1.4.  That reads as follows:

         "(a) The exclusion of the applicant in the UK is conducive to the
         public good because they have been convicted of an offence for
         which they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at
         least four years or,

         (b)  have been convicted of an offence for which they have been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment for at least twelve months
         but less than four years unless a period of ten years has passed
         since the end of the sentence, or

         (c)  being convicted of an offence for which they have been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than twelve months
         unless a period of five years has passed since the end of the
         sentence."

 5. Where this paragraph applies unless refusal would be contrary to the
    Human Rights Convention or the Convention and Protocol Relating to the
    Status of Refugees it will only be in exceptional circumstances that
    the public interest in maintaining the refusal will be outweighed by
    compelling factors.

 6. The first of those exceptions was the basis on which the Tribunal Judge
    allowed the appeal, namely that it would be a breach of Article 8 that
    his exclusion would absolve him and so therefore he fell within that
    paragraph which provided the exception to the suitability requirement.

 7. The Secretary of State has challenged that.  The grounds argue that the
    Judge had not considered whether or not S.EC.1.4A applied.  The
    category I have stated is the decision maker and the ISE are joined to
    first assessment of the refusal of entry would be contrary to the ECHR
    or the Refugee Convention and then if not to go on to consider whether
    there are exceptional circumstances.  The grounds were considered and
    permission was granted by Judge Mark Davies.  He noted that the Judge
    had qualified her mind as to whether the exclusion of the Appellant was
    conducive to the public good.

 8. It seems to me that they have missed the central point.  Clearly SE1.4
    applies to this Appellant because of the nature of his convictions but
    the exception is that unless refusal would be contrary to the Human
    Rights Convention it would only otheriwse be in exceptional
    circumstances that the public interest in maintaining refusal would be
    outweighed by compelling factors.  That paragraph has to be read as
    meaning that where it is contrary to the Human Rights Convention then
    the suitability requirements are displaced.  Full consideration has
    been given to the background of Mr Fullwood on several occasions and he
    has the benefit of the Upper Tribunal determination promulgated on the
    13th April 2012 and signed by Dr Kekic in that it was found then that
    his continued exclusion would be a breach of Article 8. Applying
    Devaseelan that was a finding which the First-tier Tribunal  in this
    case was obliged  to follow.

 9. Accordingly the Judge was obliged to find that Mr Fullwood's continued
    exclusion was a breach of the Human Rights Convention and therefore the
    exception to the suitability requirement automatically came into play.
    It was not then necessary to consider whether there were any
    exceptional circumstances the breach of the Human Rights Convention
    answered the public interest point that would otherwise have been
    made.

10. In those circumstances I am obliged to find that the decision was not
    only one that was open to the Judge, it is a decision that the Judge
    was obliged to make, relying on the determination of Judges Kekic and
    Warr and accordingly in those circumstances there is no error contained
    within the determination.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is
    upheld and the appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed and the decision of the
First-tier Tribunal stands.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date 28 April 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Parkes

