
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/05890/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4th December 2015                 |On 8th January 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                               MR JILONG CHEN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Kannagara, Counsel, instructed by Anglo Chinese
                    Law Firm Ltd
For the Respondent:    Miss A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  by  the  Appellant,  with
    permission against  a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Shand
    promulgated on 29th May 2015 in  which  he  dismissed  the  Appellant's
    appeal against the Entry Clearance  Officer's  decision  to  refuse  to
    grant him entry clearance to join his father in the UK.  The  Appellant
    is a Chinese national born on 23rd December 1995.  He is now  an  adult
    almost 20, but he was a minor at the date of the application which  led
    to the decision under appeal that was taken on 10 October 2012.

 2. The grounds on which permission to appeal was granted was  whether  the
    judge had applied the law correctly,  in  particular  the  case  of  TD
    (Paragraph 297(i)(e): "sole responsibility") Yemen [2006]  UKAIT  00049
    when deciding the single issue in the  appeal  as  to  whether  the  UK
    sponsoring father had had sole responsibility for the upbringing of his
    son.  Permission to appeal was also granted on the basis of whether the
    judge had adequately considered Article 8  but  that  was  not  pursued
    before me today.

 3. The Appellant's representative  has  argued  that  although  the  judge
    referred to the case of TD (Yemen) and even set it out in the decision,
    he in fact did not follow its guidance. The judge has relied solely  on
    the choice of school being shared with the grandparents  and  the  fact
    that he was separated from his son for a period of sixteen years.   The
    choice of school, it was argued,  was  made  in  conjunction  with  the
    grandparents because the father himself is not highly educated and  the
    grandparents' knowledge, being in China, would have  been  far  greater
    than his. It  is  also  argued  that  it  is  not  necessary  for  sole
    responsibility to have subsisted for the entirety of the sixteen years.
    The judge has not justified his finding that responsibility was  shared
    and not followed  TD  (Yemen).  The  representative  also  referred  to
    paragraph 9 of TD (Yemen)  which  itself  refers  to  an  earlier  case
    (Emmanuel v SSHD [1972] Imm AR 69) which he  said  related  to  similar
    facts to the present one.

 4. I would differ in that comparison because the Emmanuel case referred to
    in TD related to a mother who had left a child at the age of 4 and that
    child was now aged 11. It was found that she  had  not  given  up  sole
    responsibility.  That is very different from the  facts  of  this  case
    where the father left the Appellant at the age of only 1  or  2  months
    old and the Appellant being almost 18 by the time of  the  application.
    In the intervening Article 8 years there were only two visits by father
    to the Appellant.  It is true that the father  could  not  visit  China
    prior to January 2010 as up until that point he had no status to be  in
    the United Kingdom and if he had left it he would not have been able to
    return.  Whilst that explains why he had not visited China  it  is  not
    necessarily a very good explanation because he did not in fact have any
    status to be in the UK.

 5. In defending the First-tier Tribunal's decision the Presenting  Officer
    relied on a Rule 24 response essentially that the  judge  had  directed
    himself appropriately, had followed the guidance of TD (Yemen) and  was
    entitled to find on the evidence that responsibility was shared and  on
    that basis the father could not be said to have sole responsibility.

 6. In the determination at paragraph 22 the judge notes that  father  came
    to the United Kingdom in 1996, the Appellant only having been  born  in
    December 1995, and finds that the Sponsor left  for  the  UK  when  the
    Appellant was only a month or two old.  At paragraph 24 he  notes  that
    at the date of the decision the Sponsor had only visited  China  twice,
    in 2010 and 2012.  2010 was the first time he had seen his son, who was
    then aged 15.

 7. In paragraph 25 he refers to the evidence and finds that the Sponsor is
    in regular contact with his son by instant messaging, the internet  and
    accepted his evidence that he speaks to his son once a week and he  had
    weekly  telephone  contact  prior  to  them  being  connected  via  the
    internet.  However at paragraph 27 he considers the question of who has
    made decisions in the child's life and he noted contradictions  in  the
    evidence in that regard and he says that

         "It is also the case that contrary to the Sponsor's claim  that  he
         chose his son's school the Sponsor's mother stated in her telephone
         interview that it was her husband, the Appellant's grandfather  who
         hose chose the Appellant's school. Having regard to the  fact  that
         the Sponsor has been away from China for many years and was himself
         (as he says in his witness statement only educated to a low  level,
         it is reasonable to expect the Appellant's grandfather  was  better
         placed in Chain than the Sponsor  was  in  the  UK  to  assess  any
         schools which were possible choices for the  Appellant  to  attend.
         That would be consistent with the grandmother' statement  that  her
         husband chose the school."

 8. He then goes on:

         "Having regard however to the Appellant's  statement  that  it  has
         been due to the monies remitted by the Sponsor that  the  Appellant
         was able to complete higher middle  school  education  and  to  the
         Appellant's grandmother's statement that we discuss  all  important
         things with the sponsor I accept that the choice of school for  the
         Appellant  was  a  decision  that  likely  to  have  been   reached
         consensually."

 9. He then deals with the lack of any evidence  about  medical  treatment,
    mainly because it does not appear that the child has needed anything in
    particular.

10. He  then  at  paragraph  27  takes  into  account  that  the  Sponsor's
    separation from the Appellant was not simply of short duration; it  was
    virtually the entirety of the child's life. The  fact  that  the  child
    has, during the entirety of his life, lived with his grandparents  with
    close contact with an aunt and on the basis of the paucity of  evidence
    as to father's involvement and decisions that he  has  actually  taken,
    the judge has found that the true position here was that responsibility
    was shared between the sponsor and the grandparents.  He  has  reasoned
    that though, he  has  directed  himself  appropriately  to  TD  (Yemen)
    setting out the relevant parts at paragraph 17 of the decision.  Whilst
    it is of course true that a child being looked after by others does not
    necessarily mean sole responsibility  no  longer  subsists,  it  is  of
    course equally the case  that  in  other  family  situations  it  means
    precisely that.  That is what the judge found in this case. He directed
    himself  appropriately  to  the  case  law  and  concluded  after   due
    consideration of all of the evidence  and  for  detailed  reasons  that
    responsibility in this case was shared  and  therefore  the  sponsoring
    father could not be said to have sole responsibility and dismissed  the
    appeal for that reason.

11. So far as Article 8 is concerned, it has not been  pressed  before  me,
    wisely, because given the findings on shared  responsibility  the  fact
    that  this  young  man  has  lived  the  entirety  of  life  with   his
    grandparents and in China his best interests are no doubt  to  maintain
    the status quo and he would not succeed on Article 8 in any event.

Notice of Decision

12. For all of those reasons the appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.



13. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 7th January 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

