

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Numbers: OA/05504/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                              |  Determination          |
|                                                  |Promulgated              |
|On 10th September 2014                            |On 17th September 2014   |
|                                                  |                         |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                  Between:

                           AVA-MARIE ARLENE COMRIE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr A Burrett, instructed by A.J.A. Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The Appellant

1.    The Appellant is a citizen of Jamaica born on 16th December 1994.  She
      appeals against the determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  dated
      17th  April  2014  dismissing  her  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
      decision of 22nd January 2013 refusing entry clearance  to  settle  in
      the UK with her father  [the  Sponsor]  under  paragraph  297  of  the
      Immigration Rules.



2.    Permission to appeal was granted by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Kebede  on
      1st August 2014 on the grounds that it was arguable the  Judge  failed
      to make clear findings on the Appellant's circumstances at the date of
      the Respondent's decision to  refuse  entry  clearance  including  her
      relationship with her mother and, in concentrating  on  the  issue  of
      where she was  living,  failed  to  make  findings  on  the  Sponsor's
      evidence as to his level of responsibility.

3.    At the hearing, Mr Burrett submitted  that  the  issue  in  this  case
      whether the Sponsor had sole responsibility. However, the Judge failed
      to make findings in respect of the Sponsor's  responsibilities  having
      confused the issue with where the Appellant was living. The Judge  had
      failed to  make  findings  on  who  was  making  decisions  about  the
      Appellant's welfare.

4.    Ms Everett submitted that the Judge was entitled to attach  weight  to
      the issue of the Appellant's residence. The Appellant had  lived  with
      her mother all her life and the Sponsor's evidence (paragraph 17)  was
      that he still discussed matters relating to  the  Appellant  with  her
      mother. The Judge did not accept that the Appellant had moved in  with
      her aunt until very recently. He made  favourable  findings  that  the
      Sponsor had some responsibility at paragraph 29, but with the evidence
      that the Appellant had lived with her mother for most of her life  and
      gave her mother's address in her application form, there would have to
      be overwhelming evidence to demonstrate  that  the  Sponsor  had  sole
      responsibility.

5.    Mr Burrett submitted  that  the  Judge  took  into  account  that  the
      Appellant was now over 18, which was irrelevant to his  decision.  The
      Judge failed to make findings on who was making  decisions  about  the
      Appellant's education and who paid the school fees. The Judge accepted
      that the Appellant was living with her aunt and the fact that she  had
      given her mother's address on the application form did not  show  sole
      responsibility. The Judge's approach was too simplistic.


Discussion and conclusions

6.    The evidence before the Judge was that the Sponsor had come to the  UK
      in 2000 and, in connection with a visit visa application in  2010,  he
      had not seen the Appellant for some time.  The  Appellant  was  living
      with her mother. The Sponsor had sent money to the Appellant's  mother
      and her aunt. The Sponsor claimed that  the  Appellant's  relationship
      with her mother had deteriorated and the Appellant had  gone  to  live
      with her aunt  in  2010.  It  was  the  Sponsor's  decision  that  the
      Appellant should move in with her  aunt,  but  he  had  discussed  the
      matter with her mother. He still discussed  matters  relating  to  the
      Appellant with her mother who had been  involved  in  the  application
      made in November 2012.



7.    The Sponsor had  decided  that  the  Appellant  should  study  at  the
      University of The West Indies and he had funded her studies. He had no
      contact with the Appellant's school  whilst  in  the  UK  but  he  had
      visited when he went to Jamaica and he met the teachers.  The  Sponsor
      stayed with his mother when he visited and the  Appellant  would  stay
      with him. The Sponsor spoke to the Appellant by telephone nearly every
      day using telephone cards.

8.    The Judge found that the Appellant was still living with  her  mother.
      He rejected the Sponsor's claim that the Appellant had  gone  to  live
      with her aunt in 2010 because  the  evidence  in  the  aunt's  witness
      statement suggested that the Appellant was  only  living  there  on  a
      temporary basis and the Appellant gave her  mother's  address  on  the
      application form dated 13th November 2012.

9.    The Judge  accepted  that  the  Sponsor  had  played  a  part  in  the
      Appellant's upbringing, visiting Jamaica and  keeping  in  contact  by
      telephone. However, he found that the Appellant was still living  with
      her mother and, although they may not be enjoying a good  relationship
      now, the Sponsor had failed to show that he had  sole  responsibility.
      The  Judge  found  that  the  claimed  recent  difficulties   in   the
      Appellant's relationship with her mother were not determinative in the
      assessment of sole responsibility.

10.    I  find  that  the  Judge's  conclusions  at  paragraph  29  of   the
      determination were open to him on the evidence. The Judge rejected the
      Sponsor's claim that the Appellant had been living with her aunt since
      2010 and he gave cogent reasons for coming  to  that  conclusion.  The
      Appellant had given her mother's address on the application form dated
      13th November 2012 and stated that she had been living  there  for  17
      years. It was accepted by the Sponsor that the Appellant's mother  was
      still consulted in matters relating to the  Appellant,  including  the
      application for entry clearance.

11.   The Judge  found  that  the  Sponsor  had  a  close  interest  in  the
      Appellant's welfare and he made  decisions  about  her  education  and
      provided financial support. I find that the Judge's approach  was  not
      too simplistic and he did not fail to make findings on  the  Sponsor's
      responsibilities or the  Appellant's  circumstances  at  the  date  of
      decision, 22nd January 2013. The Judge looked at  the  matter  in  the
      round and concluded that the Sponsor had not shown that  he  had  sole
      responsibility for the Appellant. This finding was open to  the  Judge
      on the evidence, which showed that responsibility was  jointly  shared
      between mother and father.

12.   The Judge made no error on any point of law which  might  require  the
      determination to be set aside. The appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
      dismissed.  The determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  dated  17th
      April 2014 shall stand.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
16th September 2014
