
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: OA/05288/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Promulgated                          |
|On March 26, 2015                    |On March 30, 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MRS HUMERA SHAFIQ
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant   Mr McVeety (Home Office Presenting Officer)
Respondent  Represented by the Sponsor, Sajid Ali


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Whereas the original respondent is the appealing party, I shall, in the
    interests of convenience and consistency, replicate the nomenclature of
    the decision at first instance.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who sought entry clearance as  a
    spouse on October 30, 2013. The respondent refused her  application  on
    March 18, 2014, as she had not satisfied all  of  the  requirements  of
    paragraph EC-P1.1 of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.

 3. The appellant appealed on April 17, 2014, under section  82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. Additional  evidence  was
    submitted with the grounds of appeal and the  entry  clearance  manager
    reviewed  that  decision  on  October  22,  2014   and   conceded   the
    relationship was a subsisting relationship and reviewed  the  financial
    situation because no firm decision had  been  because  of  the  pending
    Court of Appeal decision in  MM  (Lebanon)  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  985.  An
    amended refusal letter was issued dated October 22, 2014 in  which  the
    respondent submitted the appellant had failed to  demonstrate  she  met
    the requirements of Appendix FM-SE because she failed  to  produce  the
    sponsor's bank statements as required by the Immigration Rules.

 4. The matter came  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Williams
    (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ") on December 2, 2014  and  in  a
    decision promulgated on December 17, 2014 he allowed her  appeal  under
    article 8 outside of the Immigration Rules. He found  her  claim  under
    the Immigration Rules failed.

 5. The respondent lodged grounds of appeal on December 30, 2014 submitting
    the FtTJ had erred. She argued that the FtTJ wrongly took into  account
    Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act, which only applied  in  removal  cases
    and appeared to allow the appeal simply because the FtTJ considered the
    claim was akin to a  near  miss  albeit  those  words  were  not  used.
    Insufficient reasons for allowing the appeal were given.

 6. On February 6, 2015 Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Plumptre  gave
    permission to appeal finding the FtTJ had erred  by  having  regard  to
    Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act and possibly for allowing the appeal as
    a near miss because he failed to give adequate reasons why  refusal  of
    entry clearance would result in unjustifiably harsh outcomes.

 7. The matter came before me on the above date and the sponsor represented
    the appellant.

    ERROR OF LAW SUBMISSIONS

 8. Mr McVeety submitted the FtTJ wrongly considered Section 117B(6) in his
    public interest assessment and failed to balance in his proportionality
    assessment that the appellant did not meet the Rules.  Paragraphs  [29]
    and [30] of  the  FtTJ's  determination  did  not  demonstrate  a  fair
    proportionality assessment.

 9. Mr Ali accepted he failed to show money going into a bank  account  but
    maintained the FtTJ considered all the issues and properly allowed  his
    wife's appeal.

    ERROR OF LAW ASSESSMENT

10. When the FtTJ heard this appeal he found the appellant did not meet the
    Immigration Rules because she failed to produce evidence  that  he  had
    received his wages as provided for by the Rules. The FtTJ confirmed  in
    paragraph [12] of his determination that the appeal had to fail because
    he had no discretion when the Rules were not met.

11. The FtTJ decided this was a case that fell outside  of  the  Rules  for
    article 8 purposes and the respondent has not challenged this approach.



12. The respondent's challenge is to what the FtTJ took  into  account  and
    his  proportionality  assessment.  Mr  McVeety   submitted   that   his
    proportionality assessment was deficient and the FtTJ  attached  weight
    to Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

13.  In  considering  the  FtTJ's  approach  I  have  had  regard  to   his
    determination and note the positive findings made  in  paragraphs  [14]
    and [15] of the determination. These findings would have  been  matters
    he considered in his article 8 assessment.

14. The FtTJ reminded himself of the case of MM (Lebanon) [2014]  EWCA  Civ
    985 and earlier cases. He  then  gave  reasons  in  paragraph  [20]  to
    explain why he felt he could deal with this appeal outside of the Rules
    and in particular he referred to the fact that the  family  members  in
    the United Kingdom would be unable to maintain any  meaningful  private
    or family life by visiting the appellant in Pakistan.

15. Mr McVeety submits that this is the total assessment of the  article  8
    claim and this failed to have regard to all of the relevant factors.

16. The FtTJ did apply the test set out in Razgar [2004] UKHL 00027 and  in
    considering the issue of proportionality he  had  regard  at  paragraph
    [28] to the relevant provisions of the Immigration Rules  as  to  where
    the balance of proportionality ought to be struck and in particular  he
    took the Rules to be his starting point and he had to consider by  what
    margin the appellant failed to meet the Rules. He found the sponsor was
    a credible witness and accepted he earned the money he did and he had a
    sufficient income to both support and accommodate his wife.

17. The FtTJ erred by placing weight on Section 117B(6) because  this  only
    applied where removal is planned. Mr McVeety invites me  to  find  that
    this amounted to an error in law but I  do  not  believe  that  finding
    should be looked at in isolation to the remainder of his decision.

18. In paragraph [30] he noted he also had to have  regard  to  subsections
    (3) to (5) of section 117B but he failed  to  remind  himself  to  have
    regard to subsection (1) of section 117B which states" the  maintenance
    of effective immigration control is in the public interest. He also had
    regard to Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and  Nationality  Act
    2009.

19. The FtTJ does err in having regard to Section 117B(6) but there  is  no
    dispute that the appellant has a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
    with her husband and other child who live in the United Kingdom. Whilst
    the FtTJ does not specifically mention Section 17B(1) the FtTJ is aware
    of the fact he has to have regard to whether the Immigration Rules were
    met because he says as much in paragraph [28] of his determination.

20. The FtTJ made positive findings  about  the  level  of  income  and  in
    considering the level of compliance with the Immigration Rules  he  was
    satisfied the income claimed exceeded the minimum requirements.

21. In Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 00112  (IAC)  the
    Tribunal made clear in paragraph [24] that "it will  only  be  in  very
    unusual circumstances that a person other than a close relative will be
    able to show that the refusal of entry clearance comes within the scope
    of Article 8(1). In practical terms this is likely  to  be  limited  to
    cases where the relationship is that of husband and wife or other close
    life partners or a parent and minor child and even  then  it  will  not
    necessarily be extended to cases where, for example, the proposed visit
    is based on a whim or will not add significantly to the time  that  the
    people involved spend together. In the limited  class  of  cases  where
    Article 8 (1) ECHR is engaged the refusal of entry clearance must be in
    accordance with the law and proportionate. If a person's  circumstances
    do satisfy the Immigration Rules and they have not acted in a way  that
    undermines the system  of  immigration  control,  a  refusal  of  entry
    clearance is liable to infringe Article 8."

22. The FtTJ was therefore  required  to  consider  whether  the  sponsor's
    circumstances satisfied the Immigration Rules and whether they acted in
    a way that undermined the system  of  immigration  control.  If  it  is
    demonstrated that they had then a  refusal  of  entry  clearance  could
    infringe Article 8.

23. The problem for the appellant in this appeal is the Rules, whilst not a
    complete code, set out what had to be shown. The appellant did not meet
    those Rules. The respondent brought in the requirements of Appendix FM-
    SE to enforce immigration control and as Section  117B(1)  makes  clear
    the maintenance of effective  immigration  control  is  in  the  public
    interest.

24. The FtTJ should have attached  more  weight  to  this  issue  and  this
    omission coupled with his error in considering Section 117B(6) and  the
    guidance in Mostafa (case was not before the FtTJ) I have conclude  the
    FtTJ did err in his assessment.

25. The FtTJ concluded that because he believed the sponsor earned what  he
    claimed that this  appeal  could  succeed  under  article  8.  This  is
    effectively applying a near miss policy which cases such as Miah &  Ors
    v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 261 made clear was wrong.

26. I therefore find that there is an error in law.

27. In remaking the decision I have had regard to all of the evidence given
    and the findings made. The FtTJ made positive findings  and  there  has
    been no challenge by the respondent to those findings.

28. In considering public policy I find:

      a. Immigration control is in the public interest.

      b. The appellant's wife has passed the relevant English test.

      c. The sponsor is working as evidenced by his pay slips. The FtTJ  was
         satisfied he earned what he claimed.

29. I also have to have regard to the fact the Immigration Rules  were  not
    satisfied and the position was incapable of being rectified as this  is
    an entry clearance application.

30. There are three children. The eldest child (10) lives with  his  father
    in the United Kingdom but the youngest two children (7 and 4)  returned
    to Pakistan in 2013 and have lived with their mother in Pakistan  prior
    to the application being made.

31. The Tribunal in Mostafa raised the bar in entry clearance  applications
    but having considered all of the findings along with the matters  above
    it seems that this appellant can  fall  within  the  limited  group  of
    persons whose article 8 rights would be infringed if  she  was  refused
    entry. Whilst I accept and acknowledge the Rules were not met there was
    evidence from  the  employer  and  tax  paperwork  that  confirmed  the
    appellant's income. The proposed application is not based on a whim and
    will add significantly to the time that the family will spend together.



32. The appellant did not seek to frustrate the respondent  by  staying  in
    this country. She returned to Pakistan and took the difficult  decision
    to take two of the children with her because of their ages. She has not
    acted in a way  that  undermines  the  system  of  immigration  control
    because the evidence available suggests  she  has  had  regard  to  the
    Rules.

33. Having considered all of the above matters including those  highlighted
    by the respondent I find that  to  refuse  the  appellant  entry  under
    article 8 would be disproportionate.

    DECISION

34. There was a material error. I have set aside the original decision  and
    remade it. I have allowed the appeal under article 8 ECHR after a  full
    consideration of all of the factors.

35. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction pursuant to
    Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and I see
    no reason to alter that order.



Signed:     Dated: March 26, 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Although I have allowed the appeal I reverse the original fee award  because
the application failed under the Immigration Rules.



Signed:     Dated: March 26, 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

