
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/05949/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 October 2015                   |On 30 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                               mosallam aboslo
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, beirut
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Moran, Legal Representative from Alexander
Moran
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge R Walker (Judge Walker), promulgated on 23  March  2015,
    in which he dismissed the Appellant's appeal. That appeal  was  against
    the Respondent's decision of 30 April 2014, refusing to issue a  family
    permit under the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006
    (the Regulations).

 2. The Appellant, a national of Syria born on 25 January  1954,  had  made
    the application for the family permit on 1 April 2014.  He  sought  the
    relevant documentation on the basis that he  was  a  dependent  of  his
    daughter, who resides in the United Kingdom with her  Romanian  spouse.
    The couple have two children. The application stated the purpose of the
    trip to this country was simply to visit the family members here.

 3. The Respondent refused the  application  on  the  basis  that  the  EEA
    national's passport had not been properly notarised, the Appellant  was
    not related to his sponsor as claimed, and that the  EEA  national  was
    not exercising Treaty rights.

The decision of Judge Walker

 4. By the time the appeal came before Judge Walker the  issues  concerning
    the passport, the relationship and  the  EEA  national's  status  as  a
    qualified person had been conceded by the  Respondent.  Therefore,  the
    only issue remaining in respect of the  EEA  application  was  that  of
    dependency (paragraph 23). It is also  clear  from  the  decision,  the
    Appellant's skeleton  argument  and  the  Record  of  Proceedings  that
    Article 8 was relied upon.

 5. Judge Walker found that the  Appellant  was  not  a  dependent  of  his
    daughter and her EEA spouse. He found that there were discrepancies  in
    the evidence of the sponsor and her husband  (paragraphs  24,  25,  and
    28). It was said that the money transfer receipts provided did not show
    a clear picture of financial support to the Appellant  (paragraph  26).
    The judge concluded that it would have been "very  difficult"  for  the
    sponsor to have sent money back  to  the  Appellant  in  light  of  the
    household income (paragraph 29).

 6. As to Article 8, Judge Walker did not accept that there was family life
    as between the Appellant  and  his  daughter  and  son-in-law  in  this
    country. Although not necessary in light of this initial  finding,  the
    judge went on to conclude that there was no  interference  and  in  any
    event  that  the  Respondent's   refusal   was   not   disproportionate
    (paragraphs 32-34).

 7. The appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

The grounds of appeal

 8. The grounds are threefold. First, that the judge failed to have  regard
    to relevant independent evidence, namely post-decision  money  transfer
    receipts which went to the issue of a pattern  of  financial  from  the
    sponsor to the Appellant. Second, that the judge failed  to  adequately
    reason his conclusion that the sponsor could not have afforded to  send
    money back, as claimed. Third, that the judge failed  to  consider  the
    Article 8 claim on the basis put forward by the Appellant, namely  that
    he wished to visit his grandchild here and could not see them  anywhere
    else.

 9. Permission to appeal  was  refused  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  but
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein on 24 August 2015.

The hearing before me

10. Mr Moran accepted that  the  findings  of  Judge  Walker  contained  in
    paragraphs 24, 26, and 28 were not challenged in the grounds.  However,
    those findings were based upon oral  evidence.  There  was  independent
    evidence in the form of money transfer  receipts  which  supported  the
    Appellant's case. There had  been  overlooked  by  the  judge.  It  was
    important that the original refusal of the family permit had not raised
    dependency as an issue. This only came up in the ECM review. The  money
    transfer receipts relied on post-dated the initial  decision  but  pre-
    dated the ECM review. There was no finding that the money transfers had
    not in fact been made. In respect of the conclusion  that  the  sponsor
    was unable to afford the remittances, Mr  Moran  submitted  that  Judge
    Walker should have examined her  bank  statements,  which  showed  cash
    withdrawals commensurate with the  remittances.  He  should  also  have
    sought further clarification on the expenditure if it  was  a  material
    concern. There was no  clear  finding  as  to  whether  any  dependency
    existed, as opposed to complete dependency.

11. On the Article 8 issue, it was said that the  judge  simply  failed  to
    engage with the submission that the Appellant wished to visit not  only
    his daughter, but  also  his  grandchildren.  This  was  a  meritorious
    submission and one which required consideration.

12. Mr Tufan submitted that the post-decision money transfer receipts  were
    not relevant here. It was an attempt to cure defects in  the  evidence.
    In any event, receipts did not mean that  dependency  existed.  It  was
    questionable whether the failure to address the Article 8 in  full  was
    material.

Decision on error of law

13. I will take the Article 8 issue first. I find that there is a  material
    error of law in the decision of Judge Walker.  It  is  clear  from  the
    papers on file that the Appellant's  Article  8  claim  was  based  not
    simply on a desire to visit his daughter in the United Kingdom, but  as
    importantly (or perhaps more  so)  his  grandchildren  too.  The  judge
    should have expressly addressed this element of the Article claim. This
    constitutes an error.

14. It is a material error because this aspect of the claim was  not  bound
    to fail in any event. The scope of relationships to which Article 8 can
    potentially apply may be wide, as has been recognised recently  by  the
    Upper Tribunal (see, for example, paragraph 23 of Mostafa (Article 8 in
    entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 00112  (IAC).  Article  8  is  capable  of
    covering the relationship (developed or nascent) between a  grandparent
    and grandchild. In addition, visits intended  to  maintain  or  develop
    such relationships can be an  important  method  of  protecting  and/or
    promoting Article 8 rights. It is true that Article 8 visit cases  face
    real obstacles in the path of success (see Kaur (visit appeals; Article
    8) [2015] UKUT 00487 (IAC)), but in the present appeal there is on  the
    face of it a good arguable case to suggest that a visit elsewhere would
    have been highly unlikely, if not impossible, given the state in  which
    Syria findings itself and  the  financial  constraints  by  the  United
    Kingdom-based family. I note too that there is no  express  finding  by
    the judge that the Appellant never intended to come to this country for
    a short visit.

15. I turn now to the EEA dependency issue. I have concluded, albeit  by  a
    narrow margin, that there are material errors here as well. Of  course,
    several adverse findings of Judge Walker have not been  challenged  and
    this renders the Appellant's task all the more difficult, as the  judge
    stated that he considered the case "overall".  However,  Mr  Moran  has
    persuaded me that there has been a failure to  adequately  address  two
    elements of the evidence.

16. First, Judge Walker failed to consider the  additional  money  transfer
    receipts at pages 161-167 of the Appellant's bundle. This evidence  was
    in my view relevant to the issue of whether financial support had  been
    provided by the sponsor to the Appellant before and as at the  date  of
    decision. Despite  being  post-decision  evidence  it  was  nonetheless
    admissible.  Its  potential   import   was   to   provide   independent
    corroboration of  pre-existing  support,  as  indicating  an  on  going
    pattern of remittances. This is analogous to the 'intervening devotion'
    principle commonly found in entry clearance cases concerning marriages,
    whereby post-decision evidence is relevant to the  genuineness  of  the
    relationship as at the date of decision.

17. In respect of Mr Tufan's submission  that  the  post-decision  evidence
    could not cure defects in the Appellant's case, I note Mr Moran's point
    that three of the receipts in fact pre-date the ECM  review,  in  which
    the issue of dependency was first raised. Thus, the evidence, at  least
    to this extent, was all the more relevant. I note too  that  the  judge
    did not find that the money transfer receipts produced were  themselves
    false or unreliable.

18. Second, the adverse conclusion in paragraph 29 of the judge's  decision
    is predicated upon his own concerns  about  household  income  and  the
    ability to send money back to the Appellant. It appears to me as though
    he made his own calculations and then proceeded to apply  a  subjective
    test to the question of affordability and, in turn, the credibility  of
    the  sponsor's  evidence.  However,  the  sponsor  had  given  evidence
    accepting that the expenditure was indeed  difficult.  This  acceptance
    did not render the claimed remittances incapable  of  belief.  I  agree
    with Mr Moran and the grounds to the extent that a careful analysis  of
    the evidence was required, with adequate reasons provided,  to  support
    this conclusion. I accept that the sponsor had produced bank statements
    which could have been interrogated, but were not (at least not  as  far
    as I can tell). Therefore, relevant evidence was not considered and the
    reasons set out in paragraph 29 are inadequate.

19. The two matters set out  above  are  material  because  although  other
    findings are unchallenged, the errors undermine the  sustainability  of
    what is in reality the core conclusion of Judge Walker, namely that the
    sponsor and EEA  national  had  not  been  financially  supporting  the
    Appellant to  any  significant  extent.  If  the  two  errors  had  not
    occurred, the outcome of the appeal could have been different.

20. In light of the above, I set aside the decision of Judge Walker.

Disposal

21. Neither Mr Moran nor Mr Tufan had strong views about whether the appeal
    should be kept in the Upper Tribunal  or  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

22. Having considered rule 2 of the  Upper  Tribunal  Procedure  rules  and
    paragraph 7.2 of the Senior President's  Practice  Statements,  I  have
    decided to remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.  There  are  a
    variety of factual  issues  which  require  findings,  including  those
    relating to Article 8 and the EEA dependency claim. Aspects of existing
    evidence have not yet been considered adequately or at all.

23. I set out relevant directions for the remitted hearing, below.

Anonymity

24. No direction has been sought and I see no  need  to  make  one  in  any
    event.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

Substantive Directions

      1. The appeal is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  heard
         afresh. No findings from Judge Walker's decision are preserved;

      2. The issues  in  the  appeal  are  those  of  dependency  under  the
         Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)   Regulations   2006   (the
         Regulations) and Article 8.

Procedural Directions

      1. The appeal is to be reheard at the Hatton Cross hearing centre;

      2. The appeal is not to be reheard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  R
         Walker;

      3. An Arabic interpreter will be required for the remitted hearing;

      4. No date for the remitted hearing is fixed, as this will be a matter
         for the hearing centre itself.


Signed      Date: 25 October 2015

H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
