
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
OA/05970/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated |
|On 4 April 2014                          |On 23 July 2014           |
|                                         |                          |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL



                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Miss HANIFE NAZ SAVUL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Rendle, Counsel
      (instructed by Wai Leung Solicitors)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant appealed with  permission  granted  by  First-tier
           Tribunal Judge Parkes on 5 March 2014 against the  determination
           of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Newberry  who  had  allowed  the
           Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Entry   Clearance   Officer's
           decision dated 5 February 2013 to refuse to grant the Respondent
           leave to enter as a spouse under Appendix FM of the  Immigration
           Rules. The determination was promulgated on 13 February 2014.


      2.    The Respondent is a national of Turkey, born  on  11  May  2012.
           She is the dependant daughter of Mrs Derya Savul, her mother who
           was born on 1 November 1980.  Their appeals  to  the  First-tier
           Tribunal were linked.  The judge  found  that  the  Respondent's
           sponsor, her father, was earning income through his business  in
           excess of the relevant minimum threshold laid down  in  Appendix
           FM, accepting by implication if not expressly that  the  sponsor
           had provided  the  relevant  specified  evidence  laid  down  in
           Appendix FM-SE.


      3.    Permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  as  sought  by  the
           Appellant was granted by Judge Parkes because he considered that
           it was arguable that the judge  had  erred  by  failing  (a)  to
           consider Appendix FM-SE 7, which specified  that  12  months  of
           trading had to be shown where reliance was  placed  on  earnings
           from self employment and (b) to note that the relevant date  for
           the First-tier Tribunal was the date of the application, not the
           date of decision or any subsequent review.




      Submissions - error of law


      4.    Mr Tufan for the Secretary of State relied  on  the  grounds  of
           onwards appeal and the terms  of  the  grant  of  permission  to
           appeal.  It was a simple case where the specified documents  had
           not been provided.  The solution was for a fresh entry clearance
           application to be made once the necessary evidence of 12  months
           earnings from self employment was available.


      5.    Mr Rendle for the Respondent agreed that the basic  premise  had
           to be showing compliance as at the date of the application.   He
           submitted that it was  possible  to  view  the  entry  clearance
           application as an ongoing process in that the original  decision
           invited a response to which a second decision  was  the  result.
           The judge had received sufficient evidence to  make  a  positive
           finding.  There was no material error of law.


      6.    In reply Mr Tufan pointed out that in Raju, Khatel and Others  v
           SSHD [2013] EWCA  Civ  754  the  Court  of  Appeal  stated  that
           applications  under  the  Immigration  Rules   were   not   made
           throughout a period starting with the date of  their  submission
           and finishing with the date of the decision.  The  date  of  the
           application was governed by Rule 37 of  the  Immigration  Rules.
           Paragraph  34G  precluded   the   concept   of   a   'continuing
           application' which started  when  it  was  first  submitted  and
           concluded at the date of the decision either of the Secretary of
           State or, on appeal, of a tribunal.




      The error of law finding


      7.    The tribunal reserved its determination, which now follows.  The
           tribunal finds that the  judge  had  inadvertently  fallen  into
           material error of law such that his decision had  to  be  remade
           and the appeal dismissed under the Immigration Rules  and  under
           Article 8 ECHR.


      8.    It was widely predicted that the introduction of Appendix FM and
           Appendix FM-SE on 9 July 2012,  heralded  by  the  Secretary  of
           State's Statement of Intent dated June 2012, would  create  some
           degree of controversy, as well as  problems  of  interpretation.
           The judge evidently considered  that  there  was  merit  in  the
           substance of the Respondent's  position  in  that  the  required
           income level was present on the judge's findings,  and  possibly
           by inference that a fresh entry clearance application after such
           a positive finding would cause expense and delay.


      9.    But this was not a situation where the Respondent or her sponsor
           were  not  and/or  would  never  be  capable  of   meeting   the
           requirements of Appendix FM and Appendix FM-SE.   Thus the judge
           rightly made no findings that there were any unusual or  special
           circumstances attending the entry clearance application.   There
           accordingly was  no  basis  for  disapplying  any  part  of  the
           Immigration Rules, however that was  done.   Appendix  FM-SE  is
           part of the Immigration Rules and compliance is mandatory.   The
           decision of the First-tier Tribunal is accordingly set aside for
           material error of law.  The decision must be  remade.   (It  was
           agreed that no further submissions were required as all relevant
           arguments had already been raised.)






      Discussion and fresh decision


      10.   It is plain that the sponsor is  able  to  put  himself  into  a
           position  to  comply  with  Appendix  FM-SE,  for  example,   by
           producing 12 months of trading results:  see  Appendix  FM-SE  7
           which applies to him.  That cannot be regarded as an onerous  or
           unusual requirement.   The new rules have been in force since  9
           July 2012 and the entry clearance  application  was  made  on  1
           November 2012, i.e., well after the commencement.  The  tribunal
           accepts Mr Tufan's submissions and has no option  but  to  allow
           the Secretary of State's appeal.  Raju, Khatel and Others v SSHD
           (above)  applies  as  Mr  Tufan  reminded  the  tribunal.    The
           Respondent had not produced  the  specified  evidence  with  her
           entry clearance application and that sadly was  an  end  to  the
           matter.   It was too late to send additional material after  the
           Entry Clearance Officer's decision was made, because  compliance
           had to be as at the date of application.  As the Respondent  and
           her mother are able to make fresh entry  clearance  applications
           which will  in  all  probability  succeed,  and  no  exceptional
           circumstances were found, proportionality under Article  8  ECHR
           requires her to do so.


      11.   This determination has been prepared as a formality, in that the
           determination earlier promulgated for  the  Respondent's  mother
           covered all of the issues.  No determination had, however,  been
           recorded for the appeal file which  had  been  created  for  the
           Respondent.




      DECISION


      The making of the previous decision involved the making  of  an  error
on    a point of law.  The tribunal allows the onwards appeal to  the  Upper
Tribunal, sets aside the original decision and fee  award  and  remakes  the
original decision as follows:

      The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration Rules

      The appeal is dismissed under Article 8 ECHR

      Signed                                 Dated






      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
      TO THE RESPONDENT
      FEE AWARD


      The appeal was dismissed and so there can be no fee award


      Signed                                  Dated


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
