
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/05943/2015
     OA/05944/2015
     OA/05946/2015
     OA/05947/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 December 2017                          |On 23 January 2018            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                     Olufunmilayo [A] (first Appellant)
                         [O O A] (second Appellant)
                          [O A A] (third Appellant)
                         [D O A] (fourth Appellant)
                       (anonymity directions not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr A Adewole of Liberty & Co.
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   These are linked appeals against the decisions of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Gandhi promulgated on 27 March 2017, brought with the  permission
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer granted on 24 October 2017.


2.   The First Appellant, [Olufunmilayo A] (d.o.b. [ ] 1970) is  the  mother
    of the other three minor Appellants whose names  and  personal  details
    are a matter of record on file.  The First Appellant is the partner  of
    [Henry A], a person present and settled in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    minor Appellants are his children.  Applications were  made  for  entry
    clearance which were refused for reasons set out in respective  Notices
    of  Immigration  Decision  dated  13  February  2015.   The  Appellants
    appealed to the IAC.  Their appeals were dismissed for reasons set  out
    in the linked decisions of First-tier Tribunal Judge Gandhi.


3.   Of particular focus before the First-tier Tribunal, and in turn  before
    the Upper Tribunal, was the financial requirements of  the  Rules.   In
    short, it is said on  behalf  of  the  Appellants  that  the  financial
    requirements of Appendix FM do  not  apply  in  respect  of  the  minor
    Appellants.  The Respondent resists that proposition - as is set out in
    brief terms in a Rule 24 response dated 22 November 2017.


4.   Given the relatively narrow focus of the issue in the appeal I  do  not
    propose to set out a full rehearsal of all of the evidential  materials
    in relation to relationship and income and so on.  The  appeals  before
    the Upper Tribunal essentially turn upon a single point of law.


5.   The substance of the argument advanced before  the  Upper  Tribunal  on
    behalf of the Appellants was raised before the First-tier Tribunal  and
    dealt with by Judge Gandhi at paragraphs 15 and  16  in  the  following
    terms:

         "15. Mr Adewole states that  I  should  only  look  at  the  income
             threshold for the first Appellant (the  partner)  because  the
             financial requirements  do  not  apply  to  any  children  who
             qualify for Indefinite Leave to Enter.   He  states  that  the
             first appellant's three children would qualify for  Indefinite
             Leave to Enter in line with  their  father's  (the  sponsor's)
             Indefinite Leave to Remain.  I note however that  this  is  in
             contradiction  to  what  had  been  stated  in  the   skeleton
             argument.  No reason has been  provided  for  this  change  in
             argument and Mr Adewole has not relied  on  any  law/case  law
             which supports his  contention  that  the  children  would  be
             granted Indefinite Leave to Enter.


         16.  In any case I note that the Immigration Rules state  that  any
             leave granted to a child will expire at the same time as leave
             granted to the child's parent  (D-ECC.1.1).   The  Immigration
             Rules also state that entry clearance will be granted  for  an
             initial period not exceeding 33 months to the  child's  parent
             i.e. the first Appellant (D-ECP.1.1).  I therefore  find  that
             the higher financial threshold is relevant in this case."


6.   Permission to appeal  was  granted  on  the  basis  that  Judge  Saffer
    considered that "It is arguable that  the  Judge  may  have  materially
    erred in her assessment of the financial criteria to be met by a  child
    seeking leave to enter for settlement  as  opposed  to  for  a  limited
    period".


7.   I have considered the arguments set out in the  Grounds  of  Appeal  as
    amplified before me by Mr Adewole today.  I have come to the conclusion
    that the  premise  of  these  arguments  is  essentially  fundamentally
    misconceived.  In my judgment Judge Gandhi was correct to conclude that
    the higher threshold  applied  by  reference  to  the  requirements  of
    Appendix FM.


8.   It is submitted on behalf of the Appellants that the First  Appellant's
    application fell to be considered by reference to paragraph 281 of  the
    Immigration Rules and thereafter the children's applications fell to be
    considered by reference  to  paragraph  297.   I  do  not  accept  that
    argument.


9.   In my judgement the starting point for consideration is paragraph  A277
    of Part 8 of the Immigration Rules.  A277 identifies the  fact  of  the
    introduction of Appendix FM and is in the following terms:

         "From 9 July 2012 Appendix FM will apply  to  all  applications  to
         which Part 8 of these Rules applied on or before 8 July 2012 except
         where the provisions of Part 8 are preserved and continue to  apply
         as set out in paragraphs A280 to A280B."

    Accordingly it seems absolutely clear that unless an applicant can take
    advantage of the so-called transitional provisions in  respect  of  the
    interaction between Part 8 and Appendix FM, it is Appendix FM that will
    apply to any application.


10.  The circumstances in which  paragraph  281  may  be  'preserved'  -  or
    continue to be applicable - are set out at various points in  paragraph
    A280 of the Rules.  I have had the  opportunity  to  go  through  those
    transitional provisions with Mr Adewole  and  nothing  is  identifiable
    therein that indicates that paragraph 281 is applicable  to  the  First
    Appellant's application.   In  particular,  with  regard  to  paragraph
    A280(d) in respect of applications for entry clearance it is clear that
    the First Appellant's application did not fall within the  transitional
    provisions, and is not 'saved' by any of the  various  exemptions  with
    reference to such matters as being the partner of somebody  in  the  HM
    Forces and so on.


11.  It follows, as seems to have been  clear  to  Judge  Gandhi,  that  the
    First Appellant's case fell  to  be  considered  by  reference  to  the
    provisions of Appendix FM - and therefore specifically with  regard  to
    Section EC-P 'Entry clearance as a partner'.  As  identified  by  Judge
    Gandhi such an application if successful would result in the grant of a
    limited period of leave in the first instance.


12.  It is also abundantly clear that the children's applications  therefore
    also fell to be considered by reference to Appendix FM.  Paragraph 297,
    if it was of  any  application  at  all,  is  in  respect  of  children
    accompanying a parent entering for settlement.  The  minor  Appellants'
    mother would not have been entering for settlement,  albeit  that  that
    may have been the long-term intention: in the first instance she  would
    have been entering for a period of limited leave.


13.  The provisions of Appendix FM in respect of children at  Section  E-ECC
    'Eligibility for entry clearance as a child', make it abundantly  clear
    that the financial requirements of Appendix FM are applicable.


14.  In all such circumstances it seems to me that Judge Gandhi was  correct
    to identify that the financial threshold calculated on the basis  of  a
    partner and three  children  was  the  applicable  threshold,  and  was
    correct to reject the submission advanced by Mr Adewole to  the  effect
    that there was no additional financial requirement in  respect  of  the
    children provided it was demonstrated that they would in general  terms
    be adequately accommodated and maintained.


15.  Accordingly I find no error of  law  in  this  regard  and  reject  the
    grounds of challenge as essentially being fundamentally misconceived.


16.  I note that at  the  commencement  of  the  hearing  today  Mr  Adewole
    acknowledged that if he was unable to persuade me  in  respect  of  his
    submissions on the financial requirements, he  would  not  be  able  to
    establish that Judge Gandhi otherwise fell into error in respect of her
    Article 8 assessment.  In that regard I have had consideration to those
    paragraphs of the Decision and Reasons of the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    from paragraph 19 onwards in which she gives consideration  to  Article
    8, and  in  particular  from  paragraph  27  onwards  where  the  Judge
    identifies that she is turning  her  mind  to  whether  there  are  any
    compelling circumstances requiring the grant of leave to enter  outside
    the Rules.  It seems to me that the Judge has had proper  consideration
    to all of the facts and circumstances in the case, and has  taken  into
    account the public interest considerations pursuant to section 117B  of
    the 2002 Act (as identified at paragraph 30 of the  Decision).   I  can
    find nothing therein that would suggest that  there  was  any  material
    error of law: Mr Adewole was helpful and realistic in his concession.


Notice of Decisions

17.  The decisions of the First-tier Tribunal contained  no  errors  of  law
    and accordingly stand.


18.  Each of the appeals remains dismissed.


19.  No anonymity directions are sought or made.



The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:                                 Date: 21 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

