
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/05549/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly       |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 30 March 2015                     |On 21 April 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between

                     OLUBUNMI CHRISTY OMOLARA OLANREWAJU
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Afzal of IIAS
For the Respondent:    Mr Mc Vitie Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge De Haney promulgated on 16 December 2014  which  allowed
    the appeal under the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.

Background

 3. The Appellant was born on 2 May 1970 and is a national of Nigeria.

 4. On 21 February 2014 the Appellant applied for entry  clearance  to  the
    United Kingdom as the souse of Oluwatoyin Omosola Olanrewaju.

 5. On 26 March  2014  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
    application and issued two refusal letters. The refusal letters gave  a
    number of reasons:

    (a) The evidence  did  not  show  tht  the  marriage  was  genuine  and
    subsisting.

    (b) The Appellant had not provided all of the evidence as  required  in
    Appendix FM-SE specifically 6 months of wage slips and bank  statements
    and a letter from her employer confirming the terms of  her  employment
    and  salary  dated  no  earlier  than  28  days  before  the  date   of
    application.

    (c)  There  was  no  satisfactory   evidence   in   relation   to   the
    accommodation.

 6. There was then an ECM review on 18  September  2014  in  which  it  was
    accepted that all of the required pay slips  and  bank  statements  had
    been provided but the employers letter provided was dated 2009 and  did
    not meet the requirements of Appendix FM-SE.

The Judge's Decision

 7. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  De  Haney  ("the  Judge")  allowed  the   appeal   against   the
    Respondent's decision. The Judge found :

      a) The parties were in a genuine and subsisting relationship.

      b) There was a letter in the Respondent's bundle dated 10 January 2014
         from Manchester City Council which confirmed that the Appellant had
         been employed since 15 August 2005 as  a  support  worker  for  the
         Adult Social Care Department.

      c) The defects in the letter fell within the flexibility policy.

      d) Further and  in  the  alternative  given  the  P60s,  payslips  and
         contract of employment the Respondent had the option of waiving the
         requirement if they believe it to be unnecessary.

      e) The letter from the employer was within the timescale of 28 days of
         the application.

      f) He did not find it 'palatable or in the interests  of  justice  nor
         can it be in any way be fair' for the Appellant to reapply with the
         correct  documentation  as  he  fulfils  the  requirements  of  the
         Immigration Rule 'save for one de minimus  detail.'  He  relied  on
         Sultana & others (rules: waiver/further enquiry; discretion) [2014]
         UKUT 00540 (IAC).

      g) In the alternative taking into account the public interest  factors
         as set out in paragraph 117  of  the  Nationality  Immigration  and
         Asylum Act 2002 refusal of entry clearance was disproportionate.

 8. Grounds of appeal were lodged which argued that the Judge  had  allowed
    the appeal on the basis of a near  miss  which  is  impermissible;  the
    employers letter did not meet the requirements of the Rules  and  while
    the Appellant had the opportunity to address the shortcomings in  other
    evidence in relation to payslips and bank statements and did so she did
    not do so in relation to the employers letter; the  ration  in  Sultana
    was misapplied in that the decision required the Appellant to ask for a
    discretion to be exercised in order to criticise the Respondent for not
    using it; the appeal cannot ne allowed under Article 8 on a  near  miss
    basis.

 9. On 10 February 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes gave permission to
    appeal stating that the application  'complies  with  Appendix  FM  and
    Appendix FM-SE or it does not and this application did not.'

10. At the hearing I heard submissions from Mr Mc Vitie on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent that:

    (a) He relied on the grounds.

    (b) The application did not meet the requirements of the  Rules  as  it
    did not meet the requirements of Appendix FM-SE.

    (c) The Judge should not have applied the near miss  principal  in  the
    overall assessment under Article 8.

    (d) The Appellant had a remedy:  make  a  fresh  application  with  the
    required documents.

11. On behalf of the Appellant  Mr Afzal submitted that :

    (a) The Appellant did not produce a letter from his employer  with  the
    gross annual salary but all of the income claimed is corroborated.

    (b) The letter from January 2014 meets all of the requirements.

    (c) There was no public interest in maintaining a refusal where it  was
    accepted that the income was sufficient on the  basis  of  all  of  the
    other evidence produced.

12. In reply Mr Mc Vitie on behalf of the Appellant submitted that  Article
    8 was not the remedy in a case where the applicant could not  meet  the
    requirements of the Rules  relying  on  Mostafa  (Article  8  in  entry
    clearance) [2015] UKUT 00112 (IAC).

Legal Framework

13. In relation to the date of a specified document paragraph A1 1 (l)   of
    Appendix FM-SE provides:

         (l) Where this Appendix requires the applicant to provide specified
         evidence  relating  to  a  period  which  ends  with  the  date  of
         application, that evidence, or the most recently dated part of  it,
         must  be  dated  no  earlier  than  28  days  before  the  date  of
         application.

14. In relation to salaried employment paragraph  2(b)  of  Appendix  FM-SE
    provides:

         "(b) A letter from the  employer(s)  who  issued  the  payslips  at
         paragraph 2(a) confirming:

             (i) the person's employment and gross annual salary;

             (ii) the length of their employment;

             (iii) the period over which they have been or  were  paid  the
             level of salary relied upon in the application; and

             (iv) the type of employment (permanent, fixed-term contract or
             agency)."

Finding on Material Error

15. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made  errors of law that were material to the outcome  in  the
    decision.

16. This was an appeal against a refusal of entry  clearance  as  a  spouse
    where the refusal was originally based on three issues: the  Respondent
    did not accept that  the  marriage  was  genuine  and  subsisting;  the
    Appellant had not produced the specified information in respect of  the
    sponsor's income  and  there  was  insufficient  evidence  of  adequate
    accommodation. By the time that the matter came before  the  First-tier
    Judge it was agreed that in relation to the income the Entry  Clearance
    Manager had  been  provided  with  salary  slips  and  bank  statements
    covering the required 6 month period  but  it  was  asserted  that  the
    required employer's letter had still not been provided.

17. Before the First tier judge the Judge found in the  Appellant's  favour
    in respect of the nature of the relationship and the accommodation  and
    that part of the decision has not been challenged.

18. In  relation  to  the  Employers  letter  the  Judge  found  among  the
    Respondent's papers that there was a letter from the sponsors  Employer
    Manchester City Council dated 10 January 2014 that had been overlooked.
    The Judge found that the letter only because did not contain details of
    the Sponsor's gross salary and therefore did not meet the  requirements
    of the Rules. I am satisfied however  that  the  Judge  had  failed  to
    engage with all of the requirements of Appendix FM-SE  in  relation  to
    the employers letter because :

           . the letter was not dated within 28  days  of  the  application
             which was 21 February 2014;

           . it did not state the gross salary;

           . it did not state the period over which they have been or  were
             paid the level of salary relied upon in the application ;

           . It did not state the type of employment (permanent, fixed-term
             contract or agency).

19.  I note that the Judge suggests that the defects in the letter were 'de
    minimus' . I find that failing to meet the evidential  requirements  in
    four material particulars cannot be described as de minimus. The  Judge
    referred to Sultana as supporting his view  but  I  do  not  find  that
    Sultana provides support given that I do not find that the  defects  in
    the employers letter are minor and there was also  no  contact  by  the
    Appellant or  a  legal  representative  explaining  why  the  requisite
    evidence could not be provided and the headnote confirms that :

         "Where applicants wish to invoke any discretion of this kind,  they
         should do so when making the relevant application, highlighting the
         specific provision of the Rules invoked and the grounds upon  which
         the exercise of discretion is requested."

20. I am satisfied that there was an  error  in  the  way  that  the  Judge
    assessed the case under the Rules and that he should not  have  allowed
    it under the Rules.

21. The Judge then went on to consider the case under Article 8  and  there
    was no challenge that he was entitled to do so given that  Appendix  FM
    is not a complete code. In a very brief assessment the Judge found that
    given he was satisfied that the sponsor did earn the required level  of
    income and therefore but for a 'minor omission' met the requirements of
    the Rules it was disproportionate  to  refuse  entry  clearance.  I  am
    satisfied that in making this finding the Judge was in error in that he
    was applying a near miss argument that in  essence  the  weight  to  be
    given to non-compliance with the Rules diminishes where  the  applicant
    is "nearly" or "almost" compliant. I am satisfied that in applying this
    near miss  argument  he  was  applying  an  argument  which  the  court
    disapproved of in Miah, Bibi and Salman v Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 261 finding that  the  existence  of  a
    "near-miss" principle would be a  steep  slope  away  from  predictable
    rules,  the  efficacy  and  utility  of  which  would  be   undermined.
    Accordingly there  was  no  "near-miss"  principle  applicable  to  the
    Immigration Rules.  The Secretary of State must assess the strength  of
    an Article 8 claim, but the requirements of  immigration  control  were
    not weakened by the degree of non-compliance with the Immigration Rules
    (paras 13 - 26).

22. I therefore found that errors of law have been established and that the
    Judge's determination cannot stand and must be set aside and remade.

Remaking the decision

23. I am satisfied that the Appellant that in  his  application  for  entry
    clearance as a spouse  under  Appendix  FM  cannot  succeed  under  the
    Immigration Rules as he failed to provide the specified evidence in the
    form of an employers letter dated within 28  days  of  the  application
    containing confirmation of his wife's gross salary, how  long  she  had
    been paid at that level and the nature of her employment as required by
    Appendix FM-SE.The Rules are detailed and prescriptive and there is  no
    near miss principle to save a defective application  unless  the  error
    comes within the limited terms of the provisions of  Appendix  FM-SE  D
    which this case did not as the application was refused on a  number  of
    other grounds.

24. In considering the appeal under Article 8  of  the  Convention  I  have
    determined the issue on the  basis  of  the  questions  posed  by  Lord
    Bingham in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27

Will the proposed removal be an interference by a public authority with  the
exercise of the applicant's right to respect for  his  private  (or  as  the
case may be) family life?

25. I accept that the Appellant and wife have a family life which  must  be
    respected.

If  so,  will  such  interference  have  consequences  of  such  gravity  as
potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?

26. Article 8 does not impose  on  the  state  any  general  obligation  to
    respect the choice of residence of a married couple and  there  was  no
    argument placed before me as to why the Appellant and his  wife  cannot
    enjoy family life together in  Nigeria  albeit  I  recognise  that  the
    sponsor is a British citizen.

27. However if I am wrong about this and I accept that the  decision  would
    have  consequences  of  such  gravity  as  potentially  to  engage  the
    operation of Article 8.

If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

28. I am satisfied that there is in place the legislative framework for the
    decision giving rise to the interference with Article 8 rights which is
    precise and accessible enough for the Appellant to regulate his conduct
    by reference to it.

If so, is such  interference  necessary  in  a  democratic  society  in  the
interests of national security, public safety or the economic well-being  of
the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection  of
health or morals, or for  the  protection  of  the  rights  and  freedom  of
others?

29. The interference does have legitimate aims since it is  in  pursuit  of
    one of the legitimate aims set  out  in  Article  8  (2)  necessary  in
    pursuit  of  the  economic  well  being  of  the  country  through  the
    maintenance of the requirements of a policy of immigration control. The
    state has the right to control the entry  of  non  nationals  into  its
    territory and Article 8 does not mean that  an  individual  can  choose
    where she wishes to enjoy their private and family life.

If so, is such interference  proportionate  to  the  legitimate  public  end
sought to be achieved?

30. In making the assessment  I  have  also  taken  into  account  that  my
    starting point is that the Appellant does not meet the requirements  of
    the Rules as I have found that the defects in the employers letter were
    not de minimus. I take into account the public interest  factors  in  s
    117 of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended. I am
    satisfied that there is a route for the Appellant to enter  the  United
    Kingdom as a spouse but the system deliberately and reasonably puts the
    responsibility on the applicant to submit the  correct  documents.  The
    sponsor has never submitted a letter from  his  wife's  employer  which
    contains the mandatorily required information and this is a requirement
    of the Rules and there is no reason why the Appellant could not provide
    it. I am satisfied that the decision to refuse is proportionate as  the
    Appellant has the clear option to submit an application  in  accordance
    with the requirements of the Rules.

CONCLUSION

31. I therefore found that errors of law have been  established  that  were
    material  to  the  outcome  of  the  decision  and  that  the   Judge's
    determination should be set aside

DECISION

32. I remake the appeal.

33. The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration Rules.

34. This appeal is also dismissed on human rights grounds (Article 8)



Signed      Date 20 April 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
