
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/05330/2012
                                                               OA/05333/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 10 October 2013                            |On 28 October 2013           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                           GEOFREY SOLOMON BAGEYA
                             HILLARY JOAN MUTESI
                                                                  Appellants
                                     AND

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, NAIROBI

                                                                  Respondent


                                 DIRECTIONS


1.   The appellants  are  nationals  of  Uganda.   They  have  appealed  the
    decisions of the Entry Clearance Officer of 17 February  2012  refusing
    entry clearance to the United Kingdom.

2.   The history of their appeals  is  unfortunate  and  protracted.   There
    have now been two hearings before First-tier Judges and one before  the
    Upper Tribunal. The matter comes before me now as a  consequence  of  a
    hearing before a First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  on  30  April  2013.   He
    dismissed the appeal in respect of the second appellant  on  the  basis
    that it had not been shown that her parentage was as claimed.  That had
    clear implications for the Article 8 claim of the first appellant also.



3.   Immediately after the hearing Miss Manyonga, who the  second  appellant
    claimed was her  mother,  and  who  the  judge  had  not  accepted  had
    established this, told  her  Counsel  that  she  had  referred  to  her
    relationship with Mr Bageya, who is accepted  as  the  father  of  both
    appellants, and to the fact that she had given birth to  his  daughter,
    in a statement accompanying her claim  for  asylum  in  2003  but  that
    statement had not been included in the  bundle.   The  information  was
    communicated to the Presenting Officer  and  it  was  agreed  that  the
    Tribunal should be reconvened for the  matter  to  be  put  before  the
    judge. Unfortunately the judge was  no  longer  in  the  building  and,
    though the relevant statement was forwarded  to  him  with  a  covering
    letter explaining the exceptional circumstances, it appears  that  this
    was never put before the judge, there being no reference to it in   his
    determination or on the file.

4.   Before me Mr Rendle, who has appeared for  the  appellants  throughout,
    argued that the matter fell for consideration under the Immigration and
    Asylum Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005, with  particular  reference  to
    Rule 60(1A).  This states as follows:

         "The Tribunal may either of  its  own  motion  of  on  application,
         review any order, notice of decision or determination made  by  the
         Tribunal and, after consulting all the parties to the  appeal,  may
         set it aside and direct that the relevant proceeding be dealt  with
         again by the Tribunal, on the ground that it was wrongly made as  a
         result of an administrative error on the part of  the  Tribunal  or
         its staff."

4.   It was the joint submission of Mr Rendle and Ms  Pal  who  appeared  on
    behalf of the Entry Clearance Officer, that the failure by the staff to
    put the evidence before the judge before he concluded  and  promulgated
    his determination amounted to an administrative error.   I  agree  with
    this submission, and as a consequence I set aside the determination  of
    the judge. The relevant proceedings are hereby  directed  to  be  dealt
    with again by the First-tier Tribunal, by a judge other than Judge Paul
    or Judge Verity. and that hearing will take place at Taylor House on  a
    date to be fixed.




Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen



