

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
Appeal Number: OA/05204/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Manchester                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 5th March 2015                            |On 11th March 2015           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                               Olga Bondarenko
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent
Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms Smith, Counsel instructed by Birleys Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Ukraine date of birth 20th January 1986.
     She appeals with permission the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Foudy) to dismiss her appeal against the  Respondent's  decision
    to refuse to grant her entry clearance as the spouse  dependent  spouse
    of a Tier 4 (General) Migrant.


 2. The central matter  in  issue  between  the  parties  was  whether  the
    Respondent had properly applied paragraph 320(7B)  to  the  Appellant's
    case. It was alleged that the Appellant had knowingly used deception in
    respect of an earlier attempt to enter the UK.

 3. At paragraph 3 of the determination its says the following: "It is  for
    the Appellant to persuade me on a balance of probabilities that at  the
    date of the Respondent's  decision  the  Appellant  complied  with  the
    requirements of paragraph  319C  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  that
    paragraph 320(7B) did not apply to her".

 4. As Mr McVeety accepts there was no burden on the Appellant to show that
    paragraph 320(7B) did  not  apply.  The  burden  squarely  lay  on  the
    Respondent to show that the Appellant had herself  sought  to  deceive.
    In granting permission First-tier Tribunal Judge Plumptre notes that in
    the final  analysis,  the  outcome  of  this  appeal  may  not  be  any
    different. That is  true.  However  the  Appellant  is  entitled  to  a
    determination which applies the correct burden and  standard  of  proof
    and in which her evidence, and that of her sponsor husband, is properly
    weighed.  That has not thus far been  done  and  for  that  reason  the
    matter must be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.



      Decisions


 5. The decision contains an error of law and is set aside.


 6. The matter is to be re-made in the First-tier Tribunal.





                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                     5th
                                 March 2015
