
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/05698/2015
                                                OA/05699/2015, OA/05701/2015
                                                               OA/05702/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Centre                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15th September 2016                        |On 13th October 2016          |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                (1) pari [g]
                                  (2) [m a]
                                  (3) [S A]
                              (4) farkhunda [a]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                     entry clearance officer, islamabad
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr E Pipi (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. For the avoidance of doubt, in this  determination  references  to  the
    Appellants in the First-tier Tribunal  below,  and  references  to  the
    Respondent are to the Entry Clearance Officer in Islamabad, as was  the
    case below.  This is in order to maintain consistency and confusion.

 2. Mr Pipi, of Counsel, represented the Appellants in this matter and  Mrs
    H Aboni, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer, acted  on  behalf  of
    the Entry Clearance Officer in Islamabad.

 3. The matter concerns the  refusal  of  entry  clearance  to  the  United
    Kingdom for settlement of dependent relatives under Appendix FM.  Judge
    Beg, in a determination promulgated on 30th October 2015,  following  a
    hearing at Taylor House on 15th October 2015, allowed  the  Appellants'
    appeals,  whereupon  the  Respondent  Secretary  of  State  has,   with
    permission, appealed against the decision and reasons statement of  the
    judge below.

 4. The Entry Clearance  Officer  in  Islamabad  considered  the  following
    matter.  It was noted that Pari [G], the principal Appellant,  and  the
    mother of the remaining Appellant children, required long term personal
    care to perform everyday tasks, but the Entry  Clearance  Officer  said
    that no evidence had been submitted to this effect although, there  was
    a letter from the Afghan Swiss Hospital,  but  this  was  said  not  to
    detail any medical condition or disability.  In any event, even if  the
    Appellant was able to demonstrate that she required long term care  the
    ECO had to be satisfied that care could not be  received  in  her  home
    country.  The husband of Pari [G], the  principal  Appellant  had  been
    missing.  Her case was that her health was deteriorating such that  she
    needed the support of her adult son in the UK  who  was  settled  here.
    His name is [WM].

 5. At the hearing before Judge Beg [WM] gave evidence and  confirmed  that
    he had been granted refugee status in this country and that his  mother
    was living in Kabul with his friend, [F] and his  siblings  lived  with
    the mother and he  sends  the  family  $400  every  month  because  the
    siblings have nothing to do and have no employment (paragraph 7).   The
    Sponsor said that his mother  was  mentally  ill,  depressed,  and  was
    always crying and receiving medical treatment and that his friend  [F],
    and his siblings look after their mother (paragraph 8).  The family had
    lived in Peshawar in Pakistan but moved  back  to  Afghanistan  because
    living conditions in Peshawar were very bad.

 6. The judge had regard to two letters  from  the  Afghan  Swiss  Hospital
    dated 10th December 2014.  One letter is from Dr Sayed  Sama  Hussaini,
    who is "an Internal Medicine Specialist".  e stated that Mrs  Pari  [G]
    suffered from loss of hearing, and had been diagnosed as suffering from
    a depressive episode with post-traumatic stress disorder, together with
    paranoid schizophrenia, auditory hallucination, and feeling  persecuted
    (paragraph 12).  A further letter stated that Mrs Pari [G] can  recover
    from her  depression  with  PTSD  "with  relevant  family  support  and
    medication" (paragraph 13).  The judge observed that her recovery would
    be greatly enhanced if she were surrounded by her son  who  is  in  the
    United Kingdom.   The  judge  observed  that  Dr  Hussaini  was  not  a
    Consultant Psychiatrist but a General Physician.

 7. However, there was a second  medical  report  from  a  Dr  Abdul  Naser
    Kohistani, who described himself as a "Internal  Medicine  Specialist",
    and he did say that the Appellant suffered from depression and ischemic
    heart disease and did not have any relatives in  Afghanistan  and  that
    she needed a person to help support her, prepare food and drugs for her
    (paragraph 14).

 8. At the hearing before Judge Beg, the evidence given by  the  sponsoring
    son, [WM], was that his 17 year old sibling sister, who  used  to  look
    after Pari [G], was herself now  suffering  from  depression,  and  the
    judge observed that,

         "At the hearing there was no challenge to  the  Sponsor's  evidence
         that his father disappeared in 2007 and has  never  been  heard  of
         since.  Nor was there any challenge to the Sponsor's evidence  that
         his family effectively live in hiding at the Sponsor's friend  [F]"
         (paragraph 15).

 9. The judge went on to say that,

         "I find that there is medical evidence  to  support  the  principal
         Appellant's claim that she  suffers  from  serious  mental  illness
         including post-traumatic stress disorder, depression  and  symptoms
         of schizophrenia.  I find that while she has access to some medical
         treatment, she is unable to care for herself properly on a  day-to-
         day basis."  (Paragraph 17).

    Although the family lived with the Sponsor's friend, [F], this was  "in
    very cramped  conditions  in  a  three  bedroom  house  where  Farruk's
    parents, wife and children also lived".  The judge went on to say that,

         "In conclusion I find that the first Appellant requires  long  term
         personal care to perform  everyday  tasks  as  the  result  of  her
         illness.  In respect of the second, third and fourth Appellants,  I
         find that their circumstances  constitute  serious  and  compelling
         family or other considerations which make their exclusion from  the
         United Kingdom undesirable.  I find that their  father  disappeared
         in 2007 and they are wholly reliant upon  funds  sent  to  them  by
         their brother in the United Kingdom" (paragraph 18).

10. The appeal was allowed.

11. At the hearing before me on 15th September 2016, Mrs Aboni relied  upon
    the grounds of application.  She submitted that the judge had concluded
    that the principal Appellant required long term personal care, but  the
    second part of the Rule is whether there can  be  care  that  could  be
    accessed in Afghanistan itself, and the judge  had  failed  to  address
    this properly.   Second,  the  Appellant  had  already  been  receiving
    treatment in  Afghanistan  and  so  it  needed  to  be  considered  and
    explained why that care  could  not  continue.   Third,  there  was  no
    evidence from the Sponsor's friend, [F], and this could have  made  all
    the difference.

12. In relation to the sibling children of Pari [G], the judge was wrong to
    have  allowed  the  appeal  on  the  basis  that  their  exclusion  was
    undesirable on the basis that there were serious and compelling  family
    or other considerations.  This is because the case  of  Mundeba  [2013]
    UKUT 00088 made  it  clear  that  there  was  a  very  high  threshold.
    Reference was made by Mrs Aboni to paragraph  34  which  she  described
    "serious" to mean that "there needs to be more than the parties  simply
    desiring a state of affairs to obtain".  As  far  as  "compelling"  was
    concerned  in  the  context  of  paragraph  297(1)(F),  this  indicated
    considerations "that are persuasive and powerful".

13. For his part, Mr Pipi relied upon his  detailed  and  helpful  skeleton
    argument.  He submitted that regard had properly to be given to Rule E-
    ECDR2.4 which states, "The Appellant, or if the  applicant,  and  their
    partner are the Sponsor's  parents  or  grandparents,  the  applicant's
    partner, must as a result of age, illness or  disability  require  long
    term personal care to perform everyday tasks".  He submitted  that  the
    bone of contention was "to  perform  everyday  tasks".   There  was  no
    definition of what was meant by "personal  care".   This  was  a  fact-
    sensitive matter.  It had to be considered in an individual case on the
    facts.  For example, an 80 year old may be in perfectly good health and
    would not have any difficulty in performing "everyday tasks".   On  the
    other hand, a 40 year old may be severely  disabled  and  require  such
    care as to be able to "perform everyday tasks".  The judge did identify
    what it was that the Appellant could not do and did identify  her  care
    needs and did identity how those care needs were  presently  being  met
    and would be met in the future.

14. In the instant case, Judge Beg did  (at  paragraph  14)  refer  to  the
    unchallenged medical evidence (at pages 22 to 23) that,

         "She can recover from her depression and  PTSD  with  the  relevant
         family support and medication.   This  discovery  will  be  greatly
         enhanced if she was surrounded by her son who is in  the  UK.   The
         relapses in her condition are down to  her  feeling  neglected  and
         abandoned by her family".

    This was in circumstances where  her  husband  had  abandoned  her  and
    disappeared  without  any  trace.   This,  submitted  Mr  Pipi,   aptly
    demonstrated that the personal care that the principal Appellant needed
    could only be met by a family member, namely, her son.

15. Second, in relation  to  "everyday  tasks"  these  included  not  fully
    cooking, shopping, and dressing, but also the ability  to  leave  one's
    home and interact with the outside world and engage in everyday  tasks.
    The Appellant was a person suffering from schizophrenia and held a fear
    of being persecuted, such as to be unable  to  perform  these  everyday
    tasks and the judge made that finding precisely at paragraph 18 of  the
    determination.  The grounds of application at ground 7 do not challenge
    this finding at all.  What is said instead is that the second  limb  is
    not satisfied.

16. Third, the judge specifically considered how the Sponsor in the UK  was
    providing practical and financial help.  He had not only  been  sending
    $400 to the family but he had arranged through his friend, [F], to take
    the family into his home and to look after them.  At paragraph 5 of the
    witness statement, the Sponsor makes this clear and this was taken into
    account by the judge at paragraphs 7 and 11 of the determination.   The
    grounds did not challenge this finding.

17. Fourth, this was a case where the level of support is not available  in
    Afghanistan where the Appellants live.   The  level  of  personal  care
    needed by this applicant can only be  delivered  by  a  family  member,
    according to medical evidence that was before the judge.  It  does  not
    matter how much financial  support  the  applicant  receives  from  the
    Sponsor because it will not replace the nature of "personal care"  that
    she needs.  The reference is to "the" level of support.  There  was  no
    person in Afghanistan who can reasonably provide that level of support.
     The judge identified the lack of support in Afghanistan at  paragraphs
    10, 14 to 15, and 17, and the Sponsor's statement at paragraphs  10  to
    12 also makes the same point.  The Rule also refers to the alternative,
    "all that level of support is not affordable" and the judge  considered
    this specifically at paragraph 13 of the determination.  Moreover, even
    if the required level of  care  is  available  to  Mrs  Pari  [G],  the
    principal Appellant, on the facts this is irrelevant to her if  she  is
    in hiding.  A person in hiding, and one who is mentally ill, is not  in
    a position to access any help there may be in the wider society because
    of their inability to do so and the fear of  being  located.   Finally,
    the suggestion at grounds 9 and 10 of the appeal papers that the burden
    of proof had been reversed  was  misconceived  because  the  judge  was
    simply making an observation.  The children are minors.   The  17  year
    old is herself suffering from depression for which she is receiving  no
    treatment.  The others have problems understanding and handling  mental
    health issues and the judge was simply making a statement of fact  that
    the children cannot understand mental health issues and  there  was  no
    evidence before her that they did in fact  do  so.   This  is  entirely
    different from saying that the Entry Clearance Officer bears the burden
    of proving that the children understand mental health issues.  The same
    indeed applies to [F]'s family.

18. I have given careful consideration to the submissions before me.  I  am
    satisfied that the making of the decision by the judge did not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law  (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  It is well-known that
    "perversity" represents "a very high hurdle" (see R  (Iran)  [2005]  at
    paragraph 11).  In that case it was made clear  that,  "far  too  often
    practitioners  use  the  word  'irrational'  or  'purpose'  when  these
    epithets are completely inappropriate" (paragraph 12).  I find the same
    to be the case here.  For  the  reasons  given  in  Mr  Pipi's  helpful
    submissions before me, and set out in  his  exceptionally  well-crafted
    skeleton argument, I find that the judge was perfectly entitled to come
    to the conclusions that she did too.

19. First, there  is  the  medical  evidence  of  Dr  Hussaini  and  of  Dr
    Kohistani.  The judge observes that  the  first  of  these  is  not  an
    excerpt but the second is.  The principal  Appellant's  condition  (set
    out at paragraph 14) is not in dispute.  It is not in dispute that  her
    husband has abandoned  her.   The  17  year  old  daughter  is  herself
    suffering from depression.  The judge made  independent  findings  that
    the family was without a male protector in Afghanistan and "are finding
    it impossible to cope", in  circumstances  where  they  have  no  other
    relatives in Afghanistan.  Added to this "There is medical evidence  to
    support the principal Appellant's claim that she suffers  from  serious
    mental illness including post-traumatic stress disorder, depression and
    symptoms of schizophrenia" (paragraph 17).   The  judge  then  observed
    that whilst the principal Appellant

         "has access to some medical treatment, she is unable  to  care  for
         herself properly on a day-to-day basis, and took into  account  the
         fact that the minor children were  living  with  her  but  did  not
         understand her  illness  and  were  not  able  to  look  after  her
         properly" (paragraph 17).

20. Second, in relation to  the  remaining  children,  although  Mrs  Aboni
    referred to Mundeba,  paragraph  34  needs  to  be  looked  at  in  its
    entirety.  What it makes clear is that serious and compelling does  not
    mean that a party simply want to have a state of affairs to obtain.  It
    is stated that, "The analysis is one of degree and kind".  It is not to
    do with "simply the wish of the parties to be together however  natural
    that ambition may be" (paragraph 34).  On the facts of this case,  this
    is not the case here.  If, as I have suggested, the judge was right  in
    concluding that the principal Appellant does succeed under  the  Rules,
    then for her to leave the children and come to the UK, in circumstances
    where they have no relatives, and have had their father  abandon  them,
    would indeed lead to serious and compelling circumstances being created
    amounting  to  "considerations  that  are  persuasive   and   powerful"
    (paragraph 34 of Mundeba).  In short, the judge was entirely  right  in
    concluding as she did.  This Tribunal has  a  supervisory  jurisdiction
    and it can only intervene in cases of findings made  by  a  judge  that
    were not open to her.

Notice of Decision

21. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

22. No anonymity order is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 12th October 2016


