

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/06340/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Determination issued                 |
|on 13 April 2015                     |on 17 April 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, BEIRUT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              SAMIRA CAS YOUSEF
                   (no anonymity order requested or made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr D Byrne, Advocate, instructed by Drummond Miller,
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The parties are as described above, but the rest of this  determination
    refers to them as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Syria whose date of birth is recorded  as
    1 January 1952.  Under cover of a letter dated 12  February  2014  from
    her solicitors she sought clearance to enter the UK for family  reunion
    with a refugee recognised in the UK.  The application  was  made  along
    with one by her brother.  The sponsor is her brother's wife.  She is  a
    recognised refugee in the UK.  The application said that the  appellant
    had lived with the sponsor in a family unit in Syria before the sponsor
    fled to the UK and that she was a single female  with  no  children  or
    other family of her own and no family members left in Syria.  She asked
    for her application to be allowed under the Rules or under Article 8 of
    the ECHR.

 3. The Entry Clearance Officer granted the application by the  appellant's
    brother, but refused hers by a decision dated 25 April  2014,  for  the
    following reasons.  She had not provided sufficient evidence about  her
    personal and financial circumstances.  As she claimed to live currently
    with her brother in Syria,  she  was  not  living  alone  in  the  most
    exceptional compassionate circumstances outside the UK.   The  ECO  was
    not satisfied that if her brother was to join his wife she  would  have
    no other close relatives to whom she could turn.  There was an  absence
    of evidence to show that she is wholly or mainly financially  dependent
    on the UK sponsor.  Indeed, the supporting letter from solicitors  says
    that her brother pays for her medical treatment and  that  she  jointly
    owns her home in Syria with her brother.  There was inadequate evidence
    about the proposed accommodation in the  UK.   As  to  Article  8,  the
    decision simply states that in  view  of  those  facts  any  breach  is
    proportionate.

 4. First-tier Tribunal Judge Balloch allowed  the  appellant's  appeal  by
    determination promulgated on 4 December 2014.  The  appellant  conceded
    that she could not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.   At
    paragraph  29  the  judge  reminded  herself  of  the  public  interest
    considerations set out in part 5A, sections 117A and B of the 2002  Act
    in all Article 8  cases.   At  paragraph  30  the  judge  found  it  an
    important consideration that the appellant had applied along  with  her
    brother for family reunion.  At paragraph 31 she found  that  financial
    support and accommodation could be provided in the UK for the appellant
    without resort to benefits.  She accepted  at  paragraph  32  that  the
    sponsor, her husband and sister-in-law had lived together as  a  family
    unit since the sponsor's marriage [which was on 20 September 1983]  and
    that she relied on her brother.  The judge  found  that  the  appellant
    would be very vulnerable as a woman alone in Syria and particularly  as
    a Christian.  The judge cited paragraph  3.12.16  of  the  respondent's
    Operational Guidance Note (OGN).  She concluded at  paragraphs  34  and
    35:

         Given the dangerous situation in Syria, that the appellant would be
         living there as a woman alone  and  as  a  member  of  a  religious
         minority at a time when Christians are being  attacked  and  having
         regard to the fact that the appellant has always lived as  a  close
         family member of her brother's family,  I  find  the  circumstances
         demonstrate a good arguable case outwith the Rules.  The  appellant
         would  be  accompanying  her  brother  to   the   UK.    There   is
         accommodation and financial support available for  her  in  the  UK
         with her close family members  and  particularly  her  brother  and
         sister-in-law.

         I have taken full account of the respondent's view of  the  State's
         obligations under Article 8 of the ECHR as set out in the Rules but
         in all the circumstances ... having regard to  all  the  factors  I
         find  that  the  appeal  should  be  allowed  ...  there  has  been
         demonstrated ... that any interference in family  life,  occasioned
         by the respondent's decision, would be disproportionate.

 5. The ECO's grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal are as follows:

          a) The judge considers that the  appellant  would  be  living  in
             Syria as a lone woman and would be at risk, but refers  to  no
             evidence that the particular risk is  any  more  than  another
             person living in Syria in similar circumstances.

          b)  The  judge's  approach  to  Article  8  appears  to  disclose
             engagement with matters at the date of the hearing rather than
             the relevant date, the date of decision.

          c) ... Article 8 is not a general dispensing  power  ...  if  the
             appellant's circumstances have  changed  since  she  made  her
             application then it is open to her to make a fresh application
             ... AS (Somalia) [2009] UKHL 32, paragraph 9.

          d) It is deeply pertinent to the proportionality  assessment  ...
             that the appellant cannot bring herself within  the  ambit  of
             the Rules.  In the circumstances the public interest  required
             refusal ... as there is no basis to depart from  the  findings
             under the Rules.

          e) The relationships relied upon do not disclose a breach  and/or
             a disproportionate breach  of  those  rights  protected  under
             Article 8 particularly in light of the weight to  be  afforded
             to maintenance of  effective  immigration  control  -  section
             117B(1).

          f) ... The judge's assessment under Article  8  is  fundamentally
             flawed owing to a failure to lawfully engage with  the  public
             interest factors contained within part  5A  of  the  2002  Act
             (s.117) ... It was incumbent upon the judge to have regard  to
             those  factors  and  other  aspects  relevant  to  the  public
             interest in considering proportionality ...

 6. Mrs O'Brien submitted further to the grounds that the judge  failed  to
    identify any such factors as to allow her to embark on  a  freewheeling
    Article 8 exercise outside the Rules, ignoring all those factors  which
    counted against the appellant in respect of her  failure  to  meet  the
    requirements  of   the   Rules.    The   determination   contained   no
    consideration of the public interest or of the significance of  failure
    to meet the Rules.  The assessment at paragraphs  34  and  35  did  not
    bring out any relevant factors on the respondent's side.  That  failure
    to apply the relevant requirements amounted to a material  misdirection
    in law.  Although the judge said that she had regard to  "all  factors"
    she did not say what they were.  The determination should be set aside.
     A fresh decision should be substituted finding that the case  did  not
    engage Article 8.

 7. Mr Byrne relied upon a written argument which submits that grounds  (a)
    to (c) are misconceived; that there was in any event no evidence  which
    did not appertain  at  the  date  of  the  decision;  and  that  it  is
    significant that the respondent in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  no
    submissions about section 117 of the 2002 Act.  Either the  matter  was
    not particularly material, or any error was on the side  of  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer.  There was nothing to show that  any  omission  gave
    rise to any substantial prejudice to the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  or
    that as an informed reader the respondent could not understand why  the
    decision had been reached.  The essential factors were all set out  and
    the decision was an adequate one which showed no misdirection  of  law.
    The Entry Clearance Officer did not specify any  further  factor  which
    should have been taken into  account  on  that  side.   The  judge  had
    applied the correct test of a good arguable case and what followed  was
    a matter for her.  Even if the respondent might consider the outcome to
    be a generous one, it did not disclose any legal error.

 8. Mrs O'Brien in response said that the structure  of  the  determination
    failed to engage with the consequences of not meeting the  Rules.   The
    judge had simply not grappled with that issue.  It  had  been  conceded
    that the appellant could not meet the requirements of the Rules and  so
    she was not a dependant falling within  their  scheme  for  reunion  of
    members of a family unit.  The case should not have reached  the  stage
    of any consideration outwith the Rules.

 9. I indicated that I was not satisfied that  the  grounds  disclosed  any
    material error of law and that the determination would stand.

10. Ground (a): the case did not turn on a test of  whether  the  appellant
    would be at greater risk than any other lone woman in Syria.

11. The circumstances as at the date of the hearing are not  said  to  have
    been different from those at the date of decision, so ground (b)  leads
    nowhere.

12. Ground (c): Article 8 is  not  a  general  dispensing  power  but  that
    proposition does not show that this determination must be  wrong.   The
    applicant's case did not turn on  change  of  circumstances  since  her
    application, so it would not have been an apt answer  to  suggest  that
    she apply again.

13. Ground (d): cases have to meet a high standard  to  succeed  under  the
    rules, but such cases can arise.

14. As to ground (e) and (f), the judge was clearly  aware  that  the  case
    failed within the  Rules  and  she  acknowledged  the  public  interest
    considerations as set out in statute.  To cite these  at  length  would
    not have served any purpose.  The ECO does not say that any  particular
    element of the public interest bore specifically and strongly  on  this
    case.  These complaints are about form rather than substance.

15. The appellant has been a  member  of  the  family  unit  including  her
    brother and the sponsor for half her lifetime,  and  for  most  of  her
    adult life.  She has no other family.  Those findings  are  undisputed.
    The judge was plainly entitled to find that  family  life  existed  for
    Article 8 purposes.  The conditions under which the appellant would  be
    left in Syria as a Christian woman on her  own  were  compelling.   The
    judge was right to take account of the availability of support  in  the
    UK and absence  of  likely  impact  on  public  funds.   The  remaining
    stumbling block under the  rules  was  that  she  was  not  financially
    dependent upon the sponsor.  That was the factor to be outweighed.   In
    my opinion, the grounds do not amount to more  than  disagreement  with
    the judge's conclusions about the  existence  of  a  family  life,  the
    identification of a good arguable  case  outside  the  Rules,  and  the
    proportionality conclusion.  Those findings were within the range  open
    to the  judge  and  her  assessment  is  adequately  explained  in  the
    determination.

16. The determination shall stand.




           [pic]


           15 April 2015
           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
