
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/06138/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 11 April 2014                                |On 24th April 2014         |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     Jj
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Saunders, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Chelvan, instructed by JCWI

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant before the Upper Tribunal is the Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department. For the sake of convenience I will refer to JJ  as
    the claimant.

 2. JJ is a citizen of Jamaica born in 1979. He appealed to the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of an Entry Clearance Officer ("ECO") dated
    29 January 2013 refusing to grant him entry clearance to join his  wife
    ("C"), child ("M") and step-child ("A") in the  United  Kingdom.  In  a
    determination promulgated on 13 February 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Herbert OBE allowed the claimant's appeal  (i)  under  the  Immigration
    Rules and (ii) on the basis that the ECO's decision  would  lead  to  a
    breach of Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.

 3. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Ransley  granted  the  Secretary  of  State
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal in a decision of the 7 March
    2014. Thus the appeal came before me.

 4. It is not in dispute that the  Judge  Herbert  erred  in  allowing  the
    appeal under the Immigration Rules. In  doing  so  the  judge  properly
    concluded  that  the  claimant  failed  to  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph EC-P.1.1(c) of Appendix FM to the Rules  (with  reference  to
    paragraph S-EC.1.4) as a consequence of the fact that he had an unspent
    conviction having been sentenced to 12 months imprisonment on 8  August
    2007. Further,  he  failed  to  meet  the  maintenance  requirement  in
    paragraph EC-P.1.1(d) of Appendix FM  (with  reference  to  E-ECP.3.1).
    Judge Herbert, nevertheless, allowed the appeal under  the  Immigration
    Rules on the basis that the claimant met the requirements of  paragraph
    EX.1(b) of Appendix FM.

 5. It was confirmed by the Upper Tribunal in Sabir [2014] UKUT  63  (IAC),
    that paragraph EX.1  does  not  provide  freestanding  rights  but  "is
    "parasitic" on the relevant Rule  within  Appendix  FM  that  otherwise
    grants leave to remain." In this case  the  claimant  cannot  meet  the
    requirements of the relevant Rule  in  Appendix  FM,  thus  his  appeal
    brought in relation  to  the  Immigration  Rules  ought  to  have  been
    dismissed. For this reason I set aside the determination of the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

 6. Turning to the ground relating to Article 8, the Secretary  of  State's
    challenge to the First-tier Tribunal's decision is fivefold:

      i) The tribunal's error made in  relation  to  the  Immigration  Rules
         infected its Article 8 conclusions;  the  failure  to  satisfy  the
         Rules being an essential element of the proportionality  assessment
         under Article 8;

     ii)  The  tribunal  erred  by  failing  to  identify   the   compelling
         circumstances which led it to allow the appeal  on  the  Article  8
         ground, as it was required to do  following  the  decision  of  the
         Upper Tribunal in Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640 (Cranston J and  Taylor
         UTJ );

    iii) The tribunal's conclusion on Article 8 is wrong;

     iv) The tribunal erred in its consideration  as  to  the  risk  of  the
         claimant committing further criminal offences; the evidence  before
         the tribunal being insufficient to demonstrate the claimant's  good
         character.

 7. At the hearing Mr Saunders maintained all  of  the  above  grounds  and
    pursued a further ground not pleaded in the notice of application; that
    being that the First-tier Tribunal erred in failing to consider whether
    there were arguably good grounds for granting leave to  remain  outside
    of the Rules prior  to  engaging  in  a  substantive  consideration  of
    Article 8.

 8. I deal first with the ground identified in paragraph 6(iv)  above  i.e.
    that the First-tier Tribunal erred in its assessment of  the  risk  the
    claimant would pose were he to return to the United Kingdom.

 9. The claimant  was  convicted  of  "attempting  to  obtain  property  by
    deception and attempting  to  obtain  2  passports  from  the  IPS."  A
    deportation order was signed in his name on 18 July  2008  and  he  was
    removed from the United Kingdom pursuant to that order  on  11  October
    2008. He later made an application seeking to  revoke  the  deportation
    order. The Secretary of State refused this, but Judge Rabin allowed the
    claimant's appeal against that refusal in a determination  of  November
    2011 ("2011 determination"). The Secretary of State was unsuccessful in
    her attempts to set aside the 2011 determination.

10. When coming to his conclusions  Judge  Herbert  set  out  a  number  of
    findings made in the 2011 determination, including  those  relating  to
    the genuineness of the claimant's reformation of character [26-31].  He
    further observed that the claimant had, by  the  time  of  the  hearing
    before him, spent nearly 5 years outside of the United Kingdom  without
    further conviction [55]. Given the findings in the 2011  determination,
    which Mr Saunders accepted Judge Herbert  was  entitled  to  take  into
    account, and the unobjectionable observation in  paragraph  55  of  his
    determination, in my conclusion it was clearly open to Judge Herbert to
    find as he did in paragraph 59 of the determination:

        "There is no evidence before me that this appellant  is  likely  to
        reoffend and therefore is not a risk in my  view  to  the  law  and
        order being maintained in the United Kingdom nor  does  he  pose  a
        risk to any other member of society given the special circumstances
        of his offence"

11. I turn next to the ground upon which a majority of  the  oral  argument
    before me focused, i.e. whether the error perpetrated by  the  tribunal
    in relation to its consideration of the Immigration Rules infected  its
    conclusions on the Article 8 ground.

12. It is trite that the Secretary of State's view as to where  the  public
    interest lies in Article 8 considerations  is  identified  through  the
    Immigration Rules and, consequently, a failure to meet those Rules is a
    matter of much significance in  the  tribunal's  deliberations  on  the
    issue of proportionality under Article 8.

13. In the  instant  case  Judge  Herbert  correctly  identified  that  the
    claimant failed to meet certain of the requirements of the  Immigration
    Rules. His error in relation to paragraph  EX.1(b)  was  not  that  his
    conclusion that the requirements of this Rule had been met was  legally
    flawed, but rather in his understanding of  the  consequences  for  the
    claimant of meeting such requirements.  Nevertheless,  Mr  Saunders  is
    correct in his assertion that if Judge Herbert's legal misdirection  in
    relation to the Rules played a part in his consideration of the Article
    8 ground, then the decision in relation to such ground must be vitiated
    by legal error.

14. In support of the respondent's position Mr Saunders placed reliance  on
    paragraph 52 of Judge Herbert's determination, which reads:

        "Even if this decision were not to be allowed under the Immigration
        Rules I have to adopt the case of Gulshan v SSHD [2013] UKUT  00640
        and find that the Entry Clearance Officer failed to properly  apply
        the  Immigration  Rules  and  under  paragraph  EX.1  this  is   an
        exceptional case and there are compelling circumstances that  ought
        to have lifted entry clearance for the benefit of this appellant."

15. At first blush this paragraph appears to favour Mr Saunders submission,
    but when read in the context of the determination as a whole I  do  not
    accept that this is so. The paragraph  plainly  starts  by  identifying
    that the reasoning which  follows  is  premised  on  the  fact  of  the
    claimant failing to meet the requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    This, in my conclusion, is the approach that  is  taken  thereafter  by
    Judge Herbert, a conclusion which is re-enforced by paragraph 58 of the
    determination, where Judge Herbert says as follows:

        "That having been said, the impact on the individuals in this  case
        is so severe and long-term  that  the  maintenance  of  immigration
        control whilst it  must  be  weighed  heavily  in  the  balance  is
        overridden  by  the  impact  on  the  individual  family   on   the
        circumstances of the case"

16. Had Judge Herbert been considering  Article  8  on  the  basis  of  the
    claimant  having  succeeded  under  the  Immigration  Rules  then   the
    maintenance of immigration control would not have weighed at  all,  let
    alone heavily, against the claimant in the assessment  of  whether  the
    ECO's decision was proportionate to the legitimate aim pursued.

17. The reference by the First-tier Tribunal to paragraph EX.1 of  Appendix
    FM in paragraph 52 of its determination is, in my  conclusion,  nothing
    more than identification of  the  fact  that  the  claimant  meets  the
    requirements of that paragraph of the Rules, which on the  unassailable
    findings of Judge Herbert he does  i.e.  that  the  claimant  is  in  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with a partner who  is  the  United
    Kingdom and is a British Citizen  and  that  there  are  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life with the partner continuing outside the United
    Kingdom. Judge Herbert comprehensively dealt with the latter  issue  in
    paragraphs 26, 29 and 39 to 42 of the  determination.  The  family  had
    lived together in Jamaica for seven months, but were unable to maintain
    this position primarily because of the adverse effect on A's health and
    well-being of living their. The fact that the claimant was in a genuine
    relationship with a British Citizen and that there were  insurmountable
    obstacles to such relationship  continuing  in  Jamaica  is  clearly  a
    relevant factor in the assessment of the issue of proportionality.

18. When the determination is looked at as a whole, I conclude  that  Judge
    Herbert proceeded on his Article 8 analysis unencumbered by his earlier
    finding that the claimant met the requirements of the Immigration Rules
    and, consequently, I do not accept that the error made by Judge Herbert
    in relation to the Immigration Rules infected his  conclusions  on  the
    Article 8 ground.

19. Turning to the grounds identified in paragraphs  6(ii),  6(iii)  and  7
    above;  these  are   freestanding   challenges   to   Judge   Herbert's
    consideration of Article 8 and can readily be considered together.

20. Contrary to that submitted in  the  grounds,  Judge  Herbert  not  only
    properly directed himself to the ratio of the decision in Gulshan  but,
    thereafter, applied such self direction. The  judge  was  at  pains  to
    identify, in his conclusory paragraphs, the particular circumstances of
    this claimant's case that he considered to be compelling.  The  reasons
    he gives for his conclusions in this regard are, in  my  view,  legally
    adequate. The losing party, in this case the Secretary  of  State,  can
    readily identify why she lost. The decision  to  allow  the  appeal  on
    Article 8 grounds was one that  was  open  to  Judge  Herbert  for  the
    reasons he gives. Had I exercised my discretion to re-make the decision
    on Article 8 grounds, I would have come to the same conclusion.

21. As to the additional point  raised  by  Mr  Saunders  at  the  hearing,
    permission was not sought to adduce such ground and I refuse  to  admit
    it. In any event, it is self evident that given that  the  judge  found
    that there were sufficiently compelling and  exceptional  circumstances
    not sufficiently recognised under the Rules so as  to  require  him  to
    allow the appeal on the Article 8 ground, he must also, although he did
    not expressly say so, have found there to be "good arguable grounds for
    granting leave to remain outside  of  the  Rules"  within  the  meaning
    attributed to that phrase by the Tribunal in Gulshan.

22. For the foregoing reasons I set aside the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. The Upper Tribunal has discretion as  to  scope  of  the  re-
    making of the decision on appeal. Upon re-making the decision I dismiss
    the appeal brought  in  relation  to  the  Immigration  Rules.  I  have
    considered whether to exercise discretion to  re-visit  the  Article  8
    ground but have concluded that it is not necessary  for  me  to  do  so
    given my finding that the First-tier Tribunal's determination  of  this
    ground was without legal error.

23. Mr Chelvan submitted that in all the circumstances of this case I ought
    to make  a  direction  pursuant  to  section  87  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 that  the  claimant  be  granted  entry
    clearance. In the ordinary course of events one  would  hope  that  the
    claimant will be granted entry clearance forthwith but I, nevertheless,
    decline to exercise my discretion to  direct  that  this  be  so.  This
    appeal has  been  allowed  on  the  basis  of  the  circumstances  that
    appertained as of the date of the ECO's decision, which is now over  14
    months ago.  It may be that those circumstances have not  changed,  but
    this will be a matter for the ECO when  considering  whether  to  grant
    entry clearance. Although I have some up-to-date  evidence  before  me,
    that evidence has not been tested and  has  not  been  the  subject  of
    submissions.

 Decision


 The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.


 Upon re-making the decision I allow the claimant's  appeal  on  the  basis
       that the decision of the ECO is unlawful  under  section  6  of  the
       Human Rights Act 1998 as  being  incompatible  with  the  claimant's
       rights under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.


 The ECO's decision  is  in  accordance  with  the  Immigration  Rules  and
       consequently the appeal brought  on  the  ground  asserting  to  the
       contrary is dismissed


 I make an anonymity direction in this appeal given that two minors play  a
       part in the proceedings and  the  tribunal's  decision.  Unless  and
       until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the claimant is granted
       anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
       indirectly identify him or any member of  his  family.   Failure  to
       comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of   court
       proceedings.

Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 15 April 2014

